<doc id="14113" wikidata="Q473761" url="?curid=14113" title="History of Algeria">
<text>Much of the history of [[Algeria]] has taken place on the fertile coastal plain of North Africa, which is often called the Maghreb. North Africa served as a transit region for people moving towards Europe or the Middle East, thus, the region&#x27;s inhabitants have been influenced by populations from other areas, including the Carthaginians, Romans, and Vandals. The region was conquered by the Muslims in the early 8th century AD, but broke off from the Umayyad Caliphate after the Berber Revolt of 740. During the Ottoman period, Algeria became an important state in the Mediterranean sea which led to many naval conflicts. The last significant events in the country&#x27;s recent history have been the Algerian War and Algerian Civil War.
== Prehistory ==
Evidence of the early human occupation of Algeria is demonstrated by the discovery of 1.8 million year old Oldowan stone tools found at Ain Hanech in 1992. In 1954 fossilised &quot;Homo erectus&quot; bones were discovered by C. Arambourg at Ternefine that are 700,000 years old. Neolithic civilization (marked by animal domestication and subsistence agriculture) developed in the Saharan and Mediterranean Maghrib between 6000 and 2000 BC. This type of economy, richly depicted in the Tassili n&#x27;Ajjer cave paintings in southeastern Algeria, predominated in the Maghrib until the classical period.

== Numidia ==
Numidia (Berber: &quot;Inumiden&quot;; 202–40 BC) was the ancient kingdom of the Numidians located in northwest Africa, initially comprising the territory that now makes up modern-day Algeria, but later expanding across what is today known as Tunisia, Libya, and some parts of Morocco. The polity was originally divided between the Massylii in the east and the Masaesyli in the west. During the Second Punic War (218–201 BC), Masinissa, king of the Massylii, defeated Syphax of the Masaesyli to unify Numidia into one kingdom. The kingdom began as a sovereign state and later alternated between being a Roman province and a Roman client state.

Numidia, at its largest extent, was bordered by Mauretania to the west, at the Moulouya River, Africa to the east (also exercising control over Tripolitania), the Mediterranean Sea to the north, and the Sahara to the south. It was one of the first major states in the history of Algeria and the Berbers.

=== War With Rome ===
By 112 BC, Jugurtha resumed his war with Adherbal. He incurred the wrath of Rome in the process by killing some Roman businessmen who were aiding Adherbal. After a brief war with Rome, Jugurtha surrendered and received a highly favourable peace treaty, which raised suspicions of bribery once more. The local Roman commander was summoned to Rome to face corruption charges brought by his political rival Gaius Memmius. Jugurtha was also forced to come to Rome to testify against the Roman commander, where Jugurtha was completely discredited once his violent and ruthless past became widely known, and after he had been suspected of murdering a Numidian rival.

War broke out between Numidia and the Roman Republic and several legions were dispatched to North Africa under the command of the Consul Quintus Caecilius Metellus Numidicus. The war dragged out into a long and seemingly endless campaign as the Romans tried to defeat Jugurtha decisively. Frustrated at the apparent lack of action, Metellus&#x27; lieutenant Gaius Marius returned to Rome to seek election as Consul. Marius was elected, and then returned to Numidia to take control of the war. He sent his Quaestor Sulla to neighbouring Mauretania in order to eliminate their support for Jugurtha. With the help of Bocchus I of Mauretania, Sulla captured Jugurtha and brought the war to a conclusive end. Jugurtha was brought to Rome in chains and was placed in the Tullianum.

Jugurtha was executed by the Romans in 104 BC, after being paraded through the streets in Gaius Marius&#x27; Triumph.

=== Independence ===
The Greek historians referred to these peoples as &quot;Νομάδες&quot; (i.e. Nomads), which by Latin interpretation became &quot;Numidae&quot; (but cf. also the correct use of &quot;Nomades&quot;). Historian Gabriel Camps, however, disputes this claim, favoring instead an African origin for the term.

The name appears first in Polybius (second century BC) to indicate the peoples and territory west of Carthage including the entire north of Algeria as far as the river Mulucha (Muluya), about 160 kilometres (100 mi) west of Oran.

The Numidians were composed of two great tribal groups: the Massylii in eastern Numidia, and the Masaesyli in the west. During the first part of the Second Punic War, the eastern Massylii, under their king Gala, were allied with Carthage, while the western Masaesyli, under king Syphax, were allied with Rome. The Kingdom of Masaesyli under Syphax extended from the Moulouya river to Oued Rhumel.
However, in 206 BC, the new king of the eastern Massylii, Masinissa, allied himself with Rome, and Syphax of the Masaesyli switched his allegiance to the Carthaginian side. At the end of the war, the victorious Romans gave all of Numidia to Masinissa of the Massylii. At the time of his death in 148 BC, Masinissa&#x27;s territory extended from the Moulouya to the boundary of the Carthaginian territory, and also southeast as far as Cyrenaica to the gulf of Sirte, so that Numidia entirely surrounded Carthage (Appian, &quot;Punica&quot;, 106) except towards the sea. Furthermore, after the capture of Syphax the king in modern day Morocco with his capital based in Tingis, Bokkar, had become a vassal of Massinissa. Massinissa had also penetrated as far south beyond the Atlas to the Gaetuli and Fezzan was part of his domain.

In 179 B.C. Masinissa had received a golden crown from the inhabitants of Delos as he had offered them a shipload of grain. A statue of Masinissa was set up in Delos in honour of him as well as an inscription dedicated to him in Delos by a native from Rhodes. His sons too had statues of them erected on the island of Delos and the King of Bithynia, Nicomedes, had also dedicated a statue to Masinissa.

After the death of the long-lived Masinissa around 148 BC, he was succeeded by his son Micipsa. When Micipsa died in 118 BC, he was succeeded jointly by his two sons Hiempsal I and Adherbal and Masinissa&#x27;s illegitimate grandson, Jugurtha, who was very popular among the Numidians. Hiempsal and Jugurtha quarrelled immediately after the death of Micipsa. Jugurtha had Hiempsal killed, which led to open war with Adherbal.

Phoenician traders arrived on the North African coast around 900 BC and established Carthage (in present-day Tunisia) around 800 BC. During the classical period, Berber civilization was already at a stage in which agriculture, manufacturing, trade, and political organization supported several states. Trade links between Carthage and the Berbers in the interior grew, but territorial expansion also resulted in the enslavement or military recruitment of some Berbers and in the extraction of tribute from others.

The Carthaginian state declined because of successive defeats by the Romans in the Punic Wars, and in 146 BC, the city of Carthage was destroyed. As Carthaginian power waned, the influence of Berber leaders in the hinterland grew.

By the 2nd century BC, several large but loosely administered Berber kingdoms had emerged. After that, king Masinissa managed to unify Numidia under his rule.

== Roman empire ==
Christianity arrived in the 2nd century. By the end of the 4th century, the settled areas had become Christianized, and some Berber tribes had converted en masse.

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Algeria came under the control of the Vandal Kingdom. Later, the Eastern Roman Empire (also known as the Byzantine Empire) conquered Algeria from the Vandals, incorporating it into the Praetorian prefecture of Africa and later the Exarchate of Africa.

== Medieval Muslim Algeria ==

From the 8th century Umayyad conquest of North Africa led by Musa bin Nusayr, Arab colonization started. The 11th century invasion of migrants from the Arabian peninsula brought oriental tribal customs. The introduction of Islam and Arabic had a profound impact on North Africa. The new religion and language introduced changes in social and economic relations, and established links with the Arab world through acculturation and assimilation.

The second Arab military expeditions into the Maghreb, between 642 and 669, resulted in the spread of Islam. The Umayyads (a Muslim dynasty based in Damascus from 661 to 750) recognised that the strategic necessity of dominating the Mediterranean dictated a concerted military effort on the North African front. By 711 Umayyad forces helped by Berber converts to Islam had conquered all of North Africa. In 750 the Abbasids succeeded the Umayyads as Muslim rulers and moved the caliphate to Baghdad. Under the Abbasids, Berber Kharijites Sufri Banu Ifran were opposed to Umayyad and Abbasids. After, the Rustumids (761–909) actually ruled most of the central Maghrib from Tahirt, southwest of Algiers. The imams gained a reputation for honesty, piety, and justice, and the court of Tahirt was noted for its support of scholarship. The Rustumid imams failed, however, to organise a reliable standing army, which opened the way for Tahirt&#x27;s demise under the assault of the Fatimid dynasty.

The Fatimids left the rule of most of Algeria to the Zirids and Hammadid (972–1148), a Berber dynasty that centered significant local power in Algeria for the first time, but who were still at war with Banu Ifran (kingdom of Tlemcen) and Maghraoua (942-1068). This period was marked by constant conflict, political instability, and economic decline. Following a large incursion of Arab Bedouin from Egypt beginning in the first half of the 11th century, the use of Arabic spread to the countryside, and sedentary Berbers were gradually Arabised.

The Almoravid (&quot;those who have made a religious retreat&quot;) movement developed early in the 11th century among the Sanhaja Berbers of southern Morocco. The movement&#x27;s initial impetus was religious, an attempt by a tribal leader to impose moral discipline and strict adherence to Islamic principles on followers. But the Almoravid movement shifted to engaging in military conquest after 1054. By 1106, the Almoravids had conquered the Maghreb as far east as Algiers and Morocco, and Spain up to the Ebro River.

Like the Almoravids, the Almohads (&quot;unitarians&quot;) found their inspiration in Islamic reform. The Almohads took control of Morocco by 1146, captured Algiers around 1151, and by 1160 had completed the conquest of the central Maghrib. The zenith of Almohad power occurred between 1163 and 1199. For the first time, the Maghrib was united under a local regime, but the continuing wars in Spain overtaxed the resources of the Almohads, and in the Maghrib their position was compromised by factional strife and a renewal of tribal warfare.

In the central Maghrib, the Abdalwadid founded a dynasty that ruled the Kingdom of Tlemcen in Algeria. For more than 300 years, until the region came under Ottoman suzerainty in the 16th century, the Zayanids kept a tenuous hold in the central Maghrib. Many coastal cities asserted their autonomy as municipal republics governed by merchant oligarchies, tribal chieftains from the surrounding countryside, or the privateers who operated out of their ports. Nonetheless, Tlemcen, the &quot;pearl of the Maghrib,&quot; prospered as a commercial center.

=== Berber dynasties ===
According to historians of the Middle Ages, the Berbers were divided into two branches, both going back to their ancestors Mazigh. The two branches, called Botr and Barnès were divided into tribes, and each Maghreb region is made up of several tribes. The large Berber tribes or peoples are Sanhaja, Houara, Zenata, Masmuda, Kutama, Awarba, Barghawata ... etc. Each tribe is divided into sub tribes. All these tribes had independent and territorial decisions.

Several Berber dynasties emerged during the Middle Ages: - In North and West Africa, in Spain (al-Andalus), Sicily, Egypt, as well as in the southern part of the Sahara, in modern-day Mali, Niger, and Senegal. The medieval historian Ibn Khaldun described the follying Berber dynasties: Zirid, Banu Ifran, Maghrawa, Almoravid, Hammadid, Almohad Caliphate, Marinid, Zayyanid, Wattasid, Meknes, Hafsid dynasty, Fatimids.

The invasion of the Banu Hilal Arab tribes in the 11th century sacked Kairouan, and the area under Zirid control was reduced to the coastal region, and the Arab conquests fragmented into petty Bedouin emirates.

=== Maghrawa Dynasty ===
The Maghrawa or Meghrawa (Arabic: المغراويون) were a large Zenata Berber tribal confederation whose cradle and seat of power was the territory located on the Chlef in the north-western part of today&#x27;s Algeria, bounded by the Ouarsenis to the south, the Mediterranean Sea to the north and Tlemcen to the west. They ruled these areas on behalf of the &quot;Umayyad&quot; Caliphate of Cordoba at the end of the 10th century and during the first half of the 11th century. The Maghrawa confederation of zanata Berbers supposedly originated in the region of modern Algeria between Tlemcen and Tenes.The confederation of Maghrawa were the majority people of the central Maghreb among the Zenata (Gaetuli). Both nomadic and sedentary, the Maghrawa lived under the command of Maghrawa chiefs or Zenata. Algiers has been the territory of the Maghrawa since ancient times. The name Maghrawa was transcribed into Greek by historians. The great kingdom of the Maghrawa was located between Algiers, Cherchell, Ténès, Chlef, Miliana and Médéa. The Maghrawa imposed their domination in the Aurès.[&quot;&quot;] Chlef and its surroundings were populated by the Maghrawa according to Ibn Khaldun. The Maghrawa settled and extended their domination throughout the Dahra and beyond Miliana to the Tafna wadi near Tlemcen,[&quot;&quot;] and were found as far away as Mali.[&quot;&quot;]

The Maghrawa were one of the first Berber tribes to submit to Islam in the 7th century. They supported Uqba ibn Nafi in his campaign to the Atlantic in 683. They defected from Sunni Islam and became Kharijite Muslims from the 8th century, and allied first with the Idrisids, and, from the 10th century on, with the Umayyads of Córdoba in Al-Andalus. As a result, they were caught up in the Umayyad-Fatimid conflict in Morocco and Algeria. Although they won a victory over the allies of the Fatimids in 924, they soon allied with them. When they switched back to the side of Córdoba, the Zirids briefly took control over most of Morocco, and ruled on behalf of the Fatimids. In 976/977 the Maghrawa conquered Sijilmasa from the Banu Midrar, and in 980 were able to drive the Miknasa out of Sijilmasa as well.

The Maghrawa reached their peak under Ziri ibn Atiyya (to 1001), who achieved supremacy in Fez under Umayyad suzerainty, and expanded their territory at the expense of the Banu Ifran in the northern Maghreb – another Zenata tribe whose alliances had shifted often between the Fatimids and the Umayyads of Córdoba. Ziri ibn Atiyya conquered as much as he could of what is now northern Morocco and was able to achieve supremacy in Fez by 987. In 989 he defeated his enemy, Abu al-Bahār, which resulted in Ziri ruling from Zab to Sous Al-Aqsa, in 991 achieving supremacy in the western Maghreb. As a result of his victory he was invited to Córdoba by Ibn Abi &#x27;Amir al-Mansur (also Latinized as Almanzor), the regent of Caliph Hisham II and &quot;de facto&quot; ruler of the Caliphate of Córdoba. Ziri brought many gifts and Al-Mansur housed him in a lavish palace, but Ziri soon returned to North Africa. The Banu Ifran took advantage of his absence and, under Yaddū, managed to capture Fez.[&quot;&quot;] After a bloody struggle, Ziri reconquered Fez in 993 and displayed Yaddū&#x27;s severed head on its walls.[&quot;&quot;]

A period of peace followed, in which Ziri founded the city of Oujda in 994 and made it his capital. However, Ziri was loyal to the Umayyad caliphs in Cordoba and increasingly resented the way that Ibn Abi &#x27;Amir was holding Hisham II captive while progressively usurping his power. In 997 Ziri rejected Ibn Abi &#x27;Amir&#x27;s authority and declared himself a direct supporter of Caliph Hisham II. Ibn Abi &#x27;Amir sent an invasion force to Morocco. After three unsuccessful months, Ibn Abi &#x27;Amir&#x27;s army was forced to retreat to the safety of Tangiers, so Ibn Abi &#x27;Amir sent a powerful reinforcements under his son Abd al-Malik.[&quot;&quot;] The armies clashed near Tangiers, and in this battle, Ziri was stabbed by an African soldier who reported to Abd al-Malik that he had seriously wounded the Zenata leader. Abd al-Malik pressed home the advantage, and the wounded Ziri fled, hotly pursued by the Caliph&#x27;s army. The inhabitants of Fez would not let him enter the city, but opened the gates to Abd al-Malik on 13 October 998. Ziri fled to the Sahara, where he rallied the Zenata tribes and overthrew the unpopular remnants of the Idrisid dynasty at Tiaret. He was able to expand his territory to include Tlemcen and other parts of western Algeria, this time under Fatimid protection. Ziri died in 1001 of the after-effects of the stab wounds. He was succeeded by his son Al-Mu&#x27;izz, who made peace with Al-Mansur, and regained possession of all his father&#x27;s former territories.[&quot;&quot;]

A revolt against the Andalusian Umayyads was put down by Ibn Abi &#x27;Amir, although the Maghrawa were able to regain power in Fez. Under the succeeding rulers al-Muizz (1001–1026), Hamman (1026–1039) and Dunas (1039), they consolidated their rule in northern and central Morocco.[&quot;&quot;]

Internal power struggles after 1060 enabled the Almoravid dynasty to conquer the Maghrawa realm in 1070 and put an end to their rule. In the mid 11th century the Maghrawa still controlled most of Morocco, notably most of the Sous and Draa River area as well as Aghmat, Fez and Sijilmasa. Later, Zenata power declined. The Maghrawa and Banu Ifran began oppressing their subjects, shedding their blood, violating their women, breaking into homes to seize food and depriving traders of their goods. Anyone who tried to ward them off was killed.

=== Zirid Dynasty ===
The Zirid dynasty (), Banu Ziri (), or the Zirid state () was a Sanhaja Berber dynasty from modern-day Algeria which ruled the central Maghreb from 972 to 1014 and Ifriqiya (eastern Maghreb) from 972 to 1148.

Descendants of Ziri ibn Manad, a military leader of the Fatimid Caliphate and the eponymous founder of the dynasty, the Zirids were emirs who ruled in the name of the Fatimids. The Zirids gradually established their autonomy in Ifriqiya through military conquest until officially breaking with the Fatimids in the mid-11th century. The rule of the Zirid emirs opened the way to a period in North African history where political power was held by Berber dynasties such as the Almoravid dynasty, Almohad Caliphate, Zayyanid dynasty, Marinid Sultanate and Hafsid dynasty.

Under Buluggin ibn Ziri the Zirids extended their control westwards and briefly occupied Fez and much of present-day Morocco after 980, but encountered resistance from the local Zenata Berbers who gave their allegiance to the Caliphate of Cordoba. To the east, Zirid control was extended over Tripolitania after 978 and as far as Ajdabiya (in present-day Libya). One member of the dynastic family, Zawi ibn Ziri, revolted and fled to al-Andalus, eventually founding the Taifa of Granada in 1013, after the collapse of the Caliphate of Cordoba. Another branch of the Zirids, the Hammadids, broke away from the main branch after various internal disputes and took control of the territories of the central Maghreb after 1015. The Zirids proper were then designated as Badicides and occupied only Ifriqiya between 1048 and 1148. They were based in Kairouan until 1057, when they moved the capital to Mahdia on the coast. The Zirids of Ifriqiya also intervened in Sicily during the 11th century, as the Kalbids, the dynasty who governed the island on behalf of the Fatimids, fell into disorder.

The Zirids of Granada surrendered to the Almoravids in 1090, but the Badicides and the Hammadids remained independent during this time. Sometime between 1041 and 1051 the Zirid ruler al-Mu&#x27;izz ibn Badis renounced the Fatimid Caliphs and recognized the Sunni Muslim Abbasid Caliphate. In retaliation, the Fatimids instigated the migration of the Banu Hilal tribe to the Maghreb, dealing a serious blow to Zirid power in Ifriqiya. In the 12th century, the Hilalian invasions combined with the attacks of the Normans of Sicily along the coast further weakened Zirid power. The last Zirid ruler, al-Hasan, surrendered Mahdia to the Normans in 1148, thus ending independent Zirid rule. The Almohad Caliphate conquered the central Maghreb and Ifriqiya by 1160, ending the Hammadid dynasty in turn and finally unifying the whole of the Maghreb.

==== Origins and establishment ====
The Zirids were Sanhaja Berbers, from the sedentary Talkata tribe, originating from the area of modern Algeria. In the 10th century this tribe served as vassals of the Fatimid Caliphate, an Isma&#x27;ili Shi&#x27;a state that challenged the authority of the Sunni Abbasid caliphs. The progenitor of the Zirid dynasty, Ziri ibn Manad (r. 935–971) was installed as governor of the central Maghreb (roughly north-eastern Algeria today) on behalf of the Fatimids, guarding the western frontier of the Fatimid Caliphate. With Fatimid support Ziri founded his own capital and palace at &#x27;Ashir, south-east of Algiers, in 936. He proved his worth as a key ally in 945, during the Kharijite rebellion of Abu Yazid, when he helped break Abu Yazid&#x27;s siege of the Fatimid capital, Mahdia. After playing this valuable role, he expanded &#x27;Ashir with a new palace circa 947. In 959 he aided Jawhar al-Siqili on a Fatimid military expedition which successfully conquered Fez and Sijilmasa in present-day Morocco. On their return home to the Fatimid capital they paraded the emir of Fez and the “Caliph” Ibn Wasul of Sijilmasa in cages in a humiliating manner. After this success, Ziri was also given Tahart to govern on behalf of the Fatimids. He was eventually killed in battle against the Zanata in 971.

When the Fatimids moved their capital to Egypt in 972, Ziri&#x27;s son Buluggin ibn Ziri (r. 971–984) was appointed viceroy of Ifriqiya. He soon led a new expedition west and by 980 he had conquered Fez and most of Morocco, which had previously been retaken by the Umayyads of Cordoba in 973. He also led a successful expedition to Barghawata territory, from which he brought back a large number of slaves to Ifriqiya. In 978 the Fatimids also granted Buluggin overlordship of Tripolitania (in present-day Libya), allowing him to appoint his own governor in Tripoli. In 984 Buluggin died in Sijilmasa from an illness and his successor decided to abandon Morocco in 985.

==== Buluggin&#x27;s successors and the first divisions ====
After Buluggin&#x27;s death, rule of the Zirid state passed to his son, Al-Mansur ibn Buluggin (r. 984–996), and continued through his descendants. However, this alienated the other sons of Ziri ibn Manad who now found themselves excluded from power. In 999 many of these brothers launched a rebellion in &#x27;Ashir against Badis ibn al-Mansur (r. 996–1016), Buluggin&#x27;s grandson, marking the first serious break in the unity of the Zirids. The rebels were defeated in battle by Hammad ibn Buluggin, Badis&#x27; uncle, and most of the brothers were killed. The only remaining brother of stature, Zawi ibn Ziri, led the remaining rebels westwards and sought new opportunity in al-Andalus under the Umayyads Caliphs of Cordoba, the former enemies of the Fatimids and Zirids. He and his followers eventually founded an independent kingdom in al-Andalus, the &quot;Taifa&quot; of Granada, in 1013.

After 1001 Tripolitania broke away under the leadership of Fulful ibn Sa&#x27;id ibn Khazrun, a Maghrawa leader who founded the Banu Khazrun dynasty, which endured until 1147. Fulful fought a protracted war against Badis ibn al-Mansur and sought outside help from the Fatimids and even from the Umayyads of Cordoba, but after his death in 1009 the Zirids were able to retake Tripoli for a time. The region nonetheless remained effectively under control of the Banu Khazrun, who fluctuated between practical autonomy and full independence, often playing the Fatimids and the Zirids against each other. The Zirids finally lost Tripoli to them in 1022.

Badis appointed Hammad ibn Buluggin as governor of &#x27;Ashir and the western Zirid territories in 997. He gave Hammad a great deal of autonomy, allowing him to campaign against the Zanata and control any new territories he conquered. Hammad constructed his own capital, the Qal&#x27;at Bani Hammad, in 1008, and in 1015 he rebelled against Badis and declared himself independent altogether, while also recognizing the Abbasids instead of the Fatimids as caliphs. Badis besieged Hammad&#x27;s capital and nearly subdued him, but died in 1016 shortly before this could be accomplished. His son and successor, al-Mu&#x27;izz ibn Badis (r. 1016–1062), defeated Hammad in 1017, which forced the negotiation of a peace agreement between them. Hammad resumed his recognition of the Fatimids as caliphs but remained independent, forging a new Hammadid state which controlled a large part of present-day Algeria thereafter.

==== Apogee in Ifriqiya ====
The Zirid period of Ifriqiya is considered a high point in its history, with agriculture, industry, trade and learning, both religious and secular, all flourishing, especially in their capital, Qayrawan (Kairouan). The early reign of al-Mu&#x27;izz ibn Badis (r. 1016–1062) was particularly prosperous and marked the height of their power in Ifriqiya. In the eleventh century, when the question of Berber origin became a concern, the dynasty of al-Mu&#x27;izz started, as part of the Zirids&#x27; propaganda, to emphasize its supposed links to the Himyarite kings as a title to nobility, a theme that was taken the by court historians of the period. Management of the area by later Zirid rulers was neglectful as the agricultural economy declined, prompting an increase in banditry among the rural population. The relationship between the Zirids their Fatimid overlords varied - in 1016 thousands of Shiites died in rebellions in Ifriqiya, and the Fatimids encouraged the defection of Tripolitania from the Zirids, but nevertheless the relationship remained close. In 1049 the Zirids broke away completely by adopting Sunni Islam and recognizing the Abbasids of Baghdad as rightful Caliphs, a move which was popular with the urban Arabs of Kairouan.

In Sicily the Kalbids continued to govern on behalf of the Fatimids but the island descended into political disarray during the 11th century, inciting the Zirids to intervene on the island. In 1025 (or 1021), al-Mu&#x27;izz ibn Badis sent a fleet of 400 ships to the island in response to the Byzantines reconquering Calabria (in southern Italy) from the Muslims, but the fleet was lost in a powerful storm off the coast of Pantelleria. In 1036, the Muslim population of the island request aid from al-Mu&#x27;izz to overthrow the Kalbid emir Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Akhal, whose rule they considered flawed and unjust. The request also contained a pledge to recognize al-Mu&#x27;izz as their ruler. Al-Mu&#x27;izz, eager to expand his influence after the fragmentation of Zirid North Africa, accepted and sent his son, &#x27;Abdallah, to the island with a large army. Al-Akhal, who had been in negotiations with the Byzantines, requested help from them. A Byzantine army intervened and defeated the Zirid army on the island, but it then withdrew to Calabria, allowing &#x27;Abdallah to finish off al-Akhal. Al-Akhal was besieged in Palermo and killed in 1038. &#x27;Abdallah was subsequently forced to withdraw from the island, either due to the ever-divided Sicilians turning against him or due to another Byzantine invasion in 1038, led by George Maniakes. Another Kalbid amir, al-Hasan al-Samsam, was elected to govern Sicily, but Muslim rule there disintegrated into various petty factions leading up to the Norman conquest of the island in the second half of the 11th century.

==== Hilalian invasions and withdrawal to Mahdia ====
The Zirids renounced the Fatimids and recognized the Abbasid Caliphs in 1048-49, or sometime between 1041 and 1051. In retaliation, the Fatimids sent the Arab tribes of the Banu Hilal and the Banu Sulaym to the Maghreb. The Banu Sulaym settled first in Cyrenaica, but the Banu Hilal continued towards Ifriqiya. The Zirids attempted to stop their advance towards Ifriqiya, they sent 30,000 Sanhaja cavalry to meet the 3,000 Arab cavalry of Banu Hilal in the Battle of Haydaran of 14 April 1052. Nevertheless, the Zirids were decisively defeated and were forced to retreat, opening the road to Kairouan for the Hilalian Arab cavalry. The resulting anarchy devastated the previously flourishing agriculture, and the coastal towns assumed a new importance as conduits for maritime trade and bases for piracy against Christian shipping, as well as being the last holdout of the Zirids. The Banu Hilal invasions eventually forced al-Mu&#x27;izz ibn Badis to abandon Kairouan in 1057 and move his capital to Mahdia, while the Banu Hilal largely roamed and pillaged the interior of the former Zirid territories.

As a result of the Zirid withdrawal, various local principalities emerged in different areas. In Tunis, the shaykhs of the city elected Abd al-Haqq ibn Abd al-Aziz ibn Khurasan (r. 1059-1095) as local ruler. He founded the local Banu Khurasan dynasty that governed the city thereafter, alternately recognizing the Hammadids or the Zirids as overlords depending on the circumstances. In Qabis (Gabès), the Zirid governor, al-Mu&#x27;izz ibn Muhammad ibn Walmiya remained loyal until 1062 when, outraged by the expulsion of his two brothers from Mahdia by al-Mu&#x27;izz ibn Badis, he declared his independence and placed himself under the protection of Mu&#x27;nis ibn Yahya, a chief of Banu Hilal. Sfaqus (Sfax) was declared independent by the Zirid governor, Mansur al-Barghawati, who was murdered and succeeded by his cousin Hammu ibn Malil al-Barghawati.

Al-Mui&#x27;zz ibn Badis was succeeded by his son, Tamim ibn al-Mu&#x27;izz (r. 1062-1108), who spent much of his reign attempting to restore Zirid power in the region. In 1063 he repelled a siege of Mahdia by the independent ruler of Sfax while also capturing the important port of Sus (Sousse). Meanwhile, the Hammadid ruler al-Nasir ibn &#x27;Alannas (r. 1062-1088) began to intervene in Ifriqiya around this time, having his sovereignty recognized in Sfax, Tunis, and Kairouan. Tamim organized a coalition with some of the Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym tribes and succeeded in inflicting a heavy defeat on al-Nasir at the Battle of Sabiba in 1065. The war between the Zirids and Hammadids continued until 1077, when a truce was negotiated, sealed by a marriage between Tamim and one of al-Nasir&#x27;s daughters. In 1074 Tamim sent a naval expedition to Calabria where they ravaged the Italian coasts, plundered Nicotera and enslaved many of its inhabitants. The next year (1075) another Zirid raid resulted in the capture of Mazara in Sicily; however, the Zirid emir rethought his involvement in Sicily and decided to withdraw, abandoning what they had briefly held. In 1087, the Zirid capital, Mahdia, was sacked by the Pisans. According to Ettinghausen, Grabar, and Jenkins-Madina, the Pisa Griffin is believed to have been part of the spoils taken during the sack. In 1083 Mahdia was besieged by a chief of the Banu Hilal, Malik ibn &#x27;Alawi. Unable to take the city, Malik instead turned to Kairouan and captured that city, but Tamim marched out with his entire army and defeated the Banu Hilal forces, at which point he also brought Kairouan back under Zirid control. He went on to capture Gabès in 1097 and Sfax in 1100. Gabès, however, soon declared itself independent again under the leadership of the Banu Jami&#x27;, a family from the Riyahi branch of the Banu Hilal.

Tamim&#x27;s son and successor, Yahya ibn Tamim (r. 1108-1116), formally recognized the Fatimid caliphs again and received an emissary from Cairo in 1111. He captured an important fortress near Carthage called Iqlibiya and his fleet launched raids against Sardinia and Genoa, bringing back many captives. He was assassinated in 1116 and succeeded by his son, &#x27;Ali ibn Yahya (r. 1116-1121). &#x27;Ali continued to recognize the Fatimids, receiving another embassy from Cairo in 1118. He imposed his authority on Tunis, but failed to recapture Gabès from its local ruler, Rafi&#x27; ibn Jami&#x27;, whose counterattack he then had to repel from Mahdia. He was succeeded by his son al-Hasan in 1121, the last Zirid ruler.

==== End of Zirid rule ====
During the 1130s and 1140s the Normans of Sicily began to capture cities and islands along the coast of Ifriqiya. Jerba was captured in 1135 and Tripoli was captured in 1146. In 1148, the Normans captured Sfax, Gabès, and Mahdia. In Mahdia, the population was weakened by years of famine and the bulk of the Zirid army was away on another campaign when the Norman fleet, commanded by George of Antioch, arrived off the coast. Al-Hasan decided to abandon the city, leaving it to be occupied, which effectively ended the Zirid dynasty&#x27;s rule. Al-Hasan fled to the citadel of al-Mu&#x27;allaqa near Carthage and stayed there for a several months. He planned to flee to the Fatimid court in Egypt but the Norman fleet blocked his way, so instead he headed west, making for the Almohad court of &#x27;Abd al-Mu&#x27;min in Marrakesh. He obtained permission from Yahya ibn al-&#x27;Aziz, the Hammadid ruler, to cross his territory, but after entering Hammadid territory he was detained and placed under house arrest in Algiers. When &#x27;Abd al-Mu&#x27;min captured Algiers in 1151, he freed al-Hasan, who accompanied him back to Marrakesh. Later, when &#x27;Abd al-Mu&#x27;min conquered Mahdia in 1160, placing all of Ifriqiya under Almohad rule, al-Hasan was with him. &#x27;Abd al-Mu&#x27;min appointed him governor of Mahdia, where he remained, residing in the suburb of Zawila, until &#x27;Abd al-Mu&#x27;min&#x27;s death in 1163. The new Almohad caliph, Abu Ya&#x27;qub Yusuf, subsequently ordered him to come back to Marrakesh, but al-Hasan died along the way in Tamasna in 1167.

=== Hammadid Dynasty ===
The Hammadid dynasty (Arabic: الحمّاديون) was a branch of the Sanhaja Berber dynasty that ruled an area roughly corresponding to north-eastern modern Algeria between 1008 and 1152. The state reached its peak under Nasir ibn Alnas during which it was briefly the most important state in Northwest Africa.

The Hammadid dynasty&#x27;s first capital was at Qalaat Beni Hammad. It was founded in 1007, and is now a UNESCO World Heritage Site. When the area was sacked by the Banu Hilal tribe, the Hammadids moved their capital to Béjaïa in 1090.

=== Almohad Caliphate ===
The Almohad Caliphate (; or or from

) was a North African Berber Muslim empire founded in the 12th century. At its height, it controlled much of the Iberian Peninsula (Al Andalus) and North Africa (the Maghreb).

The Almohad docrtine was founded by Ibn Tumart among the Berber Masmuda tribes, but the Almohad caliphate and its ruling dynasty were founded after his death by Abd al-Mu&#x27;min al-Gumi, which was born in the Hammadid region of Tlemcen, Algeria. Around 1120, Ibn Tumart first established a Berber state in Tinmel in the Atlas Mountains. Under Abd al-Mu&#x27;min (r. 1130–1163) they succeeded in overthrowing the ruling Almoravid dynasty governing Morocco in 1147, when he conquered Marrakesh and declared himself caliph. They then extended their power over all of the Maghreb by 1159. Al-Andalus soon followed, and all of Muslim Iberia was under Almohad rule by 1172.

The turning point of their presence in the Iberian Peninsula came in 1212, when Muhammad III, &quot;al-Nasir&quot; (1199–1214) was defeated at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in the Sierra Morena by an alliance of the Christian forces from Castile, Aragon and Navarre. Much of the remaining territories of al-Andalus were lost in the ensuing decades, with the cities of Córdoba and Seville falling to the Christians in 1236 and 1248 respectively.

The Almohads continued to rule in Africa until the piecemeal loss of territory through the revolt of tribes and districts enabled the rise of their most effective enemies, the Marinids, from northern Morocco in 1215. The last representative of the line, Idris al-Wathiq, was reduced to the possession of Marrakesh, where he was murdered by a slave in 1269; the Marinids seized Marrakesh, ending the Almohad domination of the Western Maghreb.

==== Origins ====

The Almohad movement originated with Ibn Tumart, a member of the Masmuda, a Berber tribal confederation of the Atlas Mountains of southern Morocco. At the time, Morocco, western Algeria and Spain (al-Andalus), were under the rule of the Almoravids, a Sanhaja Berber dynasty. Early in his life, Ibn Tumart went to Spain to pursue his studies, and thereafter to Baghdad to deepen them. In Baghdad, Ibn Tumart attached himself to the theological school of al-Ash&#x27;ari, and came under the influence of the teacher al-Ghazali. He soon developed his own system, combining the doctrines of various masters. Ibn Tumart&#x27;s main principle was a strict unitarianism (&quot;tawhid&quot;), which denied the independent existence of the attributes of God as being incompatible with His unity, and therefore a polytheistic idea. Ibn Tumart represented a revolt against what he perceived as anthropomorphism in Muslim orthodoxy. His followers would become known as the &quot;al-Muwaḥḥidūn&quot; (&quot;Almohads&quot;), meaning those who affirm the unity of God.

After his return to the Maghreb c. 1117, Ibn Tumart spent some time in various Ifriqiyan cities, preaching and agitating, heading riotous attacks on wine-shops and on other manifestations of laxity. He laid the blame for the latitude on the ruling dynasty of the Almoravids, whom he accused of obscurantism and impiety. He also opposed their sponsorship of the Maliki school of jurisprudence, which drew upon consensus (&quot;ijma&quot;) and other sources beyond the Qur&#x27;an and Sunnah in their reasoning, an anathema to the stricter Zahirism favored by Ibn Tumart. His antics and fiery preaching led fed-up authorities to move him along from town to town. After being expelled from Bejaia, Ibn Tumart set up camp in Mellala, in the outskirts of the city, where he received his first disciples – notably, al-Bashir (who would become his chief strategist) and Abd al-Mu&#x27;min (a Zenata Berber, who would later become his successor).

In 1120, Ibn Tumart and his small band of followers proceeded to Morocco, stopping first in Fez, where he briefly engaged the Maliki scholars of the city in debate. He even went so far as to assault the sister of the Almoravid emir ʿAli ibn Yusuf, in the streets of Fez, because she was going about unveiled, after the manner of Berber women. After being expelled from Fez, he went to Marrakesh, where he successfully tracked down the Almoravid emir Ali ibn Yusuf at a local mosque, and challenged the emir, and the leading scholars of the area, to a doctrinal debate. After the debate, the scholars concluded that Ibn Tumart&#x27;s views were blasphemous and the man dangerous, and urged him to be put to death or imprisoned. But the emir decided merely to expel him from the city.

Ibn Tumart took refuge among his own people, the Hargha, in his home village of Igiliz (exact location uncertain), in the Sous valley. He retreated to a nearby cave, and lived out an ascetic lifestyle, coming out only to preach his program of puritan reform, attracting greater and greater crowds. At length, towards the end of Ramadan in late 1121, after a particularly moving sermon, reviewing his failure to persuade the Almoravids to reform by argument, Ibn Tumart &#x27;revealed&#x27; himself as the true Mahdi, a divinely guided judge and lawgiver, and was recognized as such by his audience. This was effectively a declaration of war on the Almoravid state.

On the advice of one of his followers, Omar Hintati, a prominent chieftain of the Hintata, Ibn Tumart abandoned his cave in 1122 and went up into the High Atlas, to organize the Almohad movement among the highland Masmuda tribes. Besides his own tribe, the Hargha, Ibn Tumart secured the adherence of the Ganfisa, the Gadmiwa, the Hintata, the Haskura, and the Hazraja to the Almohad cause. Around 1124, Ibn Tumart erected the ribat of Tinmel, in the valley of the Nfis in the High Atlas, an impregnable fortified complex, which would serve both as the spiritual center and military headquarters of the Almohad movement.

For the first eight years, the Almohad rebellion was limited to a guerilla war along the peaks and ravines of the High Atlas. Their principal damage was in rendering insecure (or altogether impassable) the roads and mountain passes south of Marrakesh – threatening the route to all-important Sijilmassa, the gateway of the trans-Saharan trade. Unable to send enough manpower through the narrow passes to dislodge the Almohad rebels from their easily defended mountain strong points, the Almoravid authorities reconciled themselves to setting up strongholds to confine them there (most famously the fortress of Tasghîmût that protected the approach to Aghmat, which was conquered by the Almohads in 1132), while exploring alternative routes through more easterly passes.

Ibn Tumart organized the Almohads as a commune, with a minutely detailed structure. At the core was the &quot;Ahl ad-dār&quot; (&quot;House of the Mahdi:), composed of Ibn Tumart&#x27;s family. This was supplemented by two councils: an inner Council of Ten, the Mahdi&#x27;s privy council, composed of his earliest and closest companions; and the consultative Council of Fifty, composed of the leading &quot;sheikh&quot;s of the Masmuda tribes. The early preachers and missionaries (&quot;ṭalaba&quot; and &quot;huffāẓ&quot;) also had their representatives. Militarily, there was a strict hierarchy of units. The Hargha tribe coming first (although not strictly ethnic; it included many &quot;honorary&quot; or &quot;adopted&quot; tribesmen from other ethnicities, e.g. Abd al-Mu&#x27;min himself). This was followed by the men of Tinmel, then the other Masmuda tribes in order, and rounded off by the black fighters, the &quot;ʻabīd&quot;. Each unit had a strict internal hierarchy, headed by a &quot;mohtasib&quot;, and divided into two factions: one for the early adherents, another for the late adherents, each headed by a &quot;mizwar&quot; (or &quot;amzwaru&quot;); then came the &quot;sakkakin&quot; (treasurers), effectively the money-minters, tax-collectors, and bursars, then came the regular army (&quot;jund&quot;), then the religious corps – the muezzins, the &quot;hafidh&quot; and the &quot;hizb&quot; – followed by the archers, the conscripts, and the slaves. Ibn Tumart&#x27;s closest companion and chief strategist, al-Bashir, took upon himself the role of &quot;political commissar&quot;, enforcing doctrinal discipline among the Masmuda tribesmen, often with a heavy hand.
In early 1130, the Almohads finally descended from the mountains for their first sizeable attack in the lowlands. It was a disaster. The Almohads swept aside an Almoravid column that had come out to meet them before Aghmat, and then chased their remnant all the way to Marrakesh. They laid siege to Marrakesh for forty days until, in April (or May) 1130, the Almoravids sallied from the city and crushed the Almohads in the bloody Battle of al-Buhayra (named after a large garden east of the city). The Almohads were thoroughly routed, with huge losses. Half their leadership was killed in action, and the survivors only just managed to scramble back to the mountains.

Ibn Tumart died shortly after, in August 1130. That the Almohad movement did not immediately collapse after such a devastating defeat and the death of their charismatic Mahdi, is likely due to the skills of his successor, Abd al-Mu&#x27;min. Ibn Tumart&#x27;s death was kept a secret for three years, a period which Almohad chroniclers described as a &quot;ghayba&quot; or &quot;occultation&quot;. This period likely gave Abd al-Mu&#x27;min time to secure his position as successor to the political leadership of the movement. Although a Zenata Berber from Tagra (Algeria), and thus an alien among the Masmuda of southern Morocco, Abd al-Mu&#x27;min nonetheless saw off his principal rivals and hammered wavering tribes back to the fold. In an ostentatious gesture of defiance, in 1132, if only to remind the emir that the Almohads were not finished, Abd al-Mu&#x27;min led an audacious night operation that seized Tasghîmût fortress and dismantled it thoroughly, carting off its great gates back to Tinmel. Three years after Ibn Tumart&#x27;s death he was officially proclaimed &quot;Caliph&quot;.

In order to neutralise the Masmudas, to whom he was a stranger, Abd al-Mumin relied on his tribe of origin, the Kumiyas (a Berber tribe from Orania), which he integrated massively into the army and within the Almohad power. He thus appointed his son as his successor and his other children as governors of the provinces of the Caliphate. The Kumiyas would later form the bodyguard of Abd al Mumin and his successor. In addition, he also relied on Arabs, representatives of the great Hilalian families, whom he deported to Morocco to weaken the influence of the Masmuda sheikhs. These moves have the effect of advancing the Arabisation of the future Morocco.
==== Al-Andalus ====
Abd al-Mu&#x27;min then came forward as the lieutenant of the Mahdi Ibn Tumart. Between 1130 and his death in 1163, Abd al-Mu&#x27;min not only rooted out the Almoravids, but extended his power over all northern Africa as far as Egypt, becoming amir of Marrakesh in 1147.

Al-Andalus followed the fate of Africa. Between 1146 and 1173, the Almohads gradually wrested control from the Almoravids over the Moorish principalities in Iberia. The Almohads transferred the capital of Muslim Iberia from Córdoba to Seville. They founded a great mosque there; its tower, the Giralda, was erected in 1184 to mark the accession of Ya&#x27;qub I. The Almohads also built a palace there called Al-Muwarak on the site of the modern day Alcázar of Seville.

The Almohad princes had a longer and more distinguished career than the Almoravids. The successors of Abd al-Mumin, Abu Yaqub Yusuf (Yusuf I, ruled 1163–1184) and Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur (Yaʻqūb I, ruled 1184–1199), were both able men. Initially their government drove many Jewish and Christian subjects to take refuge in the growing Christian states of Portugal, Castile, and Aragon. Ultimately they became less fanatical than the Almoravids, and Ya&#x27;qub al-Mansur was a highly accomplished man who wrote a good Arabic style and protected the philosopher Averroes. In 1190–1191, he campaigned in southern Portugal and won back territory lost in 1189. His title of &quot;al-Manṣūr&quot; (&quot;the Victorious&quot;) was earned by his victory over Alfonso VIII of Castile in the Battle of Alarcos (1195).

From the time of Yusuf II, however, the Almohads governed their co-religionists in Iberia and central North Africa through lieutenants, their dominions outside Morocco being treated as provinces. When Almohad emirs crossed the Straits it was to lead a jihad against the Christians and then return to Morocco.

==== Holding years ====

In 1212, the Almohad Caliph Muhammad &#x27;al-Nasir&#x27; (1199–1214), the successor of al-Mansur, after an initially successful advance north, was defeated by an alliance of the four Christian kings of Castile, Aragón, Navarre, and Portugal, at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in the Sierra Morena. The battle broke the Almohad advance, but the Christian powers remained too disorganized to profit from it immediately.

Before his death in 1213, al-Nasir appointed his young ten-year-old son as the next caliph Yusuf II &quot;al-Mustansir&quot;. The Almohads passed through a period of effective regency for the young caliph, with power exercised by an oligarchy of elder family members, palace bureaucrats and leading nobles. The Almohad ministers were careful to negotiate a series of truces with the Christian kingdoms, which remained more-or-less in place for next fifteen years (the loss of Alcácer do Sal to the Kingdom of Portugal in 1217 was an exception).

In early 1224, the youthful caliph died in an accident, without any heirs. The palace bureaucrats in Marrakesh, led by the &quot;wazir&quot; Uthman ibn Jam&#x27;i, quickly engineered the election of his elderly grand-uncle, Abd al-Wahid I &#x27;al-Makhlu&#x27;, as the new Almohad caliph. But the rapid appointment upset other branches of the family, notably the brothers of the late al-Nasir, who governed in al-Andalus. The challenge was immediately raised by one of them, then governor in Murcia, who declared himself Caliph Abdallah al-Adil. With the help of his brothers, he quickly seized control of al-Andalus. His chief advisor, the shadowy Abu Zayd ibn Yujjan, tapped into his contacts in Marrakesh, and secured the deposition and assassination of Abd al-Wahid I, and the expulsion of the al-Jami&#x27;i clan.

This coup has been characterized as the pebble that finally broke al-Andalus. It was the first internal coup among the Almohads. The Almohad clan, despite occasional disagreements, had always remained tightly knit and loyally behind dynastic precedence. Caliph al-Adil&#x27;s murderous breach of dynastic and constitutional propriety marred his acceptability to other Almohad &quot;sheikhs&quot;. One of the recusants was his cousin, Abd Allah al-Bayyasi (&quot;the Baezan&quot;), the Almohad governor of Jaén, who took a handful of followers and decamped for the hills around Baeza. He set up a rebel camp and forged an alliance with the hitherto quiet Ferdinand III of Castile. Sensing his greater priority was Marrakesh, where recusant Almohad &quot;sheikh&quot;s had rallied behind Yahya, another son of al-Nasir, al-Adil paid little attention to this little band of misfits.

=== Zayyanid Dynasty ===

The Kingdom of Tlemcen or Zayyanid Kingdom of Tlemcen () was a Berber kingdom in what is now the northwest of Algeria. Its territory stretched from Tlemcen to the Chelif bend and Algiers, and at its zenith reached Sijilmasa and the Moulouya River in the west, Tuat to the south and the Soummam in the east.

The Tlemcen Kingdom was established after the demise of the Almohad Caliphate in 1236, and later fell under Ottoman rule in 1554. It was ruled by sultans of the Zayyanid dynasty. The capital of the Tlemcen kingdom centred on Tlemcen, which lay on the primary east–west route between Morocco and Ifriqiya. The kingdom was situated between the realm of the Marinids the west, centred on Fez, and the Hafsids to the east, centred on Tunis.

Tlemcen was a hub for the north–south trade route from Oran on the Mediterranean coast to the Western Sudan. As a prosperous trading centre, it attracted its more powerful neighbours. At different times the kingdom was invaded and occupied by the Marinids from the west, by the Hafsids from the east, and by Aragonese from the north. At other times, they were able to take advantage of turmoil among their neighbours: during the reign of Abu Tashfin I (r. 1318–1337) the Zayyanids occupied Tunis and in 1423, under the reign of Abu Malek, they briefly captured Fez. In the south the Zayyanid realm included Tuat, Tamentit and the Draa region which was governed by Abdallah Ibn Moslem ez Zerdali, a sheikh of the Zayyanids.

==== Rise to power (13th century) ====
The &quot;Bānu ʿabd āl-Wād&quot;, also called the &quot;Bānu Ziyān&quot; or Zayyanids after Yaghmurasen Ibn Zyan, the founder of the dynasty, were leaders of a Berber group who had long been settled in the Central Maghreb. Although contemporary chroniclers asserted that they had a noble Arab origin, he reportedly spoke in Zenati dialect and denied the lineage that genealogists had attributed to him. The town of Tlemcen, called Pomaria by the Romans, is about 806m above sea level in fertile, well-watered country.

Tlemcen was an important centre under the Almoravid dynasty and its successors the Almohad Caliphate, who began a new wall around the town in 1161.

Yaghmurasen ibn Zayyan (1235–83) of the &quot;Bānu ʿabd āl-Wād&quot; was governor of Tlemcen under the Almohads. He inherited leadership of the family from his brother in 1235. When the Almohad empire began to fall apart, in 1235, Yaghmurasen declared his independence. The city of Tlemcen became the capital of one of three successor states, ruled for centuries by successive Ziyyanid sultans. Its flag was a white crescent pointing upwards on a blue field. The kingdom covered the less fertile regions of the Tell Atlas. Its people included a minority of settled farmers and villagers, and a majority of nomadic herders.

Yaghmurasen was able to maintain control over the rival Berber groups, and when faced with the outside threat of the Marinid dynasty, he formed an alliance with the Emir of Granada and the King of Castile, Alfonso X. According to Ibn Khaldun, &quot;he was the bravest, most dreaded and honourable man of the &#x27;Abd-la-Wadid family. No one looked after the interest of his people, maintained the influence of the kingdom and managed the state administration better than he did.&quot; In 1248 he defeated the Almohad Caliph in the Battle of Oujda during which the Almohad Caliph was killed. In 1264 he managed to conquer Sijilmasa, therefore bringing Sijilmasa and Tlemcen, the two most important outlets for trans-Saharan trade under one authority. Sijilmasa remained under his control for 11 years. Before his death he instructed his son and heir Uthman to remain on the defensive with the Marinid kingdom, but to expand into Hafsid territory if possible.

==== 14th century ====
For most of its history the kingdom was on the defensive, threatened by stronger states to the east and the west. The nomadic Arabs to the south also took advantage of the frequent periods of weakness to raid the centre and take control of pastures in the south.

The city of Tlemcen was several times attacked or besieged by the Marinids, and large parts of the kingdom were occupied by them for several decades in the fourteenth century.
The Marinid Abu Yaqub Yusuf an-Nasr besieged Tlemcen from 1299 to 1307. During the siege he built a new town, al-Mansura, diverting most of the trade to this town. The new city was fortified and had a mosque, baths and palaces. The siege was raised when Abu Yakub was murdered in his sleep by one of his eunuchs.

When the Marinids left in 1307, the Zayyanids promptly destroyed al-Mansura. The Zayyanid king Abu Zayyan I died in 1308 and was succeeded by Abu Hammu I (r. 1308–1318). Abu Hammu was later killed in a conspiracy instigated by his son and heir Abu Tashufin I (r. 1318–1337). The reigns of Abu Hammu I and Abu Tashufin I marked the second apogee of the Zayyanids, a period during which they consolidated their hegemony in the central Maghreb. Tlemcen recovered its trade and its population grew, reaching about 100,000 by around the 1330s. Abu Tashufin initiated hostilities against Ifriqiya while the Marinids were distracted by their internal struggles. He besieged Béjaïa and sent an army into Tunisia that defeated the Hafsid king Abu Yahya Abu Bakr II, who fled to Constantine while the Zayyanids occupied Tunis in 1325.

The Marinid sultan Abu al-Hasan (r. 1331–1348) cemented an alliance with Hafsids by marrying a Hafsid princess. Upon being attacked by the Zayyanids again, the Hafsids appealed to Abu al-Hasan for help, providing him with an excuse to invade his neighbour. The Marinid sultan initiated a siege of Tlemcen in 1335 and the city fell in 1337. Abu Tashufin died during the fighting. Abu al-Hasan received delegates from Egypt, Granada, Tunis and Mali congratulating him on his victory, by which he had gained complete control of the trans-Saharan trade. In 1346 the Hafsid Sultan, Abu Bakr, died and a dispute over the succession ensued. In 1347 Abu al-Hasan annexed Ifriqiya, briefly reuniting the Maghrib territories as they had been under the Almohads.

However, Abu al-Hasan went too far in attempting to impose more authority over the Arab tribes, who revolted and in April 1348 defeated his army near Kairouan. His son, Abu Inan Faris, who had been serving as governor of Tlemcen, returned to Fez and declared that he was sultan. Tlemcen and the central Maghreb revolted. The Zayyanid Abu Thabit I (1348-1352) was proclaimed king of Tlemcen. Abu al-Hasan had to return from Ifriqiya by sea. After failing to retake Tlemcen and being defeated by his son, Abu al-Hasan died in May 1351. In 1352 Abu Inan Faris recaptured Tlemcen. He also reconquered the central Maghreb. He took Béjaïa in 1353 and Tunis in 1357, becoming master of Ifriqiya. In 1358 he was forced to return to Fez due to Arab opposition, where he fell sick and was killed.

The Zayyanid king Abu Hammu Musa II (r. 1359–1389) next took the throne of Tlemcen. He pursued an expansionist policy, pushing towards Fez in the west and into the Chelif valley and Béjaïa in the east. He had a long reign punctuated by fighting against the Marinids or various rebel groups. The Marinids reoccupied Tlemcen in 1360 and in 1370. In both cases, the Marinids found they were unable to hold the region against local resistance. Abu Hammu attacked the Hafsids in Béjaïa again in 1366, but this resulted in Hafsid intervention in the kingdom&#x27;s affairs. The Hafsid sultan released Abu Hammu&#x27;s cousin, Abu Zayyan, and helped him in laying claim to the Zayyanid throne. This provoked an internecine war between the two Zayyanids until 1378, when Abu Hammu finally captured Abu Zayyan in Algiers.

The historian Ibn Khaldun lived in Tlemcen for a period during the generally prosperous reign of Abu Hammu Musa II, and helped him in negotiations with the nomadic Arabs. He said of this period, &quot;Here [in Tlemcen] science and arts developed with success; here were born scholars and outstanding men, whose glory penetrated into other countries.&quot; Abu Hammu was deposed by his son, Abu Tashfin II (1389–94), and the state went into decline.

==== Decline (late 14th and 15th centuries) ====

In the late 14th century and the 15th century, the state was increasingly weak and became intermittently a vassal of Hafsid Ifriqiya, Marinid Morocco or the Crown of Aragon. In 1386 Abu Hammu moved his capital to Algiers, which he judged less vulnerable, but a year later his son, Abu Tashufin, overthrew him and took him prisoner. Abu Hammu was sent on a ship towards Alexandria but he escaped along the way when the ship stopped in Tunis. In 1388 he recaptured Tlemcen, forcing his son to flee. Abu Tashufin sought refuge in Fez and enlisted the aid of the Marinids, who sent an army to occupy Tlemcen and reinstall him on the throne. As a result, Abu Tashufin and his successors recognized the suzerainty of the Marinids and paid them an annual tribute.

During the reign of the Marinid sultan Abu Sa&#x27;id, the Zayyanids rebelled on several occasions and Abu Sa&#x27;id had to reassert his authority. After Abu Sa&#x27;id&#x27;s death in 1420 the Marinids were plunged into political turmoil. The Zayyanid emir, Abu Malek, used this opportunity to throw off Marinid authority and captured Fez in 1423. Abu Malek installed Muhammad, a Marinid prince, as a Zayyanid vassal in Fez. The Wattasids, a family related to the Marinids, continued to govern from Salé, where they proclaimed Abd al-Haqq II, an infant, as the successor to the Marinid throne, with Abu Zakariyya al-Wattasi as regent. The Hafsid sultan, Abd al-Aziz II, reacted to Abu Malek&#x27;s rising influence by sending military expeditions westward, installing his own Zayyanid client king (Abu Abdallah II) in Tlemcen and pursuing Abu Malek to Fez. Abu Malek&#x27;s Marinid puppet, Muhammad, was deposed and the Wattasids returned with Abd al-Haqq II to Fez, acknowledging Hafsid suzerainty. The Zayyanids remained vassals of the Hafsids until the end of the 15th century, when the Spanish expansion along the coast weakened the rule of both dynasties.

By the end of the 15th century the Kingdom of Aragon had gained effective political control, intervening in the dynastic disputes of the amirs of Tlemcen, whose authority had shrunk to the town and its immediate neighbourship. When the Spanish took the city of Oran from the kingdom in 1509, continuous pressure from the Berbers prompted the Spanish to attempt a counterattack against the city of Tlemcen (1543), which was deemed by the Papacy to be a crusade. The Spanish under Martin of Angulo had also suffered a prior defeat in 1535 when they attempted to install a client ruler in Tlemcen. The Spanish failed to take the city in the first attack, but the strategic vulnerability of Tlemcen caused the kingdom&#x27;s weight to shift toward the safer and more heavily fortified corsair base at Algiers.

Tlemcen was captured in 1551 by the Ottoman Empire under Hassan Pasha. The last Zayyanid sultan&#x27;s son escaped to Oran, then a Spanish possession. He was baptized and lived a quiet life as Don Carlos at the court of Philip II of Spain.

Under the Ottoman Empire Tlemcen quickly lost its former importance, becoming a sleepy provincial town. The failure of the kingdom to become a powerful state can be explained by the lack of geographical or cultural unity, the constant internal disputes and the reliance on irregular Arab-Berber nomads for the military.

=== Kingdom of Beni Abbas ===


=== Kingdom of Kuku ===


=== Christian conquest of Spain ===

The final triumph of the 700-year Christian conquest of Spain was marked by the fall of Granada in 1492. Christian Spain imposed its influence on the Maghrib coast by constructing fortified outposts and collecting tribute. But Spain never sought to extend its North African conquests much beyond a few modest enclaves. Privateering was an age-old practice in the Mediterranean, and North African rulers engaged in it increasingly in the late 16th and early 17th centuries because it was so lucrative. Until the 17th century the Barbary pirates used galleys, but a Dutch renegade of the name of Zymen Danseker taught them the advantage of using sailing ships.

Algeria became the privateering city-state par excellence, and two privateer brothers were instrumental in extending Ottoman influence in Algeria. At about the time Spain was establishing its presidios in the Maghrib, the Muslim privateer brothers Aruj and Khair ad Din—the latter known to Europeans as Barbarossa, or Red Beard—were operating successfully off Tunisia. In 1516 Aruj moved his base of operations to Algiers but was killed in 1518. Khair ad Din succeeded him as military commander of Algiers, and the Ottoman sultan gave him the title of beglerbey (provincial governor).

=== Spanish enclaves ===
The Spanish expansionist policy in North Africa began with the Catholic Monarchs and the regent Cisneros, once the &quot;Reconquista&quot; in the Iberian Peninsula was finished. That way, several towns and outposts in the Algerian coast were conquered and occupied: Mers El Kébir (1505), Oran (1509), Algiers (1510) and Bugia (1510). The Spanish conquest of Oran was won with much bloodshed: 4,000 Algerians were massacred, and up to 8,000 were taken prisoner. For about 200 years, Oran&#x27;s inhabitants were virtually held captive in their fortress walls, ravaged by famine and plague; Spanish soldiers, too, were irregularly fed and paid.

The Spaniards left Algiers in 1529, Bujia in 1554, Mers El Kébir and Oran in 1708. The Spanish returned in 1732 when the armada of the Duke of Montemar was victorious in the Battle of Aïn-el-Turk and retook Oran and Mers El Kébir; the Spanish massacred many Muslim soldiers. In 1751, a Spanish adventurer, named John Gascon, obtained permission, and vessels and fireworks, to go against Algiers, and set fire, at night, to the Algerian fleet. The plan, however, miscarried. In 1775, Charles III of Spain sent a large force to attack Algiers, under the command of Alejandro O&#x27;Reilly (who had led Spanish forces in crushing French rebellion in Louisiana), resulting in a disastrous defeat. The Algerians suffered 5,000 casualties. The Spanish navy bombarded Algiers in 1784; over 20,000 cannonballs were fired, much of the city and its fortifications were destroyed and most of the Algerian fleet was sunk.

Oran and Mers El Kébir were held until 1792, when they were sold by the king Charles IV to the Bey of Algiers.

== Regency of Algiers ==
The Regency of Algiers () was a state in North Africa lasting from 1516 to 1830, until it was conquered by the French. Situated between the regency of Tunis in the east, the Sultanate of Morocco (from 1553) in the west and Tuat as well as the country south of In Salah in the south (and the Spanish and Portuguese possessions of North Africa), the Regency originally extended its borders from La Calle in the east to Trara in the west and from Algiers to Biskra, and afterwards spread to the present eastern and western borders of Algeria.

It had various degrees of autonomy throughout its existence, in some cases reaching complete independence, recognized even by the Ottoman sultan. The country was initially governed by governors appointed by the Ottoman sultan (1518–1659), rulers appointed by the Odjak of Algiers (1659–1710), and then Deys elected by the Divan of Algiers from (1710-1830).

=== Establishment ===

From 1496, the Spanish conquered numerous possessions on the North African coast: Melilla (1496), Mers El Kébir (1505), Oran (1509), Bougie (1510), Tripoli (1510), Algiers, Shershell, Dellys, and Tenes. The Spaniards later led unsuccessful expeditions to take Algiers in the Algiers expedition in 1516, 1519 and another failed expedition in 1541.

Around the same time, the Ottoman privateer brothers Oruç and Hayreddin—both known to Europeans as Barbarossa, or &quot;Red Beard&quot;—were operating successfully off Tunisia under the Hafsids. In 1516, Oruç moved his base of operations to Algiers. He asked for the protection of the Ottoman Empire in 1517, but was killed in 1518 during his invasion of the Zayyanid Kingdom of Tlemcen. Hayreddin succeeded him as military commander of Algiers.

In 1551 Hasan Pasha, the son of Hayreddin defeated the Spanish-Moroccan armies during a campaign to recapture Tlemcen, thus cementing Ottoman control in western and central Algeria.

After that, the conquest of Algeria sped up. In 1552 Salah Rais, with the help of some Kabyle kingdoms, conquered Touggourt, and established a foothold in the Sahara.

In the 1560s eastern Algeria was centralized, and the power struggle which had been present ever since the Emirate of Béjaïa collapsed came to an end.

During the 16th, 17th, and early 18th century, the Kabyle Kingdoms of Kuku and Ait Abbas managed to maintain their independence repelling Ottoman attacks several times, notably in the First Battle of Kalaa of the Beni Abbes. This was mainly thanks to their ideal position deep inside the Kabylia Mountains and their great organisation, and the fact that unlike in the West and East where collapsing kingdoms such as Tlemcen or Béjaïa were present, Kabylia had two new and energetic emirates.

=== Base in the war against Spain ===
Hayreddin Barbarossa established the military basis of the regency. The Ottomans provided a supporting garrison of 2,000 Turkish troops with artillery. He left Hasan Agha in command as his deputy when he had to leave for Constantinople in 1533. The son of Barbarossa, Hasan Pashan was in 1544 when his father retired, the first governor of the Regency to be directly appointed by the Ottoman Empire. He took the title of &quot;beylerbey&quot;. Algiers became a base in the war against Spain, and also in the Ottoman conflicts with Morocco.

&quot;Beylerbeys&quot; continued to be nominated for unlimited tenures until 1587. After Spain had sent an embassy to Constantinople in 1578 to negotiate a truce, leading to a formal peace in August 1580, the Regency of Algiers was a formal Ottoman territory, rather than just a military base in the war against Spain. At this time, the Ottoman Empire set up a regular Ottoman administration in Algiers and its dependencies, headed by &quot;Pashas&quot;, with 3-year terms to help considate Ottoman power in the Maghreb.

=== Mediterranean privateers ===

Despite the end of formal hostilities with Spain in 1580, attacks on Christian and especially Catholic shipping, with slavery for the captured, became prevalent in Algiers and were actually the main industry and source of revenues of the Regency.

In the early 17th century, Algiers also became, along with other North African ports such as Tunis, one of the bases for Anglo-Turkish piracy. There were as many as 8,000 in the city in 1634. (Renegades were former Christians, sometimes fleeing the law, who voluntarily moved to Muslim territory and converted to Islam.) Hayreddin Barbarossa is credited with tearing down the Peñón of Algiers and using the stone to build the inner harbor.

A contemporary letter states:

Privateers and slavery of Christians originating from Algiers were a major problem throughout the centuries, leading to regular punitive expeditions by European powers. Spain (1567, 1775, 1783), Denmark (1770), France (1661, 1665, 1682, 1683, 1688), England (1622, 1655, 1672), all led naval bombardments against Algiers. Abraham Duquesne fought the Barbary pirates in 1681 and bombarded Algiers between 1682 and 1683, to help Christian captives.

=== Political Turmoil (1659-1713) ===

==== The Agha period ====
In 1659 the Janissaries of the Odjak of Algiers took over the country, and removed the local Pasha with the blessing of the Ottoman Sultan. From there on a system of dual leaders was in place. There was first and foremost the Agha, elected by the Odjak, and the Pasha appointed by the Ottoman Sublime Porte, whom was a major cause of unrest. Of course, this duality was not stable. All of the Aghas were assassinated, without an exception. Even the first Agha was killed after only 1 year of rule. Thanks to this the Pashas from Constantinople were able to increase the power, and reaffirm Turkish control over the region. In 1671, the Rais, the pirate captains, elected a new leader, Mohamed Trik. The Janissaries also supported him, and started calling him the Dey, which means Uncle in Turkish.

==== Early Dey period (1671-1710) ====

In the early Dey period the country worked similarly to before, with the Pasha still holding considerable powers, but instead of the Janissaries electing their own leaders freely, other factions such as the Taifa of Rais also wanted to elect the deys. Mohammed Trik, taking over during a time instability was faced with heavy issues. Not only were the Janissaries on a rampage, removing any leaders for even the smallest mistakes (even if those leaders were elected by them), but the native populace was also restless. The conflicts with European powers didn&#x27;t help this either. In 1677, following an explosion in Algiers and several attempts at his life, Mohammed escaped to Tripoli leaving Algiers to Baba Hassan. Just 4 years into his rule he was already at war with one of the most powerful countries in Europe, the Kingdom of France. In 1682 France bombarded Algiers for the first time. The Bombardment was inconclusive, and the leader of the fleet Abraham Duquesne failed to secure the submission of Algiers. The next year, Algiers was bombarded again, this time liberating a few slaves. Before a peace treaty could be signed though, Baba Hassan was deposed and killed by a Rais called Mezzo Morto Hüseyin. Continuing the war against France he was defeated in a naval battle in 1685, near Cherchell, and at last a French Bombardment in 1688 brought an end to his reign, and the war. His successor, Hadj Chabane was elected by the Raïs. He defeated Morocco in the Battle of Moulouya and defeated Tunis as well. He went back to Algiers, but he was assassinated in 1695 by the Janissaries whom once again took over the country. From there on Algiers was in turmoil once again. Leaders were assassinated, despite not even ruling for a year, and the Pasha was still a cause of unrest. The only notable event during this time of unrest was the recapture of Oran and Mers-el-Kébir from the Spanish.

==== Coup of Baba Ali Chaouche, and independence ====
Baba Ali Chaouche, also written as Chaouch, took over the country, ending the rule of the Janissaries. The Pasha attempted to resist him, but instead he was sent home, and told to never come back, and if he did he will be executed. He also sent a letter to the Ottoman sultan declaring that Algiers will from then on act as an independent state, and will not be an Ottoman vassal, but an ally at best. The Sublime Porte, enraged, tried to send another Pasha to Algiers, whom was then sent back to Constantinople by the Algerians. This marked the &quot;de facto&quot; independence of Algiers from the Ottoman Empire.

=== Danish–Algerian War ===
In the mid-1700s Dano-Norwegian trade in the Mediterranean expanded. In order to protect the lucrative business against piracy, Denmark–Norway had secured a peace deal with the states of Barbary Coast. It involved paying an annual tribute to the individual rulers and additionally to the States.

In 1766, Algiers had a new ruler, dey Baba Mohammed ben-Osman. He demanded that the annual payment made by Denmark-Norway should be increased, and he should receive new gifts. Denmark–Norway refused the demands. Shortly after, Algerian pirates hijacked three Dano-Norwegian ships and allowed the crew to be sold as slaves.

They threatened to bombard the Algerian capital if the Algerians did not agree to a new peace deal on Danish terms. Algiers was not intimidated by the fleet, the fleet was of 2 frigates, 2 bomb galiot and 4 ship of the line.

=== Algerian-Sharifian War ===
In the west, the Algerian-Cherifian conflicts shaped the western border of Algeria.

There were numerous battles between the Regency of Algiers and the Sharifian Empires for example: the campaign of Tlemcen in 1551, the campaign of Tlemcen in 1557, the Battle of Moulouya and the Battle of Chelif. The independent Kabyle Kingdoms also had some involvement, the Kingdom of Beni Abbes participated in the campaign of Tlemcen in 1551 and the Kingdom of Kuku provided Zwawa troops for the capture of Fez in 1576 in which Abd al-Malik was installed as an Ottoman vassal ruler over the Saadi Dynasty. The Kingdom of Kuku also participated in the capture of Fez in 1554 in which Salih Rais defeated the Moroccan army and conquered Morocco up until Fez, adding these territories to the Ottoman crown and placing Ali Abu Hassun as the ruler and vassal to the Ottoman sultan. In 1792 the Regency of Algiers managed to take possession of the Moroccan Rif and Oujda, which they then abandoned in 1795 for unknown reasons.

=== Barbary Wars ===

During the early 19th century, Algiers again resorted to widespread piracy against shipping from Europe and the young United States of America, mainly due to internal fiscal difficulties, and the damage caused by the Napoleonic Wars. This in turn led to the First Barbary War and Second Barbary War, which culminated in August 1816 when Lord Exmouth executed a naval bombardment of Algiers, the biggest, and most successful one. The Barbary Wars resulted in a major victory for the American, British, and Dutch Navy.

=== Political status ===

==== 1516-1567 ====
In between 1516 and 1567, the rulers of the Regency were chosen by the Ottoman sultan. During the first few decades, Algiers was completely aligned with the Ottoman Empire, although it later gained a certain level of autonomy as it was the westernmost province of the Ottoman Empire, and administering it directly would have been problematic.

==== 1567-1710 ====
During this period a form of dual leadership was in place, with the Aghas sharing power and influence with a Pasha appointed by the Ottoman sultan from Constantinople. After 1567, the Deys became the main leaders of the country, although the Pashas still retained some power.

==== 1710-1830 ====
After a coup by Baba Ali Chaouch, the political situation of Algiers became complicated.

==== Relation with the Ottoman Empire ====
Some sources describe it as completely independent from the Ottomans, albeit the state was still nominally part of the Ottoman Empire.

Cur Abdy, dey of Algiers shouted at an Ottoman envoy for claiming that the Ottoman Padishah was the king of Algiers (&quot;King of Algiers? King of Algiers? If he is the King of Algiers then who am I?&quot;).

Despite the Ottomans having no influence in Algiers, and the Algerians often ignoring orders from the Ottoman sultan, such as in 1784. In some cases Algiers also participated in the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s wars, such as the Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792), albeit this was not common, and in 1798 for example Algiers sold wheat to the French Empire campaigning in Egypt against the Ottomans through two Jewish traders.

In some cases, Algiers was declared to be a country rebelling against the holy law of Islam by the Ottoman Caliph. This usually meant a declaration of war by the Ottomans against the Deylik of Algiers. This could happen due to many reasons. For example, under the rule of Haji Ali Dey, Algerian pirates regularly attacked Ottoman shipments, and Algiers waged war against the Beylik of Tunis, despite several protests by the Ottoman Porte, which resulted in a declaration of war.

It can be thus said that the relationship between the Ottoman Empire and Algiers mainly depended on what the Dey at the time wanted. While in some cases, if the relationship between the two was favorable, Algiers did participate in Ottoman wars, Algiers otherwise remained completely autonomous from the rest of the Empire similar to the other Barbary States.

== French rule ==
=== 19th century colonialism ===
North African boundaries have shifted during various stages of the conquests. The borders of modern Algeria were expanded by the French, whose colonization began in 1830 (French invasion began on July 5), though it was not fully conquered and pacified until 1903. To benefit French colonists (many of whom were not in fact of French origin but Italian, Maltese, and Spanish) and nearly the entirety of whom lived in urban areas, northern Algeria was eventually organized into overseas departments of France, with representatives in the French National Assembly. France controlled the entire country, but the traditional Muslim population in the rural areas remained separated from the modern economic infrastructure of the European community.
As a result of what the French considered an insult to the French consul in Algiers by the Day in 1827, France blockaded Algiers for three years. In 1830, France invaded and occupied the coastal areas of Algeria, citing a diplomatic incident as casus belli. Hussein Dey went into exile. French colonization then gradually penetrated southwards, and came to have a profound impact on the area and its populations. The European conquest, initially accepted in the Algiers region, was soon met by a rebellion, led by Abdel Kadir, which took roughly a decade for the French troops to put down. By 1848 nearly all of northern Algeria was under French control, and the new government of the French Second Republic declared the occupied lands an integral part of France. Three &quot;civil territories&quot;—Algiers, Oran, and Constantine—were organized as French départements (local administrative units) under a civilian government. During the &quot;Pacification of Algeria&quot;, which lasted until 1903, the French perpetrated atrocities which included mass executions of civilians and prisoners and the use of concentration camps; many estimates indicates that the native Algerian population fell by one-third in the years between the French invasion and the end of fighting in the mid-1870s due to warfare, disease and starvation. Various governments and scholars consider France&#x27;s actions in Algeria as constituting a genocide.

Napoleon III set up a Project of Arab kingdom in Algeria between 1860 and 1870. His goal was to take Algeria out of legal limbo and make it a kingdom associated with France before his project was abandoned by the Third Republic.

In addition to enduring the affront of being ruled by a foreign, non-Muslim power, many Algerians lost their lands to the new government or to colonists. Traditional leaders were eliminated, coopted, or made irrelevant, and the traditional educational system was largely dismantled; social structures were stressed to the breaking point. From 1856, native Muslims and Jews were viewed as French subjects not citizens.

However, in 1865, Napoleon III allowed them to apply for full French citizenship, a measure that few took, since it involved renouncing the right to be governed by &quot;sharia&quot; law in personal matters, and was considered a kind of apostasy; in 1870, the Crémieux Decree made French citizenship automatic for Jewish natives, a move which largely angered many Muslims, which resulted in the Jews being seen as the accomplices of the colonial power by anti-colonial Algerians. Nonetheless, this period saw progress in health, some infrastructures, and the overall expansion of the economy of Algeria, as well as the formation of new social classes, which, after exposure to ideas of equality and political liberty, would help propel the country to independence.

During the colonization France focused on eradicating the local culture by destroying hundreds years old palaces and important buildings. It is estimated that around half of Algiers, a city founded in the 10th century, was destroyed. Many segregatory laws were levied against the Algerians and their culture.
=== Rise of Algerian nationalism and French resistance ===
A new generation of Islamic leadership emerged in Algeria at the time of World War I and grew to maturity during the 1920s and 1930s. Various groups were formed in opposition to French rule, most notable the National Liberation Front (FLN) and the National Algerian Movement.

&quot;Colons&quot; (colonists), or, more popularly, &quot;pieds noirs&quot; (literally, black feet) dominated the government and controlled the bulk of Algeria&#x27;s wealth. Throughout the colonial era, they continued to block or delay all attempts to implement even the most modest reforms. But from 1933 to 1936, mounting social, political, and economic crises in Algeria induced the indigenous population to engage in numerous acts of political protest. The government responded with more restrictive laws governing public order and security. Algerian Muslims rallied to the French side at the start of World War II as they had done in World War I. But the colons were generally sympathetic to the collaborationist Vichy regime established following France&#x27;s defeat by Nazi Germany. After the fall of the Vichy regime in Algeria (November 11, 1942) as a result of Operation Torch, the Free French commander in chief in North Africa slowly rescinded repressive Vichy laws, despite opposition by colon extremists.

In March 1943, Muslim leader Ferhat Abbas presented the French administration with the Manifesto of the Algerian People, signed by 56 Algerian nationalist and international leaders. The manifesto demanded an Algerian constitution that would guarantee immediate and effective political participation and legal equality for Muslims. Instead, the French administration in 1944 instituted a reform package, based on the 1936 Viollette Plan, that granted full French citizenship only to certain categories of &quot;meritorious&quot; Algerian Muslims, who numbered about 60,000. In April 1945 the French had arrested the Algerian nationalist leader Messali Hadj. On May 1 the followers of his Parti du Peuple Algérien (PPA) participated in demonstrations which were violently put down by the police. Several Algerians were killed. The tensions between the Muslim and colon communities exploded on May 8, 1945, V-E Day, causing the Sétif and Guelma massacre. When a Muslim march was met with violence, marchers rampaged. The army and police responded by conducting a prolonged and systematic ratissage (literally, raking over) of suspected centers of dissidence. According to official French figures, 1,500 Muslims died as a result of these countermeasures. Other estimates vary from 6,000 to as high as 45,000 killed. Many nationalists drew the conclusion that independence could not be won by peaceful means, and so started organizing for violent rebellion.

In August 1947, the French National Assembly approved the government-proposed Organic Statute of Algeria. This law called for the creation of an Algerian Assembly with one house representing Europeans and &quot;meritorious&quot; Muslims and the other representing the remaining 8 million or more Muslims. Muslim and colon deputies alike abstained or voted against the statute but for diametrically opposed reasons: the Muslims because it fell short of their expectations and the colons because it went too far.

=== Algerian War of Independence (1954–1962) ===
The Algerian War of Independence (1954–1962), brutal and long, was the most recent major turning point in the country&#x27;s history. Although often fratricidal, it ultimately united Algerians and seared the value of independence and the philosophy of anticolonialism into the national consciousness.

In the early morning hours of November 1, 1954, the National Liberation Front (Front de Libération Nationale—FLN) launched attacks throughout Algeria in the opening salvo of a war of independence. An important watershed in this war was the massacre of Pieds-Noirs civilians by the FLN near the town of Philippeville in August 1955. Which prompted Jacques Soustelle into calling for more repressive measures against the rebels. The French authorities claimed that 1,273 &quot;guerrillas&quot; died in what Soustelle admitted were &quot;severe&quot; reprisals. The FLN subsequently, giving names and addresses, claimed that 12,000 Muslims were killed. After Philippeville, all-out war began in Algeria. The FLN fought largely using guerrilla tactics whilst the French counter-insurgency tactics often included severe reprisals and repression.

Eventually, protracted negotiations led to a cease-fire signed by France and the FLN on March 18, 1962, at Evian, France. The Evian accords also provided for continuing economic, financial, technical, and cultural relations, along with interim administrative arrangements until a referendum on self-determination could be held. The Evian accords guaranteed the religious and property rights of French settlers, but the perception that they would not be respected led to the exodus of one million &quot;pieds-noirs&quot; and &quot;harkis&quot;.

Abusive tactics of the French Army remains a controversial subject in France to this day. Deliberate illegal methods were used, such as beatings, mutilations, hanging by the feet or hands, torture by electroshock, waterboarding, sleep deprivation and sexual assaults, among others. French war crimes against Algerian civilians were also committed, including indiscriminate shootings of civilians, bombings of villages suspected of helping the ALN, rape, disembowelment of pregnant women, imprisonment without food in small cells (some of which were small enough to impede lying down), throwing prisoners out of helicopters to their death or into the sea with concrete on their feet, and burying people alive.

The FLN also committed many atrocities, both against French pieds-noirs and against fellow Algerians whom they deemed as supporting the French. These crimes included killing unarmed men, women and children, rape and disembowelment or decapitation of women and murdering children by slitting their throats or banging their heads against walls.

Between 350,000 and 1 million Algerians are estimated to have died during the war, and more than 2 million, out of a total Muslim population of 9 or 10 million, were made into refugees or forcibly relocated into government-controlled camps. Much of the countryside and agriculture was devastated, along with the modern economy, which had been dominated by urban European settlers (the &quot;pied-noirs&quot;). French sources estimated that at least 70,000 Muslim civilians were killed or abducted and presumed killed, by the FLN during the Algerian War. Nearly one million people of mostly French, Spanish and Italian descent left the country at independence due to the privileges that they lost as settlers and their unwillingness to be on equal footing with indigenous Algerians along with them left most Algerians of Jewish descent and those Muslim Algerians who had supported a French Algeria (&quot;harkis&quot;). 30–150,000 pro-French Muslims were also killed in Algeria by FLN in post-war reprisals.

== Independent Algeria ==
=== Ben Bella presidency (1962–65) ===
The Algerian independence referendum was held in French Algeria on 1 July 1962, passing with 99.72% of the vote. As a result, France declared Algeria independent on 3 July. On 8 September 1963, the first Algerian constitution was adopted by nationwide referendum under close supervision by the National Liberation Front (FLN). Later that month, Ahmed Ben Bella was formally elected the first president of Algeria for a five-year term after receiving support from the FLN and the military, led by Colonel Houari Boumédiène.

However, the war for independence and its aftermath had severely disrupted Algeria&#x27;s society and economy. In addition to the destruction of much of Algeria&#x27;s infrastructure, an exodus of the upper-class French and European &quot;colons&quot; from Algeria deprived the country of most of its managers, civil servants, engineers, teachers, physicians, and skilled workers. The homeless and displaced numbered in the hundreds of thousands, many suffering from illness, and some 70 percent of the workforce was unemployed. The months immediately following independence witnessed the pell-mell rush of Algerians and government officials to claim the property and jobs left behind by the European &quot;colons&quot;. For example in the 1963 March Decrees, President Ben Bella declared all agricultural, industrial, and commercial properties previously owned and operated by Europeans vacant, thereby legalizing confiscation by the state.

The military played an important role in Ben Bella&#x27;s administration. Since the president recognized the role that the military played in bringing him to power, he appointed senior military officers as ministers and other important positions within the new state, including naming Colonel Boumédiène as defence minister. These military officials played a core role into implementing the country&#x27;s security and foreign policy.

Under the new constitution, Ben Bella&#x27;s presidency combined the functions of chief of state and head of government with those of supreme commander of the armed forces. He formed his government without needing legislative approval and was responsible for the definition and direction of its policies. There was no effective institutional check on the president&#x27;s powers. As a result, opposition leader Hocine Aït-Ahmed quit the National Assembly in 1963 to protest the increasingly dictatorial tendencies of the regime and formed a clandestine resistance movement, the Socialist Forces Front (&quot;Front des Forces Socialistes&quot;—FFS), dedicated to overthrowing the Ben Bella regime by force.

Late summer 1963 saw sporadic incidents attributed to the FFS, but more serious fighting broke out a year later, and the army moved quickly and in force to crush a rebellion. Minister of Defense Boumédiène had no qualms about sending the army to put down regional uprisings because he felt they posed a threat to the state. However, President Ben Bella attempted to co-opt allies from among these regional leaders in order to undermine the ability of military commanders to influence foreign and security policy. Tensions consequently built between Boumédiène and Ben Bella, and in 1965 the military removed Ben Bella in a coup d&#x27;état, replacing him with Boumédiène as head of state.

=== The 1965 coup and the Boumédienne military regime ===

On 19 June 1965, Houari Boumédiène deposed Ahmed Ben Bella in a military coup d&#x27;état that was both swift and bloodless. Ben Bella &quot;disappeared&quot;, and would not be seen again until he was released from house arrest in 1980 by Boumédiène&#x27;s successor, Colonel Chadli Bendjedid. Boumédiène immediately dissolved the National Assembly and suspended the 1963 constitution. Political power resided in the Nation Council of the Algerian Revolution (&quot;Conseil National de la Révolution Algérienne&quot;—CNRA), a predominantly military body intended to foster cooperation among various factions in the army and the party.

Houari Boumédiène&#x27;s position as head of government and of state was initially insecure, partly because of his lack of a significant power base outside of the armed forces. He relied strongly on a network of former associates known as the Oujda group, named after Boumédiène&#x27;s posting as National Liberation Army (&quot;Armée de Libération Nationale&quot;—ALN) leader in the Moroccan border town of Oujda during the war years, but he could not fully dominate his fractious regime. This situation may have accounted for his deference to collegial rule.

Over Boumédiène&#x27;s 11-year reign as Chairman of the CNRA, the council introduced two formal mechanisms: the People&#x27;s Municipal Assembly (&quot;Assemblée Populaires Communales&quot;) and the People&#x27;s Provincial Assembly (&quot;Assemblée Populaires de Wilaya&quot;) for popular participation in politics. Under Boumédiène&#x27;s rule, leftist and socialist concepts were merged with Islam.

Boumédiène also used Islam to opportunistically consolidate his power. On one hand, he made token concessions and cosmetic changes to the government to appear more Islamic, such as putting Islamist Ahmed Taleb Ibrahimi in charge of national education in 1965 and adopting policies criminalizing gambling, establishing Friday as the national holiday, and dropping plans to introduce birth control to paint an Islamic image of the new government. But on the other hand, Boumédiène&#x27;s government also progressively repressed Islamic groups, such as by ordering the dissolution of Al Qiyam.

Following attempted coups—most notably that of chief-of-staff Col. Tahar Zbiri in December 1967—and a failed assassination attempt on 25 April 1968, Boumédiène consolidated power and forced military and political factions to submit. He took a systematic, authoritarian approach to state building, arguing that Algeria needed stability and an economic base before building any political institutions.

Eleven years after Boumédiène took power, after much public debate, a long-promised new constitution was promulgated in November 1976. The constitution restored the National Assembly and gave it legislative, consent, and oversight functions. Boumédiène was later elected president with 95 percent of the cast votes.

=== Bendjedid rule (1978–92), the 1992 Coup d&#x27;État and the rise of the civil war ===
Boumédiène&#x27;s death on 27 December 1978 set off a struggle within the FLN to choose a successor. A deadlock occurred between two candidates was broken when Colonel Chadli Bendjedid, a moderate who had collaborated with Boumédiène in deposing Ahmed Ben Bella, was sworn in on February 9, 1979. He was re-elected in 1984 and 1988. After the violent 1988 October Riots, a new constitution was adopted in 1989 that eradicated the Algerian one-party state by allowing the formation of political associations in addition to the FLN. It also removed the armed forces, which had run the government since the days of Boumédiène, from a role in the operation of the government.

Among the scores of parties that sprang up under the new constitution, the militant Islamic Salvation Front (&quot;Front Islamique du Salut&quot;—FIS) was the most successful, winning a majority of votes in the June 1990 municipal elections, as well as the first stage of the December national legislative elections.

The surprising first round of success for the fundamentalist FIS party in the December 1991 balloting caused the army to discuss options to intervene in the election. Officers feared that an Islamist government would interfere with their positions and core interests in economic, national security, and foreign policy, since the FIS has promised to make a fundamental re-haul of the social, political, and economic structure to achieve a radical Islamist agenda. Senior military figures, such as Defence Minister Khaled Nezzar, Chief of the General Staff Abdelmalek Guenaizia, and other leaders of the navy, Gendarmerie, and security services, all agreed that the FIS should be stopped from gaining power at the polling box. They also agreed that Bendjedid would need to be removed from office due to his determination to uphold the country&#x27;s new constitution by continuing with the second round of ballots.

On 11 January 1992, Bendjedid announced his resignation on national television, saying it was necessary to &quot;protect the unity of the people and the security of the country&quot;. Later that same day, the High Council of State (&quot;Haut Comité d&#x27;Etat&quot;—HCE), which was composed of five people (including Khaled Nezzar, Tedjini Haddam, Ali Kafi, Mohamed Boudiaf and Ali Haroun), was appointed to carry out the duties of the president.

The new government, led by Sid Ahmed Ghozali, banned all political activity at mosques and began stopping people from attending prayers at popular mosques. The FIS was legally dissolved by Interior Minister Larbi Belkheir on 9 February for attempting &quot;insurrections against the state&quot;. A state of emergency was also declared and extraordinary powers, such as curtailing the right to associate, were granted to the regime.

Between January and March, a growing number of FIS militants were arrested by the military, including Abdelkader Hachani and his successors, Othman Aissani and Rabah Kebir. Following the announcement to dissolve the FIS and implement a state of emergency on 9 February, the Algerian security forces used their new emergency powers to conduct large scale arrests of FIS members and housed them in 5 &quot;detention centers&quot; in the Sahara. Between 5,000 (official number) and 30,000 (FIS number) people were detained.

This crackdown led to a fundamental Islamic insurgency, resulting in the continuous and brutal 10 year-long Algerian Civil War. During the civil war, the secular state apparatus nonetheless allowed elections featuring pro-government and moderate religious-based parties. The civil war lasted from 1991 to 2002.

=== Civil War and Bouteflika (1992–2019) ===

After Chadli Bendjedid resigned from the presidency in the military coup of 1992, a series of figureheads were selected by the military to assume the presidency, as officers were reluctant to assume public political power even though they had manifested control over the government. Additionally, the military&#x27;s senior leaders felt a need to give a civilian face to the new political regime they had hastily constructed in the aftermath of Benjedid&#x27;s ousting and the termination of elections, preferring a friendlier non-military face to front the regime.

The first such head of state was Mohamed Boudiaf, who was appointed president of the High Council of State (HCE) in February 1992 after a 27-year exile in Morocco. However, Boudiaf quickly came to odds with the military when attempts by Boudiaf to appoint his own staff or form a political party were viewed with suspicion by officers. Boudiaf also launched political initiatives, such as a rigorous anti-corruption campaign in April 1992 and the sacking of Khaled Nezzar from his post as Defence Minister, which were seen by the military as an attempt to remove their influence in the government. The former of these initiatives was especially hazardous to the many senior military officials who had benefited massively and illegally from the political system for years. In the end, Boudiaf was assassinated in June 1992 by one of his bodyguards with Islamist sympathies.

Ali Kafi briefly assumed the HCE presidency after Boudiaf&#x27;s death, before Liamine Zéroual was appointed as a long-term replacement in 1994. However, Zéroual only remained in office for four years before he announced his retirement, as he quickly became embroiled in a clan warfare within the upper classes of the military and fell out with groups of the more senior generals. After this Abdelaziz Bouteflika, Boumédiène&#x27;s foreign minister, succeeded as the president.

As the Algerian civil war wound to a close, presidential elections were held again in April 1999. Although seven candidates qualified for election, all but Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who had the support of the military as well as the National Liberation Front (FLN), withdrew on the eve of the election amid charges of electoral fraud and interference from the military. Bouteflika went on to win with 70 percent of the cast votes.

Despite the purportedly democratic elections, the civilian government immediately after the 1999 elections only acted as a sort of &#x27;hijab&#x27; over the true government, mostly running day-to-day businesses, while the military still largely ran the country behind the scenes. For example, ministerial mandates to individuals were only granted with the military&#x27;s approval, and different factions of the military invested in various political parties and the press, using them as pawns to gain influence.

However, the military&#x27;s influence over politics decreased gradually, leaving Bouteflika with more authority on deciding policy. One reason for this was that the senior commanders who had dominated the political scene during the 1960s and 1970s started to retire. Bouteflika&#x27;s former experience as Boumédiène&#x27;s foreign minister earned him connections that rejuvenated Algeria&#x27;s international reputation, which had been tarnished in the early 1990s due to the civil war. On the domestic front, Bouteflika&#x27;s policy of &quot;national reconciliation&quot; to bring a close to civilian violence earned him a popular mandate that helped him to win further presidential terms in 2004, 2009 and 2014.

In 2010, journalists gathered to demonstrate for press freedom and against Bouteflika&#x27;s self-appointed role as editor-in-chief of Algeria&#x27;s state television station. In February 2011, the government rescinded the state of emergency that had been in place since 1992 but still banned all protest gatherings and demonstrations. However, in April 2011, over 2,000 protesters defied the official ban and took to the streets of Algiers, clashing with police forces. These protests can be seen as a part of the Arab Spring, with protesters noting that they were inspired by the recent Egyptian revolution, and that Algeria was a police state that was &quot;corrupt to the bone&quot;.

In 2019, after 20 years in office, Bouteflika announced in February that he would seek a fifth term of office. This sparked widespread discontent around Algeria and protests in Algiers. Despite later attempts at saying he would resign after his term finished in late April, Bouteflika resigned on 2 April, after the chief of the army, Ahmed Gaid Salah, made a declaration that he was &quot;unfit for office&quot;. Despite Gaid Salah being loyal to Bouteflika, many in the military identified with civilians, as nearly 70 percent of the army are civilian conscripts who are required to serve for 18 months. Also, since demonstrators demanded a change to the whole governmental system, many army officers aligned themselves with demonstrators in the hopes of surviving an anticipated revolution and retaining their positions.

===After Bouteflika (2019-)===
After the resignation of Abdelaziz Bouteflika on 9 April 2019, the President of the Council of the Nation Abdelkader Bensalah became acting president of Algeria.

Following the presidential election on 12 December 2019, Abdelmadjid Tebboune was elected president after taking 58% of the votes, beating the candidates from both main parties, the National Liberation Front and the Democratic National Rally.

On the eve of the first anniversary of the Hirak Movement, which led to the resignation of former president Bouteflika, President Abdelmadjid Tebboune announced in a statement to the Algerian national media that 22 February would be declared the Algerian &quot;National Day of Fraternity and Cohesion between the People and Its Army for Democracy.&quot; In the same statement, Tebboune spoke in favor of the Hirak Movement, saying that &quot;the blessed Hirak has preserved the country from a total collapse&quot;, and that he had &quot;made a personal commitment to carry out all of the [movement&#x27;s] demands.&quot; On 21 and 22 February 2020, masses of demonstrators (with turnout comparable to well-established Algerian holidays like the Algerian Day of Independence) gathered to honor the anniversary of the Hirak Movement and the newly established national day.

In an effort to contain the COVID-19 pandemic, Tebboune announced on 17 March 2020 that &quot;marches and rallies, whatever their motives&quot; would be prohibited. But after protesters and journalists were arrested for participating in such marches, Tebboune faced accusations of attempting to &quot;silence Algerians.&quot; Notably, the government&#x27;s actions were condemned by Amnesty International, which said in a statement that &quot;when all eyes [...] are on the management of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Algerian authorities are devoting time to speeding up the prosecution and trial of activists, journalists, and supporters of the Hirak movement.&quot; The National Committee for the Liberation of Detainees (&quot;Comité national pour la libération des détenus&quot;—CNLD) estimated that around 70 prisoners of conscience were imprisoned by 2 July 2020 and that several of the imprisoned were arrested for Facebook posts.

On 28 December 2019, the then-recently inaugurated President Tebboune met with Ahmed Benbitour, the former Algerian Head of Government, with whom he discussed the &quot;foundations of the new Republic.&quot; On 8 January 2020, Tebboune established a &quot;commission of experts&quot; composed of 17 members (a majority of which were professors of constitutional law) responsible for examining the previous constitution and making any necessary revisions. Led by Ahmed Laraba, the commission was required to submit its proposals to Tebboune directly within the following two months. In a letter to Laraba on the same day, Tebboune outlined seven axes around which the commission should focus its discussion. These areas of focus included strengthening citizens&#x27; rights, combating corruption, consolidating the balance of powers in the Algerian government, increasing the oversight powers of parliament, promoting the independence of the judiciary, furthering citizens&#x27; equality under the law, and constitutionalizing elections. Tebboune&#x27;s letter also included a call for an &quot;immutable and intangible&quot; two-term limit to anyone serving as president — a major point of contention in the initial Hirak Movement protests, which were spurred by former president Abdelaziz Bouteflika&#x27;s announcement to run for a fifth term.

The preliminary draft revision of the constitution was publicly published on 7 May 2020, but the Laraba Commission (as the &quot;commission of experts&quot; came to be known) was open to additional proposals from the public until 20 June. By 3 June, the commission had received an estimated 1,200 additional public proposals. After all revisions were considered by the Laraba Commission, the draft was introduced to the Cabinet of Algeria (Council of Ministers).

The revised constitution was adopted in the Council of Ministers on 6 September, in the People&#x27;s National Assembly on 10 September, and in the Council of the Nation on 12 September. The constitutional changes were approved in the 1 November 2020 referendum, with 66.68% of voters participating in favour of the changes.

On 16 February 2021, mass protests and a wave of nationwide rallies and peaceful demonstrations against the government of Abdelmadjid Tebboune began. In May 2021, Algeria prohibited any protests that do not have prior approval by authorities.

In September 2024, President Tebboune won a second term with a landslide 84.3 percent of the vote, although his opponents called the results fraud.

==See also==
* Culture of Algeria
* Colonial heads of Algeria
* List of heads of government of Algeria
* History of Africa
* History of North Africa
* List of presidents of Algeria
* Politics of Algeria
* Prime Minister of Algeria
* History of cities in Algeria:
** Algiers history and timeline
** Oran history and timeline

==References==
===Notes===
===References===
===Sources===
* (118) (94)
* 
* (p.15) (p. 344)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*

==Further reading==
* Ageron, Charles Robert, and Michael Brett. &quot;Modern Algeria: A History from 1830 to the Present&quot; (1992)
* Bennoune, Mahfoud (1988). &quot;The Making of Contemporary Algeria – Colonial Upheavals and Post-Independence Development, 1830–1987&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
* Derradji, Abder-Rahmane. &quot;The Algerian Guerrilla Campaign, Strategy &amp; Tactics&quot; (Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen Press, 1997).
* Derradji, Abder-Rahmane. &quot;A Concise History of Political Violence in Algeria: Brothers in Faith Enemies in Arms&quot; (2 vol. Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen Press, 2002),
* Horne, Alistair. &quot;A Savage War of Peace: Algeria 1954-1962&quot; (2006)
* Laouisset, Djamel (2009). &quot;A Retrospective Study of the Algerian Iron and Steel Industry&quot;. New York City: Nova Publishers. .
* McDougall, James. (2017) &quot;A history of Algeria&quot; (Cambridge UP, 2017).
* Roberts, Hugh (2003). &quot;The Battlefield – Algeria, 1988–2002. Studies in a Broken Polity&quot;. London: Verso Books. .
* Ruedy, John (1992). &quot;Modern Algeria – The Origins and Development of a Nation&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. .
* Sessions, Jennifer E. &quot;By Sword and Plow: France and the Conquest of Algeria&quot; (Cornell University Press; 2011) 352 pages
* Sidaoui, Riadh (2009). &quot;Islamic Politics and the Military – Algeria 1962–2008&quot;. &quot;Religion and Politics – Islam and Muslim Civilisation&quot;. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing. .

===Historiography and memory===
* Branche, Raphaëlle. &quot;The martyr&#x27;s torch: memory and power in Algeria.&quot; &quot;Journal of North African Studies&quot; 16.3 (2011): 431–443.
* Cohen, William B. &quot;Pied-Noir memory, history, and the Algerian War.&quot; in &quot;Europe&#x27;s Invisible Migrants&quot; (2003): 129-145 online.
* Hannoum, Abdelmajid. &quot;The historiographic state: how Algeria once became French.&quot; &quot;History and Anthropology&quot; 19.2 (2008): 91-114. online
* Hassett, Dónal. &quot;Mobilizing Memory: The Great War and the Language of Politics in Colonial Algeria, 1918-1939&quot; (Oxford UP, 2019).
* House, Jim. &quot;Memory and the Creation of Solidarity during the Decolonization of Algeria.&quot; &quot;Yale French Studies&quot; 118/119 (2010): 15-38 online.
* Johnson, Douglas. &quot;Algeria: some problems of modern history.&quot; &quot;Journal of African history&quot; (1964): 221–242.
* Lorcin, Patricia M.E., ed. &quot;Algeria and France, 1800-2000: identity, memory, nostalgia&quot; (Syracuse UP, 2006).
* McDougall, James. &quot;History and the Culture of Nationalism in Algeria&quot; (Cambridge UP, 2006) excerpt.
* Vince, Natalya. &quot;Our fighting sisters: Nation, memory and gender in Algeria, 1954–2012&quot; (Manchester UP, 2072115).

==External links==
* List of rulers for Algeria</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q473761" start="12" end="34" title="History of Algeria" label="history of [[Algeria]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q31566" start="66" end="79" title="coastal plain" label="coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="83" end="95" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="123" end="130" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="132" end="144" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="329" end="342" title="Carthaginians" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651392" start="344" end="350" title="Roman people" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="356" end="363" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="397" end="404" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="457" end="474" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q759998" start="485" end="498" title="Berber Revolt" label="Berber Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="707" end="719" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q142529" start="724" end="742" title="Algerian Civil War" label="Algerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q746287" start="868" end="875" title="Oldowan" label="Oldowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="942" end="954" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1040" end="1049" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="1081" end="1094" title="domestication" label="domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="1099" end="1122" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q190048" start="1246" end="1266" title="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer" label="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="1267" end="1281" title="cave paintings" label="cave paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="1387" end="1393" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916416" start="1459" end="1468" title="Numidians" label="Numidians"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="1562" end="1569" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="1621" end="1628" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="1630" end="1635" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1655" end="1662" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q603588" start="1710" end="1718" title="Massylii" label="Massylii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288728" start="1739" end="1748" title="Masaesyli" label="Masaesyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="1773" end="1789" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q314685" start="1804" end="1813" title="Masinissa" label="Masinissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q353141" start="1846" end="1852" title="Syphax" label="Syphax"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="1981" end="1995" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="2008" end="2020" title="client state" label="client state"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="2071" end="2081" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146608" start="2102" end="2116" title="Moulouya River" label="Moulouya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="2118" end="2124" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="2186" end="2203" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="2226" end="2232" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="2318" end="2325" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q156173" start="2361" end="2369" title="Jugurtha" label="Jugurtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256641" start="2754" end="2767" title="Gaius Memmius (proconsul of Macedonia)" label="Gaius Memmius"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="3050" end="3064" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q281025" start="3149" end="3185" title="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Numidicus" label="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Numidicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q177975" start="3370" end="3382" title="Gaius Marius" label="Gaius Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="3526" end="3531" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q530576" start="3626" end="3635" title="Bocchus I" label="Bocchus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035634" start="3777" end="3786" title="Tullianum" label="Tullianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756524" start="4136" end="4149" title="Gabriel Camps" label="Gabriel Camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="4257" end="4265" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="4332" end="4340" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146608" start="4408" end="4414" title="Muluya" label="Muluya"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="4455" end="4459" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q603588" start="4522" end="4530" title="Massylii" label="Massylii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288728" start="4559" end="4568" title="Masaesyli" label="Masaesyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="4611" end="4627" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275953" start="4668" end="4672" title="Gala (King of the Massylii)" label="Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q353141" start="4741" end="4747" title="Syphax" label="Syphax"/>
<link wikidata="Q314685" start="4917" end="4926" title="Masinissa" label="Masinissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="5293" end="5302" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q162413" start="5318" end="5323" title="Sirte" label="Sirte"/>
<link wikidata="Q190368" start="5371" end="5377" title="Appian" label="Appian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26404" start="5645" end="5652" title="Gaetuli" label="Gaetuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="5657" end="5663" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="5763" end="5768" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="5941" end="5947" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="6029" end="6037" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54223" start="6180" end="6187" title="Micipsa" label="Micipsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q523301" start="6259" end="6269" title="Hiempsal I" label="Hiempsal I"/>
<link wikidata="Q356616" start="6274" end="6282" title="Adherbal (king of Numidia)" label="Adherbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156173" start="6327" end="6335" title="Jugurtha" label="Jugurtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="6520" end="6529" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="6604" end="6612" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="6629" end="6636" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988" start="7118" end="7128" title="Punic Wars" label="Punic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q314685" start="7375" end="7384" title="Masinissa" label="Masinissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="7402" end="7409" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="7446" end="7458" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="7620" end="7652" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q10416611" start="7692" end="7706" title="Vandal Kingdom" label="Vandal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="7719" end="7739" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910149" start="7839" end="7870" title="Praetorian prefecture of Africa" label="Praetorian prefecture of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q246737" start="7885" end="7904" title="Exarchate of Africa" label="Exarchate of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="7959" end="7991" title="Umayyad conquest of North Africa" label="Umayyad conquest of North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q301261" start="7999" end="8014" title="Musa bin Nusayr" label="Musa bin Nusayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="8161" end="8166" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="8171" end="8177" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45646" start="8496" end="8504" title="Umayyad dynasty" label="Umayyads"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="8798" end="8806" title="Abbasids" label="Abbasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="8861" end="8870" title="caliphate" label="caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="8874" end="8881" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="8910" end="8920" title="Kharijites" label="Kharijites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637239" start="8921" end="8926" title="Sufri" label="Sufri"/>
<link wikidata="Q672740" start="8927" end="8937" title="Banu Ifran" label="Banu Ifran"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="8954" end="8961" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="8966" end="8974" title="Abbasids" label="Abbasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q940123" start="8987" end="8996" title="Rustumids" label="Rustumids"/>
<link wikidata="Q565568" start="9055" end="9061" title="Tahirt" label="Tahirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14932665" start="9359" end="9374" title="Fatimid dynasty" label="Fatimid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="9430" end="9436" title="Zirids" label="Zirids"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="9441" end="9449" title="Hammadid" label="Hammadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q672740" start="9579" end="9589" title="Banu Ifran" label="Banu Ifran"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="9602" end="9609" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642579" start="9615" end="9624" title="Maghrawa" label="Maghraoua"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="9928" end="9937" title="Almoravid" label="Almoravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="10406" end="10413" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="10435" end="10445" title="Ebro River" label="Ebro River"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="10473" end="10481" title="Almohads" label="Almohads"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733867" start="10534" end="10548" title="Almohad reforms" label="Islamic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q307697" start="11020" end="11030" title="Abdalwadid" label="Abdalwadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030701" start="11064" end="11082" title="Kingdom of Tlemcen" label="Kingdom of Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="11462" end="11469" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="11860" end="11867" title="Sanhaja" label="Sanhaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q691819" start="11869" end="11875" title="Houara" label="Houara"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="11877" end="11883" title="Zenata" label="Zenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572273" start="11885" end="11892" title="Masmuda" label="Masmuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427023" start="11894" end="11900" title="Kutama" label="Kutama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11902" end="11908" title="Awarba" label="Awarba"/>
<link wikidata="Q808139" start="11910" end="11920" title="Barghawata" label="Barghawata"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="12125" end="12135" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="12138" end="12144" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="12263" end="12274" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="12316" end="12321" title="Zirid dynasty" label="Zirid"/>
<link wikidata="Q672740" start="12323" end="12333" title="Banu Ifran" label="Banu Ifran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642579" start="12335" end="12343" title="Maghrawa" label="Maghrawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="12345" end="12354" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="12356" end="12364" title="Hammadid dynasty" label="Hammadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="12366" end="12383" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="12385" end="12392" title="Marinid dynasty" label="Marinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q307697" start="12394" end="12402" title="Zayyanid dynasty" label="Zayyanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q970799" start="12404" end="12412" title="Wattasid dynasty" label="Wattasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q178663" start="12414" end="12420" title="Meknes" label="Meknes"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="12422" end="12436" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="12438" end="12446" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="12469" end="12479" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="12480" end="12484" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="12519" end="12527" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="12548" end="12553" title="Zirid dynasty" label="Zirid"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="12642" end="12649" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189898" start="12650" end="12657" title="emirate" label="emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="12712" end="12718" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="12745" end="12751" title="Zenata" label="Zenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="12752" end="12758" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="12766" end="12779" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849561" start="12844" end="12849" title="Chlef" label="Chlef"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="12892" end="12899" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357948" start="12916" end="12925" title="Ouarsenis" label="Ouarsenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="12944" end="12961" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="12979" end="12986" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="13046" end="13053" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="13060" end="13080" title="Caliphate of Cordoba" label="Caliphate of Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642579" start="13163" end="13171" title="Maghrawa" label="Maghrawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="13189" end="13195" title="Zenata" label="zanata"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="13250" end="13257" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="13372" end="13378" title="Zenata" label="Zenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q26404" start="13380" end="13387" title="Gaetuli" label="Gaetuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617666" start="13676" end="13685" title="Cherchell" label="Cherchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982137" start="13713" end="13718" title="Médéa" label="Médéa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="13857" end="13868" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011989" start="13936" end="13941" title="Dahra Range" label="Dahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634593" start="13968" end="13978" title="Tafna Beni Saf" label="Tafna wadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="14037" end="14041" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="14120" end="14125" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q423772" start="14161" end="14174" title="Uqba ibn Nafi" label="Uqba ibn Nafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="14198" end="14206" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="14234" end="14245" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="14257" end="14266" title="Kharijites" label="Kharijite"/>
<link wikidata="Q431575" start="14323" end="14330" title="Idrisid" label="Idrisid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="14373" end="14392" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Umayyads of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="14396" end="14406" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="14456" end="14463" title="Fatimid" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="14476" end="14483" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="14488" end="14495" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="14645" end="14651" title="Zirids" label="Zirids"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292856" start="14785" end="14796" title="Midrarid dynasty" label="Banu Midrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423557" start="14832" end="14839" title="Miknasa" label="Miknasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="14847" end="14856" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085755" start="14905" end="14920" title="Ziri ibn Atiyya" label="Ziri ibn Atiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="14958" end="14961" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="14976" end="14986" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q672740" start="15039" end="15049" title="Banu Ifran" label="Banu Ifran"/>
<link wikidata="Q724484" start="15387" end="15390" title="M&amp;#x27;zab" label="Zab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055244" start="15394" end="15398" title="Sous" label="Sous"/>
<link wikidata="Q334861" start="15515" end="15543" title="Almanzor" label="Ibn Abi &amp;#x27;Amir al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="15550" end="15559" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="15578" end="15584" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q169640" start="15595" end="15604" title="Hisham II" label="Hisham II"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="16059" end="16064" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="16558" end="16566" title="Tangiers" label="Tangiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36788" start="16635" end="16647" title="Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan" label="Abd al-Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q431575" start="17160" end="17175" title="Idrisid dynasty" label="Idrisid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q565568" start="17179" end="17185" title="Tiaret" label="Tiaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="17877" end="17894" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q486636" start="18063" end="18073" title="Draa River" label="Draa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826842" start="18090" end="18096" title="Aghmat" label="Aghmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="18458" end="18465" title="Sanhaja" label="Sanhaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="18466" end="18472" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="18473" end="18480" title="dynasty" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="18497" end="18504" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="18529" end="18536" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="18558" end="18566" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q205689" start="18619" end="18633" title="Ziri ibn Manad" label="Ziri ibn Manad"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="18660" end="18677" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="18736" end="18740" title="emir" label="emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="19079" end="19096" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="19098" end="19115" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q307697" start="19117" end="19133" title="Zayyanid dynasty" label="Zayyanid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="19135" end="19152" title="Marinid Sultanate" label="Marinid Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="19157" end="19171" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004719" start="19180" end="19197" title="Buluggin ibn Ziri" label="Buluggin ibn Ziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="19263" end="19266" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="19291" end="19298" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="19352" end="19366" title="Zenata" label="Zenata Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="19400" end="19420" title="Caliphate of Cordoba" label="Caliphate of Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="19467" end="19479" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q202991" start="19504" end="19512" title="Ajdabiya" label="Ajdabiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574936" start="19572" end="19585" title="Zawi ibn Ziri" label="Zawi ibn Ziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="19608" end="19618" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q205708" start="19644" end="19660" title="Taifa of Granada" label="Taifa of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="19752" end="19761" title="Hammadid dynasty" label="Hammadids"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="20019" end="20027" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q466054" start="20071" end="20077" title="Mahdia" label="Mahdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="20134" end="20140" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q919971" start="20173" end="20180" title="Kalbids" label="Kalbids"/>
<link wikidata="Q293658" start="20449" end="20473" title="al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz ibn Badis" label="al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz ibn Badis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="20523" end="20528" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="20536" end="20553" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="20616" end="20626" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q108782166" start="20725" end="20743" title="Hilalian invasion of Ifriqiya" label="Hilalian invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="20777" end="20784" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q294307" start="20863" end="20871" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Hasan al-Hasan ibn Ali" label="al-Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="20956" end="20973" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="21162" end="21169" title="Sanhaja" label="Sanhaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="21170" end="21177" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349358" start="21188" end="21197" title="Sedentary lifestyle" label="sedentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="21249" end="21256" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="21314" end="21331" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="21336" end="21349" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ilism" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="21350" end="21360" title="Shia Islam" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="21404" end="21409" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="21410" end="21425" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid caliphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329919" start="21431" end="21441" title="progenitor" label="progenitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q205689" start="21464" end="21478" title="Ziri ibn Manad" label="Ziri ibn Manad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="21533" end="21540" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401317" start="21726" end="21737" title="Achir" label="&amp;#x27;Ashir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="21753" end="21760" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="21823" end="21832" title="Kharijite" label="Kharijite"/>
<link wikidata="Q335488" start="21846" end="21855" title="Abu Yazid" label="Abu Yazid"/>
<link wikidata="Q466054" start="21925" end="21931" title="Mahdia" label="Mahdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q559554" start="22036" end="22052" title="Jawhar al-Siqilli" label="Jawhar al-Siqili"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="22115" end="22118" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="22123" end="22132" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="22218" end="22222" title="emir" label="emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q565568" start="22344" end="22350" title="Tiaret" label="Tahart"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="22435" end="22441" title="Zenata" label="Zanata"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="22492" end="22497" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004719" start="22522" end="22539" title="Buluggin ibn Ziri" label="Buluggin ibn Ziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="22578" end="22586" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q111207701" start="22602" end="22616" title="Zirid conquest of Morocco" label="new expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="22716" end="22735" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Umayyads of Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q111207701" start="22758" end="22779" title="Zirid expedition to Barghawata" label="successful expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q808139" start="22783" end="22793" title="Barghawata" label="Barghawata"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="22928" end="22940" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="22957" end="22962" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="23009" end="23016" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q341992" start="23255" end="23277" title="Al-Mansur ibn Buluggin" label="Al-Mansur ibn Buluggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q778316" start="23508" end="23527" title="Badis ibn al-Mansur" label="Badis ibn al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q12208658" start="23667" end="23686" title="Hammad ibn Buluggin" label="Hammad ibn Buluggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574936" start="23784" end="23797" title="Zawi ibn Ziri" label="Zawi ibn Ziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="23864" end="23874" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="23885" end="23912" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Umayyads Caliphs of Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q205708" start="24043" end="24071" title="Taifa of Granada" label="&amp;quot;Taifa&amp;quot; of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642579" start="24179" end="24187" title="Maghrawa" label="Maghrawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827580" start="24211" end="24223" title="Banu Khazrun" label="Banu Khazrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q778316" start="24298" end="24317" title="Badis ibn al-Mansur" label="Badis ibn al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q500367" start="25010" end="25033" title="Qal&amp;#x27;at Bani Hammad" label="Qal&amp;#x27;at Bani Hammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q293658" start="25343" end="25367" title="al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz ibn Badis" label="al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz ibn Badis"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="25571" end="25579" title="Hammadid dynasty" label="Hammadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="25875" end="25883" title="Qayrawan" label="Qayrawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q293658" start="25915" end="25939" title="al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz ibn Badis" label="al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz ibn Badis"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="26229" end="26244" title="Himyarite Kingdom" label="Himyarite kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="26581" end="26588" title="Shiites" label="Shiites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="26843" end="26850" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="26912" end="26917" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="26935" end="26941" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q919971" start="26946" end="26953" title="Kalbids" label="Kalbids"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="27225" end="27235" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="27249" end="27257" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q481758" start="27356" end="27367" title="Pantelleria" label="Pantelleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="28060" end="28067" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q367718" start="28270" end="28285" title="George Maniakes" label="George Maniakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q74011" start="28440" end="28455" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="28738" end="28748" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="28757" end="28768" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q108757675" start="29022" end="29040" title="Battle of Haydaran" label="Battle of Haydaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q108782166" start="29450" end="29470" title="Hilalian invasion of Ifriqiya" label="Banu Hilal invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="29767" end="29772" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q215661" start="30056" end="30061" title="Gabès" label="Qabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46325" start="30368" end="30374" title="Sfax" label="Sfaqus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394917" start="30580" end="30604" title="Tamim ibn al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz" label="Tamim ibn al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz"/>
<link wikidata="Q180717" start="30812" end="30815" title="Sousse" label="Sus"/>
<link wikidata="Q286956" start="30856" end="30882" title="Nasir ibn Alnas" label="al-Nasir ibn &amp;#x27;Alannas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="31384" end="31392" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q54724" start="31442" end="31450" title="Nicotera" label="Nicotera"/>
<link wikidata="Q481730" start="31556" end="31562" title="Mazara del Vallo" label="Mazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="31752" end="31756" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216041" start="31773" end="31785" title="Richard Ettinghausen" label="Ettinghausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914857" start="31787" end="31793" title="Oleg Grabar" label="Grabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776728" start="31819" end="31831" title="Pisa Griffin" label="Pisa Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="32607" end="32615" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="32669" end="32677" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="32682" end="32687" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188938" start="33280" end="33285" title="Djerba" label="Jerba"/>
<link wikidata="Q982702" start="33550" end="33567" title="George of Antioch" label="George of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="33944" end="33951" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q307312" start="33967" end="33985" title="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min" label="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="33989" end="33998" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="34168" end="34180" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q294307" start="34414" end="34422" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Hasan al-Hasan ibn Ali" label="al-Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q335489" start="34626" end="34647" title="Abu Yaqub Yusuf" label="Abu Ya&amp;#x27;qub Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q21084376" start="34736" end="34743" title="Tamasna" label="Tamasna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="34801" end="34807" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="34841" end="34848" title="Sanhaja" label="Sanhaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="34849" end="34855" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="34856" end="34863" title="dynasty" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="34929" end="34936" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q286956" start="34993" end="35008" title="Nasir ibn Alnas" label="Nasir ibn Alnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q500367" start="35133" end="35151" title="Qalaat Beni Hammad" label="Qalaat Beni Hammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="35190" end="35216" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="35250" end="35260" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q59975" start="35305" end="35311" title="Béjaïa" label="Béjaïa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="35393" end="35405" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="35407" end="35413" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="35414" end="35420" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="35498" end="35515" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="35517" end="35527" title="Al Andalus" label="Al Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="35533" end="35545" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="35551" end="35558" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733867" start="35566" end="35582" title="Almohad doctrine" label="Almohad docrtine"/>
<link wikidata="Q455925" start="35598" end="35608" title="Ibn Tumart" label="Ibn Tumart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572273" start="35626" end="35633" title="Masmuda" label="Masmuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q307312" start="35723" end="35749" title="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min" label="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min al-Gumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="35773" end="35781" title="Hammadid dynasty" label="Hammadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="35792" end="35799" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="35801" end="35808" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948981" start="35870" end="35876" title="Tinmel" label="Tinmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="35884" end="35899" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="35983" end="36000" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="36046" end="36055" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="36077" end="36083" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="36132" end="36139" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="36193" end="36199" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q715749" start="36313" end="36347" title="Muhammad an-Nasir" label="Muhammad III, &amp;quot;al-Nasir&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q219697" start="36380" end="36409" title="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa" label="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q686362" start="36417" end="36430" title="Sierra Morena" label="Sierra Morena"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="36475" end="36482" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="36484" end="36490" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="36495" end="36502" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="36605" end="36612" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="36617" end="36624" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="36859" end="36866" title="Marinid" label="Marinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822103" start="36937" end="36952" title="Idris al-Wathiq" label="Idris al-Wathiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q455925" start="37182" end="37192" title="Ibn Tumart" label="Ibn Tumart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572273" start="37210" end="37217" title="Masmuda" label="Masmuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="37221" end="37227" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="37256" end="37271" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="37306" end="37313" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="37323" end="37330" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="37342" end="37352" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="37382" end="37392" title="Almoravids" label="Almoravids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="37396" end="37403" title="Sanhaja" label="Sanhaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="37505" end="37512" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q316349" start="37598" end="37613" title="al-Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="al-Ash&amp;#x27;ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="37659" end="37669" title="al-Ghazali" label="al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q174495" start="37815" end="37821" title="tawhid" label="tawhid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37876" end="37893" title="God in Islam#Other attributes" label="attributes of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="38028" end="38044" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="38224" end="38231" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="38279" end="38287" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="38561" end="38567" title="Maliki" label="Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q652172" start="38626" end="38630" title="ijma" label="ijma"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="38667" end="38678" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="38683" end="38689" title="Sunnah" label="Sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q140592" start="38738" end="38744" title="Zahiri" label="Zahiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q59975" start="38887" end="38893" title="Bejaia" label="Bejaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q307312" start="39063" end="39081" title="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min" label="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="39205" end="39212" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="39232" end="39235" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="39357" end="39366" title="Almoravid" label="Almoravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="39406" end="39409" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="39525" end="39534" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q552458" start="39590" end="39603" title="Ali ibn Yusuf" label="Ali ibn Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055244" start="40046" end="40050" title="Sous" label="Sous"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="40252" end="40259" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="40434" end="40439" title="Mahdi" label="Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898224" start="40672" end="40679" title="Hintata" label="Hintata"/>
<link wikidata="Q584279" start="40740" end="40750" title="High Atlas" label="High Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572273" start="40804" end="40811" title="Masmuda" label="Masmuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333989" start="41017" end="41022" title="ribat" label="ribat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948981" start="41026" end="41032" title="Tinmel" label="Tinmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="41504" end="41514" title="Sijilmassa" label="Sijilmassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="41535" end="41554" title="trans-Saharan trade" label="trans-Saharan trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040509" start="41822" end="41831" title="Tasghîmût" label="Tasghîmût"/>
<link wikidata="Q239718" start="43342" end="43349" title="muezzin" label="muezzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q168559" start="43564" end="43583" title="political commissar" label="political commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826842" start="43892" end="43898" title="Aghmat" label="Aghmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="43945" end="43954" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q54874867" start="44107" end="44127" title="Battle of al-Buhayra" label="Battle of al-Buhayra"/>
<link wikidata="Q127301" start="44703" end="44709" title="Occultation (Islam)" label="ghayba"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="44884" end="44890" title="Zenata" label="Zenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q231331" start="45587" end="45593" title="Oran Province" label="Orania"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="45929" end="45937" title="Banu Hilal" label="Hilalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="46354" end="46359" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="46378" end="46387" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="46398" end="46408" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="46622" end="46629" title="Córdoba, Andalusia" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="46633" end="46640" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q834479" start="46692" end="46699" title="Giralda" label="Giralda"/>
<link wikidata="Q498261" start="46848" end="46866" title="Alcázar of Seville" label="Alcázar of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q335489" start="46985" end="47000" title="Abu Yaqub Yusuf" label="Abu Yaqub Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q455739" start="47032" end="47057" title="Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur" label="Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="47248" end="47254" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="47388" end="47394" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39837" start="47431" end="47439" title="Averroes" label="Averroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q113903781" start="47458" end="47489" title="Almohad campaign against Portugal (1190–1191)" label="campaigned in southern Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q295268" start="47622" end="47645" title="Alfonso VIII of Castile" label="Alfonso VIII of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481920" start="47653" end="47670" title="Battle of Alarcos" label="Battle of Alarcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142023" start="47697" end="47705" title="Yusuf II" label="Yusuf II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="47840" end="47847" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="47932" end="47937" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q715749" start="48043" end="48072" title="Muhammad an-Nasir" label="Muhammad &amp;#x27;al-Nasir&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="48218" end="48225" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="48227" end="48233" title="Aragón" label="Aragón"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="48235" end="48242" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q219697" start="48265" end="48294" title="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa" label="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q686362" start="48302" end="48315" title="Sierra Morena" label="Sierra Morena"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="48522" end="48528" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142023" start="48529" end="48562" title="Yusuf II, Almohad Caliph" label="Yusuf II &amp;quot;al-Mustansir&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="48614" end="48621" title="Regent" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q65173868" start="48906" end="48928" title="Siege of Alcácer do Sal" label="loss of Alcácer do Sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="48936" end="48955" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Kingdom of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="49085" end="49094" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="49113" end="49118" title="Vizier" label="wazir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627497" start="49208" end="49244" title="Abdul-Wahid I, Almohad Caliph" label="Abd al-Wahid I &amp;#x27;al-Makhlu&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="49394" end="49404" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12225" start="49476" end="49482" title="Murcia" label="Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q307610" start="49512" end="49528" title="Abdallah al-Adil" label="Abdallah al-Adil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260782" start="49709" end="49719" title="Deposition (politics)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="49797" end="49801" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="49809" end="49813" title="coup" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="50186" end="50192" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q488555" start="50270" end="50276" title="Baeza, Spain" label="Baezan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15681" start="50309" end="50313" title="Jaén, Spain" label="Jaén"/>
<link wikidata="Q243122" start="50458" end="50482" title="Ferdinand III of Castile" label="Ferdinand III of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="50774" end="50780" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="50821" end="50828" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="50859" end="50866" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q772214" start="50874" end="50885" title="Chelif River" label="Chelif bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="50890" end="50897" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="50925" end="50934" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146608" start="50943" end="50957" title="Moulouya River" label="Moulouya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q909981" start="50971" end="50975" title="Tuat" label="Tuat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491757" start="50997" end="51004" title="Soummam River" label="Soummam"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="51079" end="51096" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="51127" end="51134" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q307697" start="51180" end="51196" title="Zayyanid dynasty" label="Zayyanid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="51244" end="51251" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="51302" end="51309" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="51314" end="51322" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="51374" end="51382" title="Marinid Sultanate" label="Marinids"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="51404" end="51407" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="51417" end="51424" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="51449" end="51454" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="51512" end="51516" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="51524" end="51537" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q209703" start="51551" end="51564" title="Sudan (region)" label="Western Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="51765" end="51774" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822166" start="51895" end="51908" title="Abu Tashufin I" label="Abu Tashfin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q109237183" start="52009" end="52017" title="Zayyanid Capture of Fez" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q909981" start="52064" end="52068" title="Tuat" label="Tuat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701585" start="52070" end="52078" title="Tamentit" label="Tamentit"/>
<link wikidata="Q486636" start="52087" end="52091" title="Draa River" label="Draa"/>
<link wikidata="Q335451" start="52312" end="52332" title="Yaghmurasen Ibn Zyan" label="Yaghmurasen Ibn Zyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="52380" end="52386" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="52434" end="52441" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293952" start="52544" end="52558" title="Zenati languages" label="Zenati dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="52781" end="52798" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="52822" end="52839" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="53170" end="53177" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q307697" start="53265" end="53273" title="Ziyyanid" label="Ziyyanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478180" start="53399" end="53409" title="Tell Atlas" label="Tell Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="53629" end="53644" title="Marinid dynasty" label="Marinid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="53677" end="53692" title="Emir of Granada" label="Emir of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q47595" start="53718" end="53727" title="Alfonso X" label="Alfonso X"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="53742" end="53753" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q111915115" start="54044" end="54059" title="Battle of Oujda" label="Battle of Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="54405" end="54420" title="Marinid dynasty" label="Marinid kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="54441" end="54447" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="54825" end="54833" title="Marinid dynasty" label="Marinids"/>
<link wikidata="Q335476" start="54947" end="54970" title="Abu Yaqub Yusuf an-Nasr" label="Abu Yaqub Yusuf an-Nasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q324772" start="55391" end="55402" title="Abu Hammu I" label="Abu Hammu I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822166" start="55493" end="55507" title="Abu Tashufin I" label="Abu Tashufin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q59975" start="55916" end="55922" title="Béjaïa" label="Béjaïa"/>
<link wikidata="Q324785" start="55983" end="56004" title="Abu Yahya Abu Bakr II" label="Abu Yahya Abu Bakr II"/>
<link wikidata="Q187346" start="56018" end="56029" title="Constantine, Algeria" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="56059" end="56064" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335620" start="56094" end="56106" title="Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Othman" label="Abu al-Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="56978" end="56986" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q336990" start="56997" end="57011" title="Abu Inan Faris" label="Abu Inan Faris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57162" end="57174" title="Abu Thabit I" label="Abu Thabit I"/>
<link wikidata="Q59975" start="57454" end="57460" title="Béjaïa" label="Béjaïa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="57473" end="57478" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335050" start="57634" end="57651" title="Abu Hammu Musa II" label="Abu Hammu Musa II"/>
<link wikidata="Q772214" start="57780" end="57786" title="Chelif River" label="Chelif"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="58444" end="58455" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="59047" end="59053" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="59054" end="59062" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="59072" end="59079" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="59087" end="59102" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688156" start="59727" end="59741" title="Abu Said Uthman III" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id"/>
<link wikidata="Q109237183" start="60016" end="60028" title="Zayyanid Capture of Fez" label="captured Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q970799" start="60119" end="60128" title="Wattasid dynasty" label="Wattasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q466046" start="60189" end="60193" title="Salé" label="Salé"/>
<link wikidata="Q307564" start="60217" end="60231" title="Abd al-Haqq II" label="Abd al-Haqq II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822096" start="60289" end="60313" title="Abu Zakariya Yahya al-Wattasi" label="Abu Zakariyya al-Wattasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="60317" end="60323" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q307147" start="60344" end="60358" title="Abu Faris Abd al-Aziz II" label="Abd al-Aziz II"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="60887" end="60904" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="61113" end="61117" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="61289" end="61295" title="Papacy" label="Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111915776" start="61374" end="61388" title="Spanish Expedition to Tlemcen (1535)" label="defeat in 1535"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="61649" end="61656" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495579" start="61671" end="61687" title="Campaign of Tlemcen (1551)" label="captured in 1551"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="61695" end="61709" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128171" start="61716" end="61728" title="Hasan Pasha (son of Barbarossa)" label="Hassan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="61879" end="61897" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859372" start="62183" end="62194" title="Arab-Berber" label="Arab-Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="62350" end="62377" title="Reconquista" label="Christian conquest of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="62404" end="62411" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="62844" end="62859" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="62880" end="62885" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q466888" start="62910" end="62924" title="Zymen Danseker" label="Zymen Danseker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323096" start="63168" end="63176" title="presidio" label="presidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q470634" start="63224" end="63228" title="Aruj" label="Aruj"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="63233" end="63245" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Khair ad Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="63279" end="63289" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q342392" start="63683" end="63691" title="Cardinal Cisneros" label="Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q31085" start="63853" end="63866" title="Mers El Kébir" label="Mers El Kébir"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="63875" end="63879" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="63888" end="63895" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q59975" start="63907" end="63912" title="Bejaia" label="Bugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783538" start="63925" end="63949" title="Spanish conquest of Oran (1509)" label="Spanish conquest of Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q40519" start="64366" end="64382" title="José Carrillo de Albornoz, 1st Duke of Montemar" label="Duke of Montemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573364" start="64431" end="64460" title="Spanish conquest of Oran (1732)" label="retook Oran and Mers El Kébir"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="64714" end="64734" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651702" start="64794" end="64817" title="Alejandro O&amp;#x27;Reilly" label="Alejandro O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940494" start="64982" end="65007" title="Bombardment of Algiers (1784)" label="bombarded Algiers in 1784"/>
<link wikidata="Q183226" start="65219" end="65229" title="Charles IV of Spain" label="Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325722" start="65237" end="65251" title="History of Ottoman Algeria" label="Bey of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="65320" end="65332" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629782" start="65373" end="65396" title="French conquest of Algeria" label="conquered by the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q20018403" start="65419" end="65435" title="Ottoman Tunisia" label="regency of Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125406908" start="65453" end="65473" title="Sultanate of Morocco" label="Sultanate of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q909981" start="65502" end="65506" title="Tuat" label="Tuat"/>
<link wikidata="Q76593022" start="65539" end="65547" title="In Salah Province" label="In Salah"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611175" start="65570" end="65620" title="European enclaves in North Africa before 1830" label="Spanish and Portuguese possessions of North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050005" start="65672" end="65680" title="El Kala" label="La Calle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="65723" end="65730" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q312759" start="65734" end="65740" title="Biskra" label="Biskra"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="65950" end="65964" title="Ottoman sultan" label="Ottoman sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105085695" start="66083" end="66099" title="Odjak of Algiers" label="Odjak of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821337" start="66122" end="66125" title="Dey" label="Dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045696" start="66142" end="66158" title="Divan of Algiers" label="Divan of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="66283" end="66290" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q31085" start="66299" end="66312" title="Mers El Kébir" label="Mers El Kébir"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="66321" end="66325" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q59975" start="66334" end="66340" title="Béjaïa" label="Bougie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="66349" end="66356" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="66365" end="66372" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617666" start="66374" end="66383" title="Shershell" label="Shershell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021755" start="66385" end="66391" title="Dellys" label="Dellys"/>
<link wikidata="Q426788" start="66397" end="66402" title="Tenes" label="Tenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q71630263" start="66476" end="66502" title="Algiers Expedition (1516)" label="Algiers expedition in 1516"/>
<link wikidata="Q108542187" start="66504" end="66508" title="Algiers Expedition (1519)" label="1519"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502863" start="66528" end="66546" title="Algiers expedition (1541)" label="expedition in 1541"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="66583" end="66592" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q470634" start="66602" end="66606" title="Oruç Reis" label="Oruç"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="66611" end="66620" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Hayreddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="66635" end="66641" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="66717" end="66724" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="66735" end="66742" title="Hafsids" label="Hafsids"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="66834" end="66848" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030701" start="66908" end="66924" title="Kingdom of Tlemcen" label="Zayyanid Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="66928" end="66935" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128171" start="67004" end="67015" title="Hasan Pasha (son of Barbarossa)" label="Hasan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495579" start="67084" end="67113" title="Campaign of Tlemcen (1551)" label="campaign to recapture Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475368" start="67232" end="67242" title="Salah Rais" label="Salah Rais"/>
<link wikidata="Q648255" start="67266" end="67272" title="Kabyle people" label="Kabyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495617" start="67283" end="67302" title="Touggourt Expedition (1552)" label="conquered Touggourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28499348" start="67454" end="67471" title="Hafsids of Béjaïa" label="Emirate of Béjaïa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446186" start="67569" end="67573" title="Kingdom of Kuku" label="Kuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446243" start="67578" end="67587" title="Kingdom of Beni Abbas" label="Ait Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951624" start="67683" end="67722" title="First Battle of Kalaa of the Beni Abbes (1553)" label="First Battle of Kalaa of the Beni Abbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46178" start="67787" end="67804" title="Kabylia Mountains" label="Kabylia Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128112" start="68190" end="68200" title="Hasan Agha" label="Hasan Agha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="68251" end="68265" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128171" start="68298" end="68310" title="Hasan Pasha (son of Barbarossa)" label="Hasan Pashan"/>
<link wikidata="Q740406" start="68457" end="68466" title="beylerbey" label="beylerbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="68515" end="68520" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12227587" start="68538" end="68568" title="Morocco–Turkey relations" label="Ottoman conflicts with Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q184951" start="69012" end="69017" title="Pasha" label="Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859497" start="69245" end="69269" title="Barbary Slave Trade" label="slavery for the captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="69468" end="69473" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763693" start="69496" end="69516" title="Anglo-Turkish piracy" label="Anglo-Turkish piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="69688" end="69693" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="69696" end="69716" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Hayreddin Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q329966" start="70169" end="70185" title="Abraham Duquesne" label="Abraham Duquesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="70197" end="70212" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q105085695" start="70391" end="70407" title="Odjak of Algiers" label="Odjak of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="70653" end="70666" title="Sublime Porte" label="Sublime Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q100701531" start="71045" end="71057" title="Mohammed Trik" label="Mohamed Trik"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="71805" end="71814" title="explosion" label="explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="71880" end="71887" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195572" start="71907" end="71918" title="Baba Hassan" label="Baba Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104881979" start="71947" end="71968" title="French-Algerian War 1681–88" label="he was already at war"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="72024" end="72041" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909585" start="72058" end="72094" title="Bombardment of Algiers (1682)" label="bombarded Algiers for the first time"/>
<link wikidata="Q329966" start="72158" end="72174" title="Abraham Duquesne" label="Abraham Duquesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010253" start="72234" end="72261" title="Bombardment of Algiers (1683)" label="Algiers was bombarded again"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133071" start="72396" end="72415" title="Mezzo Morto Hüseyin Pasha" label="Mezzo Morto Hüseyin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72451" end="72492" title="Battle off Cherchell" label="he was defeated in a naval battle in 1685"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617666" start="72499" end="72508" title="Cherchell" label="Cherchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28497080" start="72524" end="72550" title="Bombardment of Algiers (1688)" label="French Bombardment in 1688"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72608" end="72620" title="Hadj Chabane" label="Hadj Chabane"/>
<link wikidata="Q86667083" start="72673" end="72691" title="Battle of Moulouya" label="Battle of Moulouya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72705" end="72718" title="Algerian-Tunisian war (1694)" label="Tunis as well"/>
<link wikidata="Q28497187" start="73048" end="73083" title="Reconquest of Oran and Mers el Kébir (1708)" label="recapture of Oran and Mers-el-Kébir"/>
<link wikidata="Q48746946" start="73157" end="73174" title="Baba Ali Chaouche" label="Baba Ali Chaouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="73563" end="73576" title="Sublime Porte" label="Sublime Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="73709" end="73717" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="73930" end="73944" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="73989" end="74002" title="Barbary Coast" label="Barbary Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821337" start="74133" end="74136" title="dey" label="dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28494872" start="74137" end="74160" title="Baba Mohammed ben-Osman" label="Baba Mohammed ben-Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="74275" end="74289" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="74600" end="74607" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="74630" end="74646" title="ship of the line" label="ship of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q86684978" start="74900" end="74927" title="Campaign of Tlemcen (1557)" label="campaign of Tlemcen in 1557"/>
<link wikidata="Q30742449" start="74960" end="74976" title="Battle of Chelif" label="Battle of Chelif"/>
<link wikidata="Q30745598" start="75165" end="75187" title="Capture of Fez (1576)" label="capture of Fez in 1576"/>
<link wikidata="Q105162351" start="75320" end="75342" title="Capture of Fez (1554)" label="capture of Fez in 1554"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="75781" end="75787" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="75831" end="75855" title="United States of America" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="75930" end="75945" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q468293" start="75971" end="75988" title="First Barbary War" label="First Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q233505" start="75993" end="76011" title="Second Barbary War" label="Second Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528158" start="76050" end="76062" title="Lord Exmouth" label="Lord Exmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q891806" start="76080" end="76102" title="Bombardment of Algiers (1816)" label="bombardment of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48746946" start="76954" end="76970" title="Baba Ali Chaouch" label="Baba Ali Chaouch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77207" end="77215" title="Cur Abdy" label="Cur Abdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123210" start="77639" end="77668" title="Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792)"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="77748" end="77761" title="First French Empire" label="French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q253684" start="77762" end="77782" title="French campaign in Egypt and Syria" label="campaigning in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639864" start="78105" end="78117" title="Haji Ali (Dey of Algiers)" label="Haji Ali Dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="78868" end="78880" title="colonization" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="79261" end="79285" title="French National Assembly" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q45635" start="79713" end="79724" title="casus belli" label="casus belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387563" start="79726" end="79737" title="Hussein Dey" label="Hussein Dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="79762" end="79774" title="colonialism" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q179825" start="79982" end="79993" title="Abd al-Qadir al-Jaza&amp;#x27;iri" label="Abdel Kadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="80153" end="80175" title="French Second Republic" label="French Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122811" start="80412" end="80435" title="Pacification of Algeria" label="Pacification of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80491" end="80501" title="French Algeria#French atrocities against the Algerian indigenous population" label="atrocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="80890" end="80898" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q131283169" start="80923" end="80957" title="Project of Arab kingdom in Algeria" label="Project of Arab kingdom in Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="81114" end="81128" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="81499" end="81503" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="81568" end="81580" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="81720" end="81726" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="81787" end="81795" title="apostasy" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q281348" start="81810" end="81825" title="Crémieux Decree" label="Crémieux Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978221" start="82134" end="82152" title="economy of Algeria" label="economy of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="82704" end="82711" title="Islamic" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="82757" end="82768" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="82892" end="82917" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051578" start="82932" end="82958" title="National Algerian Movement" label="National Algerian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="83568" end="83580" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="83601" end="83612" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="83680" end="83685" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="83739" end="83751" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="83834" end="83849" title="Operation Torch" label="Operation Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="83855" end="83866" title="Free French Forces" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q193043" start="84012" end="84024" title="Ferhat Abbas" label="Ferhat Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q942087" start="84626" end="84638" title="Messali Hadj" label="Messali Hadj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366385" start="84670" end="84694" title="Parti du Peuple Algérien" label="Parti du Peuple Algérien"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="84717" end="84731" title="Demonstration (people)" label="demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="84887" end="84894" title="V-E Day" label="V-E Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q593024" start="84908" end="84933" title="Sétif and Guelma massacre" label="Sétif and Guelma massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="85457" end="85481" title="French National Assembly" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q680363" start="85515" end="85541" title="Organic Statute of Algeria" label="Organic Statute of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="86002" end="86030" title="Algerian War of Independence" label="Algerian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="86250" end="86265" title="anticolonialism" label="anticolonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="86379" end="86408" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="Front de Libération Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="86476" end="86495" title="Algerian War of Independence" label="war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q699510" start="86647" end="86664" title="Jacques Soustelle" label="Jacques Soustelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q273017" start="87249" end="87262" title="Evian, France" label="Evian, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471139" start="87268" end="87281" title="Evian accords" label="Evian accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="87422" end="87432" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="87710" end="87721" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532562" start="87788" end="87803" title="Torture during the Algerian War" label="illegal methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552748" start="87901" end="87914" title="waterboarding" label="waterboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q778417" start="88141" end="88155" title="disembowelment" label="disembowelment"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="88188" end="88200" title="Starvation" label="without food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599494" start="88291" end="88324" title="Death flights" label="out of helicopters to their death"/>
<link wikidata="Q861534" start="88374" end="88394" title="Premature burial" label="burying people alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="88457" end="88468" title="pieds-noirs" label="pieds-noirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="88864" end="88870" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="89010" end="89021" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="89060" end="89067" title="Economic system" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="89112" end="89119" title="settler" label="settler"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="89132" end="89141" title="pied-noir" label="pied-noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="89281" end="89293" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="89561" end="89564" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q942985" start="89645" end="89650" title="harki" label="harki"/>
<link wikidata="Q128513" start="89818" end="89850" title="1962 Algerian independence referendum" label="Algerian independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="89863" end="89877" title="French Algeria" label="French Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504636" start="90018" end="90039" title="Constitution of Algeria" label="Algerian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724086" start="90055" end="90076" title="Algerian constitutional referendum, 1963" label="nationwide referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="90108" end="90139" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Front (FLN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q179908" start="90159" end="90174" title="Ahmed Ben Bella" label="Ahmed Ben Bella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914452" start="90206" end="90226" title="president of Algeria" label="president of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q310855" start="90318" end="90335" title="Houari Boumédiène" label="Houari Boumédiène"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="90351" end="90371" title="Algerian War" label="war for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="90571" end="90589" title="Pied-Noir" label="&amp;quot;colons&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="91799" end="91813" title="chief of state" label="chief of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="91818" end="91836" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622579" start="92128" end="92144" title="Hocine Aït-Ahmed" label="Hocine Aït-Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q633590" start="92154" end="92171" title="People&amp;#x27;s National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q605960" start="92295" end="92317" title="Socialist Forces Front" label="Socialist Forces Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999015" start="93047" end="93063" title="1965 Algerian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q310855" start="93190" end="93207" title="Houari Boumédiène" label="Houari Boumédiène"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="93246" end="93262" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288449" start="93314" end="93325" title="forced disappearance" label="disappeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q314688" start="93449" end="93465" title="Chadli Bendjedid" label="Chadli Bendjedid"/>
<link wikidata="Q633590" start="93504" end="93521" title="People&amp;#x27;s National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274271" start="94052" end="94063" title="Oujda group" label="Oujda group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746356" start="94106" end="94130" title="National Liberation Army (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="94193" end="94201" title="Morocco" label="Moroccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="94217" end="94222" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867107" start="94483" end="94515" title="People&amp;#x27;s Municipal Assembly" label="People&amp;#x27;s Municipal Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867113" start="94570" end="94603" title="People&amp;#x27;s Provincial Assembly" label="People&amp;#x27;s Provincial Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="94766" end="94771" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827669" start="94972" end="94992" title="Ahmed Taleb Ibrahimi" label="Ahmed Taleb Ibrahimi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="95433" end="95444" title=":fr:Tahar Zbiri" label="Tahar Zbiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="95475" end="95488" title="assassination" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="96248" end="96251" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="FLN"/>
<link wikidata="Q314688" start="96342" end="96358" title="Chadli Bendjedid" label="Chadli Bendjedid"/>
<link wikidata="Q179908" start="96420" end="96435" title="Ahmed Ben Bella" label="Ahmed Ben Bella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592935" start="96525" end="96543" title="1988 October Riots" label="1988 October Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="96725" end="96737" title="armed forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q734545" start="96931" end="96954" title="Islamic Salvation Front" label="Islamic Salvation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195980" start="97678" end="97691" title="Khaled Nezzar" label="Khaled Nezzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223725" start="97720" end="97740" title="Abdelmalek Guenaizia" label="Abdelmalek Guenaizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665572" start="97767" end="97771" title="Algerian National Navy" label="navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100409" start="97773" end="97784" title="Gendarmerie Nationale (Algeria)" label="Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128444" start="98288" end="98309" title="High Council of State (Algeria)" label="High Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="" start="98413" end="98427" title=":fr:Tedjini Haddam" label="Tedjini Haddam"/>
<link wikidata="Q327129" start="98429" end="98437" title="Ali Kafi" label="Ali Kafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q314691" start="98439" end="98454" title="Mohamed Boudiaf" label="Mohamed Boudiaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836244" start="98459" end="98469" title="Ali Haroun" label="Ali Haroun"/>
<link wikidata="Q327010" start="98556" end="98573" title="Sid Ahmed Ghozali" label="Sid Ahmed Ghozali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041052" start="98736" end="98750" title="Larbi Belkheir" label="Larbi Belkheir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821102" start="99064" end="99082" title="Abdelkader Hachani" label="Abdelkader Hachani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="99103" end="99117" title="Othman Aissani" label="Othman Aissani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278667" start="99122" end="99133" title="Rabah Kebir" label="Rabah Kebir"/>
<link wikidata="Q142529" start="99592" end="99610" title="Algerian Civil War" label="Algerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q314688" start="99848" end="99864" title="Chadli Bendjedid" label="Chadli Bendjedid"/>
<link wikidata="Q314691" start="100442" end="100457" title="Mohamed Boudiaf" label="Mohamed Boudiaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128444" start="100494" end="100515" title="High Council of State (Algeria)" label="High Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195980" start="100867" end="100880" title="Khaled Nezzar" label="Khaled Nezzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q327129" start="101283" end="101291" title="Ali Kafi" label="Ali Kafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q327127" start="101362" end="101377" title="Liamine Zéroual" label="Liamine Zéroual"/>
<link wikidata="Q57308" start="101675" end="101695" title="Abdelaziz Bouteflika" label="Abdelaziz Bouteflika"/>
<link wikidata="Q142529" start="101769" end="101787" title="Algerian civil war" label="Algerian civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q57308" start="101918" end="101938" title="Abdelaziz Bouteflika" label="Abdelaziz Bouteflika"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="101991" end="102016" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q472238" start="103768" end="103781" title="2010–12 Algerian protests" label="in April 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="103938" end="103949" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="104012" end="104031" title="Egyptian revolution of 2011" label="Egyptian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q217405" start="104056" end="104068" title="police state" label="police state"/>
<link wikidata="Q61829297" start="104277" end="104296" title="2019–20 Algerian protests" label="protests in Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827559" start="104447" end="104463" title="Ahmed Gaid Salah" label="Ahmed Gaid Salah"/>
<link wikidata="Q57308" start="104993" end="105013" title="Abdelaziz Bouteflika" label="Abdelaziz Bouteflika"/>
<link wikidata="Q101531124" start="105035" end="105044" title="List of Presidents of the Council of the Nation (Algeria)" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119509" start="105052" end="105073" title="Council of the Nation" label="Council of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821079" start="105074" end="105093" title="Abdelkader Bensalah" label="Abdelkader Bensalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q46640783" start="105141" end="105186" title="2019 Algerian presidential election" label="the presidential election on 12 December 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821166" start="105188" end="105208" title="Abdelmadjid Tebboune" label="Abdelmadjid Tebboune"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="105313" end="105338" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q840321" start="105347" end="105372" title="Democratic National Rally" label="Democratic National Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q61829297" start="105418" end="105432" title="2019–20 Algerian protests" label="Hirak Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28642" start="105558" end="105581" title="Mass media in Algeria" label="Algerian national media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819824" start="106120" end="106148" title="Independence Day (Algeria)" label="Algerian Day of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="106275" end="106292" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="106630" end="106651" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q87202921" start="106721" end="106756" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Algeria" label="management of the COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79912784" start="106917" end="106967" title="National Committee for the Liberation of Detainees" label="National Committee for the Liberation of Detainees"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="107167" end="107175" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q401173" start="107263" end="107278" title="Ahmed Benbitour" label="Ahmed Benbitour"/>
<link wikidata="Q182762" start="107291" end="107318" title="Prime Minister of Algeria" label="Algerian Head of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206" start="107531" end="107549" title="constitutional law" label="constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="107968" end="107978" title="Political corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="107998" end="108015" title="Separation of powers" label="balance of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="108059" end="108075" title="Separation of powers" label="oversight powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142337" start="108079" end="108089" title="Parliament of Algeria" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108125" end="108134" title="Judiciary of Algeria" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586858" start="108210" end="108219" title="Elections in Algeria" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015487" start="108951" end="108969" title="Cabinet of Algeria" label="Cabinet of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015487" start="109039" end="109059" title="Cabinet of Algeria" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q633590" start="109083" end="109114" title="People&amp;#x27;s National Assembly" label="People&amp;#x27;s National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119509" start="109143" end="109164" title="Council of the Nation" label="Council of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q97652388" start="109230" end="109256" title="2020 Algerian constitutional referendum" label="1 November 2020 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q105847294" start="109342" end="109355" title="2021 Algerian protests" label="mass protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q106746723" start="109603" end="109606" title="2024 Algerian presidential election" label="won"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992061" start="109729" end="109747" title="Culture of Algeria" label="Culture of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434892" start="109750" end="109775" title="List of French governors of Algeria" label="Colonial heads of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13411409" start="109778" end="109816" title="List of heads of government of Algeria" label="List of heads of government of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="109819" end="109836" title="History of Africa" label="History of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q375719" start="109839" end="109862" title="History of North Africa" label="History of North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q462785" start="109865" end="109894" title="List of presidents of Algeria" label="List of presidents of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154481" start="109897" end="109916" title="Politics of Algeria" label="Politics of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182762" start="109919" end="109944" title="Prime Minister of Algeria" label="Prime Minister of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109988" end="109995" title="Algiers#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805616" start="110000" end="110008" title="Timeline of Algiers" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110017" end="110024" title="Oran#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967113" start="110029" end="110037" title="Timeline of Oran" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="110443" end="110469" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q985068" start="110569" end="110587" title="Lewiston, New York" label="Lewiston, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558777" start="110589" end="110607" title="Edwin Mellen Press" label="Edwin Mellen Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q985068" start="110749" end="110767" title="Lewiston, New York" label="Lewiston, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558777" start="110769" end="110787" title="Edwin Mellen Press" label="Edwin Mellen Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345330" start="110993" end="111008" title="Nova Publishers" label="Nova Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010248" start="111204" end="111215" title="Verso Books" label="Verso Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130954" start="111324" end="111348" title="Indiana University Press" label="Indiana University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805028" start="111653" end="111671" title="Ashgate Publishing" label="Ashgate Publishing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14114" wikidata="Q408167" url="?curid=14114" title="History of Zimbabwe">
<text>Until roughly 2,000 years ago, what would become Zimbabwe was populated by ancestors of the San people. Bantu inhabitants of the region arrived and developed ceramic production in the area. A series of trading empires emerged, including the Kingdom of Mapungubwe and Kingdom of Zimbabwe. In the 1880s, the British South Africa Company began its activities in the region, leading to the colonial era in Southern Rhodesia.

In 1965, the colonial government declared itself independent as Rhodesia, but largely failed to secure international recognition and faced sustained internal opposition in the Rhodesian Bush War.

After fifteen years of war, following the Lancaster House Agreement of 1979 there was a transition to internationally recognised majority rule in 1980. The United Kingdom, which had never recognised Rhodesian independence, briefly imposed direct rule in order to grant independence on 18 April that year as the new country of Zimbabwe. In the 2000s Zimbabwe&#x27;s economy began to deteriorate due to various factors, including the imposition of economic sanctions by Western countries led by the United Kingdom and widespread corruption in government. Economic instability caused many Zimbabweans to emigrate. Prior to its recognized independence as Zimbabwe in 1980, the nation had been known by several names: Rhodesia, Southern Rhodesia, and Zimbabwe Rhodesia.

== Pre-Colonial era (150,000 BCE – 1852 CE) ==

=== Prehistory ===
By 150,000 BC, &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; had migrated to the region now known as Zimbabwe from East Africa. Prior to the arrival of Bantu speakers in present-day Zimbabwe the region was populated by ancestors of the San people. The first Bantu-speaking farmers arrived during the Bantu expansion around 2000 years ago.

These Bantu speakers were the makers of early Iron Age pottery belonging to the Silver Leaves or Matola tradition, of the third to fifth centuries A.D., found in southeast Zimbabwe. This tradition was part of the eastern stream of Bantu expansion (sometimes called Kwale) which originated west of the Great Lakes, spreading to the coastal regions of southeastern Kenya and north eastern Tanzania, and then southwards to Mozambique, south eastern Zimbabwe and Natal. More substantial in numbers in Zimbabwe were the makers of the Ziwa and Gokomere ceramic wares, of the fourth century A.D. Their early Iron Age ceramic tradition belonged to the highlands facies of the eastern stream, which moved inland to Malawi and Zimbabwe. Imports of beads have been found at Gokomere and Ziwa sites, possibly in return for gold exported to the coast.

A later phase of the Gokomere culture was the Zhizo in southern Zimbabwe. Zhizo communities settled in the Shashe-Limpopo area in the tenth century. Their capital there was Schroda (just across the Limpopo River from Zimbabwe). Many fragments of ceramic figurines have been recovered from there, including figures of animals and birds, and also fertility dolls. The inhabitants produced ivory bracelets and other ivory goods. Imported beads found there and at other Zhizo sites, are evidence of trade, probably of ivory and skins, with traders on the Indian Ocean coast.

Pottery belonging to a western stream of Bantu expansion (sometimes called Kalundu) has been found at sites in northeastern Zimbabwe, dating back to the seventh century. (The western stream originated in the same area as the eastern stream: both belong to the same style system, called by Phillipson the Chifumbadze system, which has general acceptance by archaeologists.) The terms eastern and western streams represent the expansion of the Bantu-speaking peoples in terms of their culture. Another question is about the branches of the Bantu languages which they spoke. It seems that the makers of the Ziwa/Gokomere wares were not the ancestral speakers of the Shona languages of today&#x27;s Zimbabwe, who did not arrive in there until around the tenth century, from south of the Limpopo river, and whose ceramic culture belonged to the western stream. The linguist and historian Ehret believes that in view of the similarity of the Ziwa/Gokomere pottery to the Nkope of the ancestral Nyasa language speakers, the Ziwa/Gokomere people spoke a language closely related to the Nyasa group. Their language, whatever it was, was superseded by the ancestral Shona languages, although Ehret says that a set of Nyasa words occur in central Shona dialects today.

The evidence that the ancestral Shona speakers came from South Africa is that the ceramic styles associated with Shona speakers in Zimbabwe from the thirteenth to the seventeenth centuries can be traced back to western stream (Kalunndu) pottery styles in South Africa. The Ziwa /Gokomere and Zhizo traditions were superseded by Leopards Kopje and Gumanye wares of the Kalundu tradition from the tenth century.

Although the western stream Kalundu tradition was ancestral to Shona ceramic wares, the closest relationships of the ancestral Shona language according to many linguists were with a southern division of eastern Bantu – such languages as the southeastern languages (Nguni, Sotho-Tswana, Tsonga), Nyasa and Makwa. While it may well be the case that the people of the western stream spoke a language belonging to a wider Eastern Bantu division, it is a puzzle which remains to be resolved that they spoke a language most closely related to the languages just mentioned, all of which are today spoken in southeastern Africa.

After the Shona speaking people moved into the present day Zimbabwe many different dialects developed over time in the different parts of the country. Among these was Kalanga.
It is believed that Kalanga speaking societies first emerged in the middle Limpopo valley in the 9th century before moving on to the Zimbabwean highlands. The Zimbabwean plateau eventually became the centre of subsequent Kalanga states. The Kingdom of Mapungubwe was the first in a series of sophisticated trade states developed in Zimbabwe by the time of the first European explorers from Portugal. They traded in gold, ivory and copper for cloth and glass. From about 1250 until 1450, Mapungubwe was eclipsed by the Kingdom of Zimbabwe. This Kalanga state further refined and expanded upon Mapungubwe&#x27;s stone architecture, which survives to this day at the ruins of the kingdom&#x27;s capital of Great Zimbabwe. From –1760, Zimbabwe gave way to the Kingdom of Mutapa. This Kalanga state ruled much of the area that is known as Zimbabwe today, and parts of central Mozambique. It is known by many names including the Mutapa Empire, also known as Mwenemutapa was known for its gold trade routes with Arabs and the Portuguese. António Fernandes, a Portuguese explorer, first entered the area in 1511 from Sofala and encountered the Manyika people. He returned in 1513 and explored the northern region of the territory, coming into contact with Chikuyo Chisamarengu, the ruler of Mutapa. In the early 17th century, Portuguese settlers destroyed the trade and began a series of wars which left the empire in near collapse. As a direct response to Portuguese aggression in the interior, a new Kalanga state emerged called the Rozvi Empire. Relying on centuries of military, political and religious development, the Rozvi (which means &quot;destroyers&quot;) removed the Portuguese from the Zimbabwe plateau by force of arms. The Rozvi continued the stone building traditions of the Zimbabwe and Mapungubwe kingdoms while adding guns to its arsenal and developing a professional army to protect its trade routes and conquests. Around 1821, the Zulu general Mzilikazi of the Khumalo clan successfully rebelled from King Shaka and created his own clan, the Ndebele. The Ndebele fought their way northwards into the Transvaal, leaving a trail of destruction in their wake and beginning an era of widespread devastation known as the Mfecane. When Boer trekkers converged on the Transvaal in 1836, they drove the tribe even further northward.

After losing their remaining South African lands in 1840, Mzilikazi and his tribe permanently settled the southwest of present-day Zimbabwe in what became known as Matabeleland, establishing Bulawayo as their capital. Mzilikazi then organised his society into a military system with regimental kraals, similar to those of Shaka, which was stable enough to repel further Boer incursions. During the pre-colonial period, the Ndebele social structure was stratified. It was composed mainly of three social groups, abeZansi, Enhla and Amahole. The Zansi were the ruling class of the original Khumalo people who migrated from south of Limpopo with Mzilikazi. The Enhla and Amahole groups were made up of other tribes and ethnics who had been incorporated into the empire during the migration. However, with the passage of time, this stratification has slowly disappeared The Ndebele people have for long ascribed to the worship of Unkunkulu as their supreme being. Their religious life in general, rituals, ceremonies, practices, devotion and loyalty revolves around the worship of this Supreme Being. However, with the popularisation of Christianity and other religions, Ndebele traditional religion is now uncommon.

Mzilikazi died in 1868 and, following a violent power struggle, was succeeded by his son, Lobengula. King Mzilikazi had established the Ndebele Kingdom, with Shona subjects paying tribute to him. The nascent kingdom encountered European powers for the first time and Lobengula signed various treaties with the various nations jostling for power in the region, playing them off one another in order to preserve the sovereignty of his kingdom and gain the aid of the Europeans should the kingdom become involved in a war.

== Colonial era (1890–1980) ==

In the 1880s, British diamond magnate Cecil Rhodes&#x27; British South Africa Company (BSAC) started to make inroads into the region. In 1898, the name Southern Rhodesia was adopted. In 1888, Rhodes obtained a concession for mining rights from King Lobengula of the Ndebele peoples. Cecil Rhodes presented this concession to persuade the British government to grant a royal charter to his British South Africa Company over Matabeleland, and its subject states such as Mashonaland. Rhodes sought permission to negotiate similar concessions covering all territory between the Limpopo River and Lake Tanganyika, then known as &#x27;Zambesia&#x27;. In accordance with the terms of aforementioned concessions and treaties, Cecil Rhodes promoted the immigration of white settlers into the region, as well as the establishment of mines, primarily to extract the diamond ores present. In 1895 the BSAC adopted the name &#x27;Rhodesia&#x27; for the territory of Zambesia, in honour of Cecil Rhodes. In 1898, &#x27;Southern Rhodesia&#x27; became the official denotation for the region south of the Zambezi, which later became Zimbabwe. The region to the north was administered separately by the BSAC and later named Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia).

The Shona waged unsuccessful wars (known as Chimurenga) against encroachment upon their lands by clients of BSAC and Cecil Rhodes in 1896 and 1897. Following the failed insurrections of 1896–97 the Ndebele and Shona groups became subject to Rhodes&#x27;s administration thus precipitating European settlement en masse in the new colony.

The colony&#x27;s first formal constitution was drafted in 1899, and copied various pieces of legislation directly from that of the Union of South Africa; Rhodesia was meant to be, in many ways, a shadow colony of the Cape. Many within the administrative framework of the BSAC assumed that Southern Rhodesia, when its &quot;development&quot; was &quot;suitably advanced&quot;, would &quot;take its rightful place as a member of&quot; the Union of South Africa after the Second Boer War (1898–1902), when the four South African colonies joined under the auspices of one flag and began to work towards the creation of a unified administrative structure. The territory was made open to white settlement, and these settlers were then in turn given considerable administrative powers, including a franchise that, while on the surface non-racial, ensured &quot;a predominantly European electorate&quot; which &quot;operated to preclude Great Britain from modifying her policy in Southern Rhodesia and subsequently treating it as a territory inhabited mainly by Africans whose interests should be paramount and to whom British power should be transferred&quot;.

=== World War I ===

As a British territory, Southern Rhodesia immediately joined World War I after the UK declared war on the Central Powers, in August 1914. Rhodesia was noted for its patriotic zeal in joining the war. The main priority of British forces in Southern Africa was the capture of the German colony of South-West Africa, modern-day Namibia. A Rhodesian unit was sent to guard Victoria Falls from a possible German invasion via the Caprivi Strip. Meanwhile, a force was sent to assist British forces in South Africa suppressing the pro-German Maritz Rebellion. Afterwards, Rhodesians participated in the invasion of German South-West Africa.

Following the British victory over German forces in Southern Africa, many Rhodesian units, mostly white, were sent to the Western Front in Europe, where they took part in major battles of the war. A small number of Rhodesian soldiers saw action in the Salonika Front in Macedonia, and some even joined the Royal Flying Corps. Other Rhodesian regiments were sent to participate in the invasion of German East Africa, now Tanzania, in early 1915. A guerrilla war in the German colony began, and the fierce fighting and disease devastated the 2nd Rhodesian Regiment, leading to more regiments of native Africans being raised. By November 1918, the Central Powers surrendered to the Allies, ending World War I.

Southern Rhodesia became a self-governing British colony in October 1923, subsequent to a referendum held the previous year. The British government took full command of the British South Africa Company&#x27;s holdings, including both Northern and Southern Rhodesia. Northern Rhodesia retained its status as a colonial protectorate; Southern Rhodesia was given responsible self-government – with limitations and still annexed to the crown as a colony. Many studies of the country see it as a state that operated independently within the Commonwealth; nominally under the rule of the Crown, but technically able to do as it pleased. And in theory, Southern Rhodesia was able to govern itself, draft its own legislation, and elect its own parliamentary leaders. But in reality, this was self-government subject to supervision. Until the white minority settler government&#x27;s declaration of unilateral independence in 1965, London remained in control of the colony&#x27;s external affairs, and all legislation was subject to approval from the United Kingdom Government and the Queen.

In 1930, the Land Apportionment Act divided rural land along racial lines, creating four types of land: white-owned land that could not be acquired by Africans; purchase areas for those Africans who could afford to purchase land; Tribal Trust Lands designated as the African reserves; and Crown lands owned by the state, reserved for future use and public parks. Fifty one percent of the land was given to approximately 50,000 white inhabitants, with 29.8 per cent left for over a million Africans.

Many Rhodesians served on behalf of the United Kingdom during World War II, mainly in the East African Campaign against Axis forces in Italian East Africa.

In 1953, the British government consolidated the two colonies of Rhodesia with Nyasaland (now Malawi) in the ill-fated Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland which was dominated by Southern Rhodesia. This move was heavily opposed by the residents of Nyasaland, who feared coming under the domination of white Rhodesians. In 1962, however, with growing African nationalism and general dissent, the British government declared that Nyasaland had the right to secede from the Federation; soon afterwards, they said the same for Northern Rhodesia.

After African-majority governments had assumed control in neighbouring Northern Rhodesia and in Nyasaland, the white-minority Southern Rhodesian government led by Ian Smith made a Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI) from the United Kingdom on 11 November 1965. The United Kingdom deemed this an act of rebellion, but did not re-establish control by force. The white minority government declared itself a republic in 1970. A civil war ensued, with Joshua Nkomo&#x27;s ZAPU and Robert Mugabe&#x27;s ZANU using assistance from the governments of Zambia and Mozambique. Although Smith&#x27;s declaration was not recognised by the United Kingdom nor any other foreign power, Southern Rhodesia dropped the designation &quot;Southern&quot;, and claimed nation status as the Republic of Rhodesia in 1970 although this was not recognised internationally.

==Independence and the 1980s==
The country gained official independence as Zimbabwe on 18 April 1980. The government held independence celebrations in Rufaro stadium in Salisbury, the capital. Lord Christopher Soames, the last Governor of Southern Rhodesia, watched as Charles, Prince of Wales, gave a farewell salute and the Rhodesian Signal Corps played &quot;God Save the Queen&quot;. Many foreign dignitaries also attended, including Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India, President Shehu Shagari of Nigeria, President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, President Seretse Khama of Botswana, and Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser of Australia, representing the Commonwealth of Nations. Bob Marley sang &#x27;Zimbabwe&#x27;, a song he wrote, at the government&#x27;s invitation in a concert at the country&#x27;s independence festivities.

President Shagari pledged $15 million at the celebration to train Zimbabweans in Zimbabwe and expatriates in Nigeria. Mugabe&#x27;s government used part of the money to buy newspaper companies owned by South Africans, increasing the government&#x27;s control over the media. The rest went to training students in Nigerian universities, government workers in the Administrative Staff College of Nigeria in Badagry, and soldiers in the Nigerian Defence Academy in Kaduna. Later that year Mugabe commissioned a report by the BBC on press freedom in Zimbabwe. The BBC issued its report on 26 June, recommending the privatisation of the Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation and its independence from political interests.

Mugabe&#x27;s government changed the capital&#x27;s name from Salisbury to Harare on 18 April 1982 in celebration of the second anniversary of independence. The government renamed the main street in the capital, Jameson Avenue, in honour of Samora Machel, President of Mozambique.

In 1992, a World Bank study indicated that more than 500 health centres had been built since 1980. The percentage of children vaccinated increased from 25% in 1980 to 67% in 1988 and life expectancy increased from 55 to 59 years. Enrollment increased by 232 per cent one year after primary education was made free and secondary school enrolment increased by 33 per cent in two years. These social policies lead to an increase in the debt ratio. Several laws were passed in the 1980s in an attempt to reduce wage gaps. However, the gaps remained considerable. In 1988, the law gave women, at least in theory, the same rights as men. Previously, they could only take a few personal initiatives without the consent of their father or husband.

The new Constitution provided for an executive President as Head of State with a Prime Minister as Head of Government. Reverend Canaan Banana served as the first President. In government amended the Constitution in 1987 to provide for an Executive President and abolished the office of Prime Minister. The constitutional changes came into effect on 1 January 1988 with Robert Mugabe as president. The bicameral Parliament of Zimbabwe had a directly elected House of Assembly and an indirectly elected Senate, partly made up of tribal chiefs. The Constitution established two separate voters rolls, one for the black majority, who had 80% of the seats in Parliament, and the other for whites and other ethnic minorities, such as Coloureds, people of mixed race, and Asians, who held 20%. The government amended the Constitution in 1986, eliminating the voter rolls and replacing the white seats with seats filled by nominated members. Many white MPs joined ZANU which then reappointed them. In 1990 the government abolished the Senate and increased the House of Assembly&#x27;s membership to include members nominated by the President.

Prime Minister Mugabe kept Peter Walls, the head of the army, in his government and put him in charge of integrating the Zimbabwe People&#x27;s Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA), Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army (ZANLA), and the Rhodesian Army. While Western media outlets praised Mugabe&#x27;s efforts at reconciliation with the white minority, tension soon developed. On 17 March 1980, after several unsuccessful assassination attempts Mugabe asked Walls, &quot;Why are your men trying to kill me?&quot; Walls replied, &quot;If they were my men you would be dead.&quot; BBC News interviewed Walls on 11 August 1980. He told the BBC that he had asked British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to annul the 1980 election prior to the official announcement of the result on the grounds that Mugabe used intimidation to win the election. Walls said Thatcher had not replied to his request. On 12 August British government officials denied that they had not responded, saying Antony Duff, Deputy Governor of Salisbury, told Walls on 3 March that Thatcher would not annul the election.

Minister of Information Nathan Shamuyarira said the government would not be &quot;held ransom by racial misfits&quot; and told &quot;all those Europeans who do not accept the new order to pack their bags.&quot; He also said the government continued to consider taking &quot;legal or administrative action&quot; against Walls. Mugabe, returning from a visit with United States President Jimmy Carter in New York City, said, &quot;One thing is quite clear—we are not going to have disloyal characters in our society.&quot; Walls returned to Zimbabwe after the interview, telling Peter Hawthorne of &quot;Time&quot; magazine, &quot;To stay away at this time would have appeared like an admission of guilt.&quot; Mugabe drafted legislation that would exile Walls from Zimbabwe for life and Walls moved to South Africa.

Ethnic divisions soon came back to the forefront of national politics. Tension between ZAPU and ZANU erupted with guerrilla activity starting again in Matabeleland in south-western Zimbabwe. Nkomo (ZAPU) left for exile in Britain and did not return until Mugabe guaranteed his safety. In 1982 government security officials discovered large caches of arms and ammunition on properties owned by ZAPU, accusing Nkomo and his followers of plotting to overthrow the government. Mugabe fired Nkomo and his closest aides from the cabinet. Seven MPs, members of the Rhodesian Front, left Smith&#x27;s party to sit as &quot;independents&quot; on 4 March 1982, signifying their dissatisfaction with his policies. As a result of what they saw as persecution of Nkomo and his party, PF-ZAPU supporters, army deserters began a campaign of dissidence against the government. Centring primarily in Matabeleland, home of the Ndebeles who were at the time PF-ZAPU&#x27;s main followers, this dissidence continued through 1987. It involved attacks on government personnel and installations, armed banditry aimed at disrupting security and economic life in the rural areas, and harassment of ZANU-PF members.

Because of the unsettled security situation immediately after independence and democratic sentiments, the government kept in force a &quot;state of emergency&quot;. This gave the government widespread powers under the &quot;Law and Order Maintenance Act,&quot; including the right to detain persons without charge which it used quite widely. In 1983 to 1984 the government declared a curfew in areas of Matabeleland and sent in the army in an attempt to suppress members of the Ndebele tribe. The pacification campaign, known as the Gukuruhundi, or strong wind, resulted in at least 20,000 civilian deaths perpetrated by an elite, North Korean-trained brigade, known in Zimbabwe as the Gukurahundi.

ZANU-PF increased its majority in the 1985 elections, winning 67 of the 100 seats. The majority gave Mugabe the opportunity to start making changes to the constitution, including those with regard to land restoration. Fighting did not cease until Mugabe and Nkomo reached an agreement in December 1987 whereby ZAPU became part of ZANU-PF and the government changed the constitution to make Mugabe the country&#x27;s first executive president and Nkomo one of two vice-presidents.

==1990s==
Elections in March 1990 resulted in another overwhelming victory for Mugabe and his party, which won 117 of the 120 election seats. Election observers estimated voter turnout at only 54% and found the campaign neither free nor fair, though balloting met international standards. Unsatisfied with a &quot;de facto&quot; one-party state, Mugabe called on the ZANU-PF Central Committee to support the creation of a &quot;de jure&quot; one-party state in September 1990 and lost. The government began further amending the constitution. The judiciary and human rights advocates fiercely criticised the first amendments enacted in April 1991 because they restored corporal and capital punishment and denied recourse to the courts in cases of compulsory purchase of land by the government. The general health of the civilian population also began to significantly flounder and by 1997 25% of the population of Zimbabwe had been infected by HIV, the AIDS virus.

During the 1990s students, trade unionists, and workers often demonstrated to express their discontent with the government. Students protested in 1990 against proposals for an increase in government control of universities and again in 1991 and 1992 when they clashed with police. Trade unionists and workers also criticised the government during this time. In 1992 police prevented trade unionists from holding anti-government demonstrations. In 1994 widespread industrial unrest weakened the economy. In 1996 civil servants, nurses, and junior doctors went on strike over salary issues.

On 9 December 1997 a national strike paralysed the country. Mugabe was panicked by demonstrations by ZANLA ex-combatants, war veterans, who had been the heart of incursions 20 years earlier in the Bush War. He agreed to pay them large gratuities and pensions, which proved to be a wholly unproductive and unbudgeted financial commitment. The discontent with the government spawned draconian government crackdowns which in turn started to destroy both the fabric of the state and of society. This in turn brought with it further discontent within the population. Thus a vicious downward spiral commenced.

Although many whites had left Zimbabwe after independence, mainly for neighbouring South Africa, those who remained continued to wield disproportionate control of some sectors of the economy, especially agriculture. In the late-1990s whites accounted for less than 1% of the population but owned 70% of arable land. Mugabe raised this issue of land ownership by white farmers. In a calculated move, he began forcible land redistribution, which brought the government into headlong conflict with the International Monetary Fund. Amid a severe drought in the region, the police and military were instructed not to stop the invasion of white-owned farms by the so-called &#x27;war veterans&#x27; and youth militia. This led to a mass migration of White Zimbabweans out of Zimbabwe. At present almost no arable land is in the possession of white farmers.

===The economy during the 1980s and 1990s===

The economy was run along corporatist lines with strict governmental controls on all aspects of the economy. Controls were placed on wages, prices and massive increases in government spending resulting in significant budget deficits. This experiment met with very mixed results and Zimbabwe fell further behind the first world and unemployment. Some market reforms in the 1990s were attempted. A 40 per cent devaluation of the Zimbabwean dollar was allowed to occur and price and wage controls were removed. These policies also failed at that time. Growth, employment, wages, and social service spending contracted sharply, inflation did not improve, the deficit remained well above target, and many industrial firms, notably in textiles and footwear, closed in response to increased competition and high real interest rates. The incidence of poverty in the country increased during this time.

==1999 to 2000==

However, Zimbabwe began experiencing a period of considerable political and economic upheaval in 1999. Opposition to President Mugabe and the ZANU-PF government grew considerably after the mid-1990s in part due to worsening economic and human rights conditions brought about by the seizure of farmland owned by white farmers and economic sanctions imposed by Western countries in response. The Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) was established in September 1999 as an opposition party founded by trade unionist Morgan Tsvangirai.

The MDC&#x27;s first opportunity to test opposition to the Mugabe government came in February 2000, when a referendum was held on a draft constitution proposed by the government. Among its elements, the new constitution would have permitted President Mugabe to seek two additional terms in office, granted government officials immunity from prosecution, and authorised government seizure of white-owned land. The referendum was handily defeated. Shortly thereafter, the government, through a loosely organised group of war veterans, some of the so-called war veterans judging from their age were not war veterans as they were too young to have fought in the chimurenga, sanctioned an aggressive land redistribution program often characterised by forced expulsion of white farmers and violence against both farmers and farm employees.

Parliamentary elections held in June 2000 were marred by localised violence, electoral irregularities, and government intimidation of opposition supporters. Nonetheless, the MDC succeeded in capturing 57 of 120 seats in the National Assembly.

==2002==
Presidential elections were held in March 2002. In the months leading up to the poll, ZANU-PF, with the support of the army, security services, and especially the so-called &#x27;war veterans&#x27;, – very few of whom actually fought in the Second Chimurenga against the Smith regime in the 1970s – set about wholesale intimidation and suppression of the MDC-led opposition. Despite strong international criticism, these measures, together with organised subversion of the electoral process, ensured a Mugabe victory . The government&#x27;s behaviour drew strong criticism from the EU and the US, which imposed limited sanctions against the leading members of the Mugabe regime. Since the 2002 election, Zimbabwe has suffered further economic difficulty and growing political chaos.

==2003–2005==
Divisions within the opposition MDC had begun to fester early in the decade, after Morgan Tsvangirai (the president of the MDC) was lured into a government sting operation that videotaped him talking of Mr. Mugabe&#x27;s removal from power. He was subsequently arrested and put on trial on treason charges. This crippled his control of party affairs and raised questions about his competence. It also catalysed a major split within the party. In 2004 he was acquitted, but not until after suffering serious abuse and mistreatment in prison. The opposing faction was led by Welshman Ncube who was the general secretary of the party. In mid-2004, vigilantes loyal to Mr. Tsvangirai began attacking members who were mostly loyal to Ncube, climaxing in a September raid on the party&#x27;s Harare headquarters in which the security director was nearly thrown to his death.

An internal party inquiry later established that aides to Tsvangirai had tolerated, if not endorsed, the violence. Divisive as the violence was, it was a debate over the rule of law that set off the party&#x27;s final break-up in November 2005. These division severely weakened the opposition. In addition the government employed its own operatives to both spy on each side and to undermine each side via acts of espionage. Zimbabwean parliamentary election, 2005 were held in March 2005 in which ZANU-PF won a two-thirds majority, were again criticised by international observers as being flawed. Mugabe&#x27;s political operatives were thus able to weaken the opposition internally and the security apparatus of the state was able to destabilise it externally by using violence in anti-Mugabe strongholds to prevent citizens from voting. Some voters were &#x27;turned away&#x27; from polling station despite having proper identification, further guaranteeing that the government could control the results. Additionally Mugabe had started to appoint judges sympathetic to the government, making any judicial appeal futile. Mugabe was also able to appoint 30 of the members of parliament.

As Senate elections approached further opposition splits occurred. Ncube&#x27;s supporters argued that the M.D.C. should field a slate of candidates; Tsvangirai&#x27;s argued for a boycott. When party leaders voted on the issue, Ncube&#x27;s side narrowly won, but Mr. Tsvangirai declared that as president of the party he was not bound by the majority&#x27;s decision. Again the opposition was weakened. As a result, the elections for a new Senate in November 2005 were largely boycotted by the opposition. Mugabe&#x27;s party won 24 of the 31 constituencies where elections were held amid low voter turnout. Again, evidence surfaced of voter intimidation and fraud. 

In May 2005 the government began Operation Murambatsvina. It was officially billed to rid urban areas of illegal structures, illegal business enterprises, and criminal activities. In practice its purpose was to punish political opponents. The UN estimates 700,000 people have been left without jobs or homes as a result. Families and traders, especially at the beginning of the operation, were often given no notice before police destroyed their homes and businesses. Others were able to salvage some possessions and building materials but often had nowhere to go, despite the government&#x27;s statement that people should be returning to their rural homes. Thousands of families were left unprotected in the open in the middle of Zimbabwe&#x27;s winter., . The government interfered with non-governmental organisation (NGO) efforts to provide emergency assistance to the displaced in many instances. Some families were removed to transit camps, where they had no shelter or cooking facilities and minimal food, supplies, and sanitary facilities. The operation continued into July 2005, when the government began a program to provide housing for the newly displaced.

Human Rights Watch said the evictions had disrupted treatment for people with HIV/AIDS in a country where 3,000 die from the disease each week and about 1.3 million children have been orphaned. The operation was &quot;the latest manifestation of a massive human rights problem that has been going on for years&quot;, said Amnesty International. As of September 2006, housing construction fell far short of demand, and there were reports that beneficiaries were mostly civil servants and ruling party loyalists, not those displaced. The government campaign of forced evictions continued in 2006, albeit on a lesser scale.

In September 2005 Mugabe signed constitutional amendments that reinstituted a national senate (abolished in 1987) and that nationalised all land. This converted all ownership rights into leases. The amendments also ended the right of landowners to challenge government expropriation of land in the courts and marked the end of any hope of returning any land that had been hitherto grabbed by armed land invasions. Elections for the senate in November resulted in a victory for the government. The MDC split over whether to field candidates and partially boycotted the vote. In addition to low turnout there was widespread government intimidation. The split in the MDC hardened into factions, each of which claimed control of the party. The early months of 2006 were marked by food shortages and mass hunger. The sheer extremity of the siltation was revealed by the fact that in the courts, state witnesses said they were too weak from hunger to testify.

==2006 to 2007==
In August 2006 runaway inflation forced the government to replace its existing currency with a revalued one. In December 2006, ZANU-PF proposed the &quot;harmonisation&quot; of the parliamentary and presidential election schedules in 2010; the move was seen by the opposition as an excuse to extend Mugabe&#x27;s term as president until 2010.

Morgan Tsvangirai was badly beaten on 12 March 2007 after being arrested and held at Machipisa Police Station in the Highfield suburb of Harare. The event garnered an international outcry and was considered particularly brutal and extreme, even considering the reputation of Mugabe&#x27;s government. Kolawole Olaniyan, Director of Amnesty International&#x27;s Africa Programme said &quot;We are very concerned by reports of continuing brutal attacks on opposition activists in Zimbabwe and call on the government to stop all acts of violence and intimidation against opposition activists&quot;.

The economy has shrunk by 50% from 2000 to 2007. In September 2007 the inflation rate was put at almost 8,000%, the world&#x27;s highest. There are frequent power and water outages. Harare&#x27;s drinking water became unreliable in 2006 and as a consequence dysentery and cholera swept the city in December 2006 and January 2007. Unemployment in formal jobs is running at a record 80%. There was widespread hunger, manipulated by the government so that opposition strongholds suffer the most. Availability of bread was severely constrained after a poor wheat harvest and the closure of all bakeries.

The country, which used to be one of Africa&#x27;s richest, became one of its poorest. Many observers now view the country as a &#x27;failed state&#x27;. The settlement of the Second Congo War brought back Zimbabwe&#x27;s substantial military commitment, although some troops remain to secure the mining assets under their control. The government lacks the resources or machinery to deal with the ravages of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, which affects 25% of the population. With all this and the forced and violent removal of white farmers in a brutal land redistribution program, Mugabe has earned himself widespread scorn from the international arena.

The regime has managed to cling to power by creating wealthy enclaves for government ministers, and senior party members. For example, Borrowdale Brook, a suburb of Harare is an oasis of wealth and privilege. It features mansions, manicured lawns, full shops with fully stocked shelves containing an abundance of fruit and vegetables, big cars and a golf club give is the home to President Mugabe&#x27;s out-of-town retreat.

Zimbabwe&#x27;s bakeries shut down in October 2007 and supermarkets warned that they would have no bread for the foreseeable future due to collapse in wheat production after the seizure of white-owned farms. The ministry of agriculture has also blamed power shortages for the wheat shortfall, saying that electricity cuts have affected irrigation and halved crop yields per acre. The power shortages are because Zimbabwe relies on Mozambique for some of its electricity and that due to an unpaid bill of $35 million Mozambique had reduced the amount of electrical power it supplies. On 4 December 2007, The United States imposed travel sanctions against 38 people with ties to President Mugabe because they &quot;played a central role in the regime&#x27;s escalated human rights abuses.&quot;

On 8 December 2007, Mugabe attended a meeting of EU and African leaders in Lisbon, prompting UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown to decline to attend. While German chancellor Angela Merkel criticised Mugabe with her public comments, the leaders of other African countries offered him statements of support.

===Deterioration of the educational system===
The educational system in Zimbabwe, which was once regarded as among the best in Africa, went into crisis in 2007 because of the country&#x27;s economic meltdown. One foreign reporter witnessed hundreds of children at Hatcliffe Extension Primary School in Epworth, west of Harare, writing in the dust on the floor because they had no exercise books or pencils. The high school exam system unravelled in 2007. Examiners refused to mark examination papers when they were offered just Z$79 a paper, enough to buy three small candies. Corruption has crept into the system and may explain why in January 2007 thousands of pupils received no marks for subjects they had entered, while others were deemed &quot;excellent&quot; in subjects they had not sat. However, as of late the education system has recovered and is still considered the best in Southern Africa.

==2008==

===2008 elections===

Zimbabwe held a presidential election along with a 2008 parliamentary election of 29 March. The three major candidates were incumbent President Robert Mugabe of the Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF), Morgan Tsvangirai of the Movement for Democratic Change – Tsvangirai (MDC-T), and Simba Makoni, an independent. As no candidate received an outright majority in the first round, a second round was held on 27 June 2008 between Tsvangirai (with 47.9% of the first round vote) and Mugabe (43.2%). Tsvangirai withdrew from the second round a week before it was scheduled to take place, citing violence against his party&#x27;s supporters. The second round went ahead, despite widespread criticism, and led to victory for Mugabe.

Because of Zimbabwe&#x27;s dire economic situation the election was expected to provide President Mugabe with his toughest electoral challenge to date. Mugabe&#x27;s opponents were critical of the handling of the electoral process, and the government was accused of planning to rig the election; Human Rights Watch said that the election was likely to be &quot;deeply flawed&quot;. After the first round, but before the counting was completed, Jose Marcos Barrica, the head of the Southern African Development Community observer mission, described the election as &quot;a peaceful and credible expression of the will of the people of Zimbabwe.&quot;

No official results were announced for more than a month after the first round. The failure to release results was strongly criticised by the MDC, which unsuccessfully sought an order from the High Court to force their release. An independent projection placed Tsvangirai in the lead, but without the majority needed to avoid a second round. The MDC declared that Tsvangirai won a narrow majority in the first round and initially refused to participate in any second round. ZANU-PF has said that Mugabe will participate in a second round; the party alleged that some electoral officials, in connection with the MDC, fraudulently reduced Mugabe&#x27;s score, and as a result a recount was conducted.

After the recount and the verification of the results, the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC) announced on 2 May that Tsvangirai won 47.9% and Mugabe won 43.2%, thereby necessitating a run-off, which was to be held on 27 June 2008. Despite Tsvangirai&#x27;s continuing claims to have won a first round majority, he refused to participate in the second round. The period following the first round was marked by serious political violence caused by ZANU-PF. ZANU-PF blamed the MDC supporters for perpetrating this violence; Western governments and prominent Western organisations have blamed ZANU-PF for the violence which seems very likely to be true. On 22 June 2008, Tsvangirai announced that he was withdrawing from the run-off, describing it as a &quot;violent sham&quot; and saying that his supporters risked being killed if they voted for him. The second round nevertheless went ahead as planned with Mugabe as the only actively participating candidate, although Tsvangirai&#x27;s name remained on the ballot. Mugabe won the second round by an overwhelming margin and was sworn in for another term as president on 29 June.

The international reaction to the second round have varied. The United States and states of the European Union have called for increased sanctions. On 11 July, the United Nations Security Council voted to impose sanctions on the Zimbabwe; Russia and China vetoed. The African Union has called for a &quot;government of national unity.&quot;

Preliminary talks to set up conditions for official negotiations began between leading negotiators from both parties on 10 July, and on 22 July, the three party leaders met for the first time in Harare to express their support for a negotiated settlement of disputes arising out of the presidential and parliamentary elections. Negotiations between the parties officially began on 25 July and are currently proceeding with very few details released from the negotiation teams in Pretoria, as coverage by the media is barred from the premises where the negotiations are taking place. The talks were mediated by South African President Thabo Mbeki.

On 15 September 2008, the leaders of the 14-member Southern African Development Community witnessed the signing of the power-sharing agreement, brokered by South African leader Thabo Mbeki. With symbolic handshake and warm smiles at the Rainbow Towers hotel, in Harare, Mugabe and Tsvangirai signed the deal to end the violent political crisis. As provided, Robert Mugabe will remain president, Morgan Tsvangirai will become prime minister, ZANU-PF and the MDC will share control of the police, Mugabe&#x27;s Zanu (PF) will command the Army, and Arthur Mutambara becomes deputy prime minister.

===Marange diamond fields massacre===
In November 2008 the Air Force of Zimbabwe was sent, after some police officers began refusing orders to shoot the illegal miners at Marange diamond fields. Up to 150 of the estimated 30,000 illegal miners were shot from helicopter gunships. In 2008 some Zimbabwean lawyers and opposition politicians from Mutare claimed that Shiri was the prime mover behind the military assaults on illegal diggers in the diamond mines in the east of Zimbabwe. Estimates of the death toll by mid-December range from 83 reported by the Mutare City Council, based on a request for burial ground, to 140 estimated by the (then) opposition Movement for Democratic Change - Tsvangirai party.

==2009 to present==
===2009–2017===
In January 2009, Morgan Tsvangirai announced that he would do as the leaders across Africa had insisted and join a coalition government as prime minister with his nemesis, President Robert Mugabe . On 11 February 2009 Tsvangirai was sworn in as the Prime Minister of Zimbabwe. By 2009 inflation had peaked at 500 billion % per year under the Mugabe government and the Zimbabwe currency was worthless. The opposition shared power with the Mugabe regime between 2009 and 2013, Zimbabwe switched to using the US dollar as currency and the economy improved reaching a growth rate of 10% per year.

In 2013 the Mugabe government won an election which The Economist described as &quot;rigged,&quot; doubled the size of the civil service and embarked on &quot;...misrule and dazzling corruption.&quot; However, the United Nations, African Union and SADC endorsed the elections as free and fair.

By 2016 the economy had collapsed, nationwide protests took place throughout the country and the finance minister admitted &quot;Right now we literally have nothing.&quot;
There was the introduction of bond notes to literally fight the biting cash crisis and liquidity crunch. Special Historical bonds was created to help the economy but never seen the light and was kept by the then President Robert Mugabe. Cash became scarce on the market in the year 2017.

On Wednesday 15 November 2017 the military placed President Mugabe under house arrest and removed him from power. The military stated that the president was safe. The military placed tanks around government buildings in Harare and blocked the main road to the airport. Public opinion in the capital favored the dictators removal although they were uncertain about his replacement with another dictatorship. The Times reported that Emmerson Mnangagwa helped to orchestrate the coup. He had recently been sacked by Mr Mugabe so that the path could be smoothed for Grace Mugabe to replace her husband. A Zimbabwean army officer, Major General Sibusiso Moyo, went on television to say the military was targeting &quot;criminals&quot; around President Mugabe but not actively removing the president from power. However the head of the African Union described it as such.

Ugandan writer Charles Onyango-Obbo stated on Twitter &quot;If it looks like a coup, walks like a coup and quacks like a coup, then it&#x27;s a coup&quot;. Naunihal Singh, an assistant professor at the U.S. Naval War College and author of a book on military coups, described the situation in Zimbabwe as a coup. He tweeted that &quot;&#x27;The President is safe&#x27; is a classic coup catch-phrase&quot; of such an event.

Robert Mugabe resigned 21 November 2017. Second Vice-president Phelekezela Mphoko became the Acting President. Former Vice-president and new ZANU-PF -leader, Emmerson Mnangagwa, was sworn in as president on 24 November 2017.

===2018–2019===
General elections were held on 30 July 2018 to elect the president and members of both houses of parliament. Ruling party ZANU-PF won the majority of seats in parliament, incumbent President Emmerson Mnangagwa was declared the winner after receiving 50.8% of votes. The opposition accused the government of rigging the vote. In subsequent riots by MDC supporters, the army opened fire and killed three people, while three others died of their injuries the following day.
In January 2019 following a 130% increase in the price of fuel thousands of Zimbabweans protested and the government responded with a coordinated crackdown that resulted in hundreds of arrests and multiple deaths.

In September 2019, former president Robert Mugabe died in Singapore, aged 95.

In September 2023, Zimbabwe signed control over almost 20% of the country&#x27;s land to the carbon offset company Blue Carbon.

Economic statistics 2021

GDP growth in Zimbabwe is projected to reach 3.9% in 2021, a significant improvement after a two-year recession, according to the World Bank Zimbabwe Economic Update.

=== 2023 Zimbabwean general election ===

In August 2023, President Emmerson Mnangagwa won a second term in an outcome of the election rejected by the opposition and questioned by observers.

==See also==
*History of Africa
*Zimbabwe:
**Land reform in Zimbabwe
**Economic history of Zimbabwe
**Education in Zimbabwe
**Foreign relations of Zimbabwe
**List of presidents of Zimbabwe
**Politics of Zimbabwe
**Prime Minister of Zimbabwe
**Bulawayo history and timeline
** Harare history and timeline
**Years in Zimbabwe
*Rhodesia:
**President of Rhodesia
**Prime Minister of Rhodesia
**Governor of Southern Rhodesia

==References==
==Further reading==
* Bourne, Richard. &quot;Catastrophe: What Went Wrong in Zimbabwe?&quot; (Zed Books 2011). 
* Davoodi, Schoresch &amp; Sow, Adama: Democracy and Peace in Zimbabwe in: EPU Research Papers: Issue 12/08, Stadtschlaining 2008
* Maguwu, Farai: Land Reform, Famine and Environmental Degradation in Zimbabwe in: EPU Research Papers: Issue 06/07, Stadtschlaining 2007
* Michel, Eddie. &quot;The White House and White Africa: Presidential Policy Toward Rhodesia During the UDI Era, 1965-1979&quot; (New York: Routledge, 2019). ; online review
* Mlambo, Alois. &quot;History of Zimbabwe&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2014) 
* Raftopoulos, Brian &amp; Alois Mlambo, Eds. &quot;Becoming Zimbabwe. A History from the Pre-colonial Period to 2008&quot; (Weaver Press, 2009). 
* Scarnecchia, Timothy. &quot;The Urban Roots of Democracy and Political Violence in Zimbabwe: Harare and Highfield, 1940-1964&quot; (Rochester University Press, 2008).
* Sibanda, Eliakim M. &quot;The Zimbabwe African People&#x27;s Union, 1961-87: A Political History of Insurgency in Southern Rhodesia&quot; (2004).

==External links==

*Background Note: Zimbabwe
*Monomotapa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="49" end="57" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="92" end="102" title="San people" label="San people"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="104" end="109" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q98085401" start="241" end="262" title="Kingdom of Mapungubwe" label="Kingdom of Mapungubwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q596092" start="267" end="286" title="Kingdom of Zimbabwe" label="Kingdom of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q918320" start="306" end="334" title="British South Africa Company" label="British South Africa Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="402" end="419" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444955" start="598" end="616" title="Rhodesian Bush War" label="Rhodesian Bush War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801770" start="661" end="686" title="Lancaster House Agreement" label="Lancaster House Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="775" end="789" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995667" start="1172" end="1192" title="Economic instability" label="Economic instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072083" start="1220" end="1228" title="Zimbabwean diaspora" label="emigrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="1332" end="1340" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="1342" end="1359" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q890120" start="1365" end="1382" title="Zimbabwe Rhodesia" label="Zimbabwe Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="1473" end="1485" title="Human" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="1667" end="1677" title="San people" label="San people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144585" start="2300" end="2304" title="Ziwa" label="Ziwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534480" start="2309" end="2317" title="Gokomere" label="Gokomere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904660" start="3846" end="3861" title="Shona languages" label="Shona languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070921" start="4171" end="4176" title="Nyasa languages" label="Nyasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q961559" start="5118" end="5123" title="Nguni languages" label="Nguni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038386" start="5125" end="5137" title="Sotho-Tswana languages" label="Sotho-Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="5139" end="5145" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="5642" end="5649" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q98085401" start="5892" end="5913" title="Kingdom of Mapungubwe" label="Kingdom of Mapungubwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="6072" end="6077" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q596092" start="6169" end="6188" title="Kingdom of Zimbabwe" label="Kingdom of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q209217" start="6354" end="6368" title="Great Zimbabwe" label="Great Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q854468" start="6407" end="6424" title="Kingdom of Mutapa" label="Kingdom of Mutapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="6522" end="6532" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q854468" start="6574" end="6587" title="Mutapa Empire" label="Mutapa Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="6656" end="6661" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="6670" end="6680" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6682" end="6699" title="António Fernandes (explorer)" label="António Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361151" start="6760" end="6766" title="Sofala" label="Sofala"/>
<link wikidata="Q760720" start="6787" end="6794" title="Manyika" label="Manyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q986822" start="7178" end="7190" title="Rozvi Empire" label="Rozvi Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q129962" start="7595" end="7599" title="Zulu people" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249008" start="7608" end="7617" title="Mzilikazi" label="Mzilikazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27695" start="7670" end="7675" title="Shaka" label="Shaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211360" start="7706" end="7713" title="Ndebele people (Zimbabwe)" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="7764" end="7773" title="South African Republic" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q865081" start="7880" end="7887" title="Mfecane" label="Mfecane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="7894" end="7898" title="Boer" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q338949" start="7899" end="7907" title="Great Trek" label="trekkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266775" start="8154" end="8166" title="Matabeleland" label="Matabeleland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193250" start="8181" end="8189" title="Bulawayo" label="Bulawayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388326" start="8284" end="8289" title="kraal" label="kraal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390927" start="9294" end="9303" title="Lobengula" label="Lobengula"/>
<link wikidata="Q120531911" start="9779" end="9794" title="diamond magnate" label="diamond magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825" start="9795" end="9807" title="Cecil Rhodes" label="Cecil Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q918320" start="9814" end="9842" title="British South Africa Company" label="British South Africa Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="9909" end="9926" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376831" start="9982" end="9995" title="Rudd Concession" label="mining rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390927" start="10001" end="10015" title="Lobengula" label="King Lobengula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211360" start="10023" end="10030" title="Ndebele people (Zimbabwe)" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="10095" end="10113" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="10125" end="10138" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266775" start="10180" end="10192" title="Matabeleland" label="Matabeleland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640913" start="10225" end="10236" title="Mashonaland" label="Mashonaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="10331" end="10344" title="Limpopo River" label="Limpopo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511" start="10349" end="10364" title="Lake Tanganyika" label="Lake Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="10580" end="10585" title="Mining" label="mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q87769621" start="10600" end="10607" title="Diamond mine" label="extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="10612" end="10619" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10674" end="10688" title="The Rhodesias#Origin of the name &amp;#x27;Rhodesia&amp;#x27;" label="Rhodesia&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="10762" end="10779" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953903" start="10963" end="10980" title="Northern Rhodesia" label="Northern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="10986" end="10992" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4516015" start="11040" end="11050" title="Chimurenga" label="Chimurenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="11285" end="11293" title="European ethnic groups" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="11804" end="11819" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12572" end="12583" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="12617" end="12631" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="12789" end="12802" title="German Empire" label="German colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="12806" end="12823" title="German South West Africa" label="South-West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="12836" end="12843" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393804" start="12880" end="12894" title="Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe" label="Victoria Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="12935" end="12948" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q767368" start="13046" end="13062" title="Maritz rebellion" label="Maritz Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q704886" start="13107" end="13143" title="South West Africa campaign" label="invasion of German South-West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="13268" end="13281" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262377" start="13398" end="13412" title="Macedonian front" label="Salonika Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="13416" end="13425" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="13452" end="13470" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q705571" start="13530" end="13541" title="East African campaign (World War I)" label="invasion of"/>
<link wikidata="Q153963" start="13542" end="13560" title="German East Africa" label="German East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="13566" end="13574" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448101" start="13881" end="13895" title="self-governing colony" label="self-governing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="13896" end="13910" title="British Empire" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="14432" end="14441" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="15443" end="15452" title="Rhodesian" label="Rhodesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15500" end="15512" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="15528" end="15549" title="East African Campaign (World War II)" label="East African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="15558" end="15562" title="Axis powers of World War II" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q328478" start="15573" end="15592" title="Italian East Africa" label="Italian East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649306" start="15674" end="15683" title="Nyasaland" label="Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="15689" end="15695" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q654342" start="15714" end="15750" title="Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland" label="Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874021" start="15945" end="15964" title="African nationalism" label="African nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q953903" start="16209" end="16226" title="Northern Rhodesia" label="Northern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649306" start="16234" end="16243" title="Nyasaland" label="Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869224" start="16249" end="16263" title="white minority rule" label="white-minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q313424" start="16301" end="16310" title="Ian Smith" label="Ian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321053" start="16318" end="16362" title="Unilateral Declaration of Independence (Rhodesia)" label="Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q470290" start="16594" end="16606" title="Joshua Nkomo" label="Joshua Nkomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203423" start="16614" end="16618" title="ZAPU" label="ZAPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="16623" end="16636" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q203427" start="16644" end="16648" title="ZANU" label="ZANU"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="16690" end="16696" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="16701" end="16711" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="16914" end="16934" title="Rhodesia" label="Republic of Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="17069" end="17077" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="17163" end="17172" title="Harare" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q336050" start="17192" end="17210" title="Christopher Soames" label="Christopher Soames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589719" start="17221" end="17250" title="Governor of Southern Rhodesia" label="Governor of Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="17263" end="17287" title="Charles III of the United Kingdom" label="Charles, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="17356" end="17374" title="God Save the Queen" label="God Save the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="17447" end="17460" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q380668" start="17481" end="17494" title="Shehu Shagari" label="Shehu Shagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q105480" start="17517" end="17531" title="Kenneth Kaunda" label="Kenneth Kaunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q219962" start="17553" end="17566" title="Seretse Khama" label="Seretse Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="17599" end="17613" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="17645" end="17668" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="17670" end="17680" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="17917" end="17928" title="expatriates" label="expatriates"/>
<link wikidata="Q798812" start="18228" end="18235" title="Badagry" label="Badagry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208318" start="18285" end="18291" title="Kaduna (city)" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="18352" end="18365" title="press freedom" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="18612" end="18618" title="Harare" label="Harare"/>
<link wikidata="Q219918" start="18778" end="18791" title="Samora Machel" label="Samora Machel"/>
<link wikidata="Q384419" start="18793" end="18816" title="President of Mozambique" label="President of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q313711" start="19688" end="19701" title="Canaan Banana" label="Canaan Banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083905" start="19971" end="19993" title="Parliament of Zimbabwe" label="Parliament of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="20288" end="20296" title="Coloured" label="Coloured"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177572" start="20723" end="20734" title="Peter Walls" label="Peter Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426171" start="20817" end="20858" title="Zimbabwe People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army" label="Zimbabwe People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570814" start="20868" end="20909" title="Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army" label="Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321070" start="20927" end="20941" title="Rhodesian Army" label="Rhodesian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995667" start="21028" end="21042" title="Whites in Zimbabwe" label="white minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="21270" end="21278" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="21350" end="21372" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="British Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="21373" end="21390" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q708430" start="21670" end="21681" title="Antony Duff" label="Antony Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966640" start="21804" end="21822" title="Nathan Shamuyarira" label="Nathan Shamuyarira"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="22166" end="22178" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="22382" end="22386" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266775" start="22747" end="22759" title="Matabeleland" label="Matabeleland"/>
<link wikidata="Q490844" start="24473" end="24484" title="Gukurahundi" label="Gukurahundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="25139" end="25152" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="25297" end="25312" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="25396" end="25403" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="25920" end="25930" title="AIDS virus" label="AIDS virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570814" start="26624" end="26629" title="ZANLA" label="ZANLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="27431" end="27442" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317814" start="28243" end="28258" title="budget deficits" label="budget deficits"/>
<link wikidata="Q182803" start="28453" end="28470" title="Zimbabwean dollar" label="Zimbabwean dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="29298" end="29305" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582118" start="29333" end="29363" title="Movement for Democratic Change (pre-2005)" label="Movement for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q57762" start="29453" end="29470" title="Morgan Tsvangirai" label="Morgan Tsvangirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072089" start="30308" end="30349" title="Zimbabwean parliamentary election, 2000" label="Parliamentary elections held in June 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444955" start="30802" end="30819" title="Second Chimurenga" label="Second Chimurenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982050" start="31932" end="31946" title="Welshman Ncube" label="Welshman Ncube"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072090" start="32653" end="32692" title="Zimbabwean parliamentary election, 2005" label="Zimbabwean parliamentary election, 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q444629" start="34122" end="34145" title="Operation Murambatsvina" label="Operation Murambatsvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q57762" start="37196" end="37213" title="Morgan Tsvangirai" label="Morgan Tsvangirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="37528" end="37549" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q392160" start="38528" end="38540" title="failed state" label="failed state"/>
<link wikidata="Q75756" start="38570" end="38586" title="Second Congo War" label="Second Congo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="38815" end="38823" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q567" start="40433" end="40446" title="Angela Merkel" label="Angela Merkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341189" start="40616" end="40646" title="Education in Zimbabwe" label="educational system in Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="41503" end="41511" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154365" start="41554" end="41581" title="Zimbabwean parliamentary election, 2008" label="2008 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="41647" end="41660" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910161" start="41668" end="41717" title="Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front" label="Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q57762" start="41729" end="41746" title="Morgan Tsvangirai" label="Morgan Tsvangirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146616" start="41754" end="41797" title="Movement for Democratic Change – Tsvangirai" label="Movement for Democratic Change – Tsvangirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379403" start="41811" end="41823" title="Simba Makoni" label="Simba Makoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="42551" end="42569" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="42736" end="42774" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071981" start="43665" end="43694" title="Zimbabwe Electoral Commission" label="Zimbabwe Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="43792" end="43799" title="Two-round system" label="run-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849256" start="44740" end="44762" title="International reaction to the Zimbabwean presidential election" label="international reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="44900" end="44931" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370117" start="45121" end="45142" title="2008 Zimbabwean political negotiations" label="official negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="45273" end="45279" title="Harare" label="Harare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="45557" end="45565" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q101547" start="45712" end="45723" title="Thabo Mbeki" label="Thabo Mbeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="45777" end="45815" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q101547" start="45903" end="45914" title="Thabo Mbeki" label="Thabo Mbeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q432934" start="46272" end="46288" title="Arthur Mutambara" label="Arthur Mutambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629562" start="46380" end="46401" title="Air Force of Zimbabwe" label="Air Force of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323024" start="46492" end="46514" title="Marange diamond fields" label="Marange diamond fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q399322" start="46665" end="46671" title="Mutare" label="Mutare"/>
<link wikidata="Q399322" start="46879" end="46898" title="Mutare" label="Mutare City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146616" start="46980" end="47023" title="Movement for Democratic Change - Tsvangirai" label="Movement for Democratic Change - Tsvangirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q19056226" start="47317" end="47343" title="Prime Minister of Zimbabwe" label="Prime Minister of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27284255" start="47992" end="48011" title="2016 Zimbabwe protests" label="nationwide protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q43172549" start="48448" end="48530" title="2017 Zimbabwean coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="the military placed President Mugabe under house arrest and removed him from power"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="48825" end="48834" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q510523" start="48849" end="48867" title="Emmerson Mnangagwa" label="Emmerson Mnangagwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q453364" start="48980" end="48992" title="Grace Mugabe" label="Grace Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="49248" end="49261" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="49331" end="49338" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181212" start="49772" end="49790" title="Phelekezela Mphoko" label="Phelekezela Mphoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q510523" start="49867" end="49885" title="Emmerson Mnangagwa" label="Emmerson Mnangagwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058296" start="49951" end="49994" title="Zimbabwean general election, 2018" label="General elections were held on 30 July 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910161" start="50073" end="50080" title="ZANU-PF" label="ZANU-PF"/>
<link wikidata="Q510523" start="50142" end="50160" title="Emmerson Mnangagwa" label="Emmerson Mnangagwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800088" start="50299" end="50302" title="MDC Alliance" label="MDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q60644669" start="50485" end="50634" title="Zimbabwe fuel protests" label="thousands of Zimbabweans protested and the government responded with a coordinated crackdown that resulted in hundreds of arrests and multiple deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488967" start="50809" end="50822" title="carbon credit" label="carbon offset"/>
<link wikidata="Q127923397" start="50831" end="50842" title="Blue Carbon (company)" label="Blue Carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q112039245" start="51165" end="51173" title="2023 Zimbabwean general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="51245" end="51262" title="History of Africa" label="History of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469058" start="51276" end="51299" title="Land reform in Zimbabwe" label="Land reform in Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333499" start="51302" end="51330" title="Economic history of Zimbabwe" label="Economic history of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341189" start="51333" end="51354" title="Education in Zimbabwe" label="Education in Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468568" start="51357" end="51386" title="Foreign relations of Zimbabwe" label="Foreign relations of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19056184" start="51389" end="51419" title="List of presidents of Zimbabwe" label="List of presidents of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153995" start="51422" end="51442" title="Politics of Zimbabwe" label="Politics of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19056226" start="51445" end="51471" title="Prime Minister of Zimbabwe" label="Prime Minister of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51483" end="51490" title="Bulawayo#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q48781091" start="51495" end="51503" title="Timeline of Bulawayo" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51514" end="51521" title="Harare#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020828" start="51526" end="51534" title="Timeline of Harare" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050980" start="51537" end="51554" title="Years in Zimbabwe" label="Years in Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q584901" start="51568" end="51589" title="President of Rhodesia" label="President of Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348310" start="51592" end="51618" title="Prime Minister of Rhodesia" label="Prime Minister of Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589719" start="51621" end="51650" title="Governor of Southern Rhodesia" label="Governor of Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q875466" start="51854" end="51857" title="European University Center for Peace Studies" label="EPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q875466" start="51992" end="51995" title="European University Center for Peace Studies" label="EPU"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14115" wikidata="Q161414" url="?curid=14115" title="History of Russia">
<text>The history of Russia begins with the histories of the East Slavs. The traditional start date of specifically Russian history is the establishment of the Rus&#x27; state in the north in the year 862, ruled by Varangians. In 882, Prince Oleg of Novgorod seized Kiev, uniting the northern and southern lands of the Eastern Slavs under one authority, moving the governance center to Kiev by the end of the 10th century, and maintaining northern and southern parts with significant autonomy from each other. The state adopted Christianity from the Byzantine Empire in 988, beginning the synthesis of Byzantine, Slavic and Scandinavian cultures that defined Russian culture for the next millennium. Kievan Rus&#x27; ultimately disintegrated as a state due to the Mongol invasions in 1237–1240. After the 13th century, Moscow emerged as a significant political and cultural force, driving the unification of Russian territories. By the end of the 15th century, many of the petty principalities around Moscow had been united with the Grand Duchy of Moscow, which took full control of its own sovereignty under Ivan the Great.

Ivan the Terrible transformed the Grand Duchy into the Tsardom of Russia in 1547. However, the death of Ivan&#x27;s son Feodor I without issue in 1598 created a succession crisis and led Russia into a period of chaos and civil war known as the Time of Troubles, ending with the coronation of Michael Romanov as the first Tsar of the Romanov dynasty in 1613. During the rest of the seventeenth century, Russia completed the exploration and conquest of Siberia, claiming lands as far as the Pacific Ocean by the end of the century. Domestically, Russia faced numerous uprisings of the various ethnic groups under their control, as exemplified by the Cossack leader Stenka Razin, who led a revolt in 1670–1671. In 1721, in the wake of the Great Northern War, Tsar Peter the Great renamed the state as the Russian Empire; he is also noted for establishing St. Petersburg as the new capital of his Empire, and for his introducing Western European culture to Russia. In 1762, Russia came under the control of Catherine the Great, who continued the westernizing policies of Peter the Great, and ushered in the era of the Russian Enlightenment. Catherine&#x27;s grandson, Alexander I, repulsed an invasion by the French Emperor Napoleon, leading Russia into the status of one of the great powers.

Peasant revolts intensified during the nineteenth century, culminating with Alexander II abolishing Russian serfdom in 1861. In the following decades, reform efforts such as the Stolypin reforms of 1906–1914, the constitution of 1906, and the State Duma (1906–1917) attempted to open and liberalize the economy and political system, but the emperors refused to relinquish autocratic rule and resisted sharing their power. A combination of economic breakdown, mismanagement over Russia&#x27;s involvement in World War I, and discontent with the autocratic system of government triggered the Russian Revolution in 1917. The end of the monarchy initially brought into office a coalition of liberals and moderate socialists, but their failed policies led to the October Revolution. In 1922, Soviet Russia, along with the Ukrainian SSR, Byelorussian SSR, and Transcaucasian SFSR signed the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR, officially merging all four republics to form the Soviet Union as a single state. Between 1922 and 1991 the history of Russia essentially became the history of the Soviet Union. During this period, the Soviet Union was one of the victors in World War II after recovering from a surprise invasion in 1941 by Nazi Germany and its collaborators, which had previously signed a non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union&#x27;s network of satellite states in Eastern Europe, which were brought into its sphere of influence in the closing stages of World War II, helped the country become a superpower competing with fellow superpower the United States and other Western countries in the Cold War.

By the mid-1980s, with the weaknesses of Soviet economic and political structures becoming acute, Mikhail Gorbachev embarked on major reforms, which eventually led to the weakening of the communist party and dissolution of the Soviet Union, leaving Russia again on its own and marking the start of the history of post-Soviet Russia. The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic renamed itself as the Russian Federation and became the primary successor state to the Soviet Union. Russia retained its nuclear arsenal but lost its superpower status. Scrapping the central planning and state-ownership of property of the Soviet era in the 1990s, new leaders, led by President Vladimir Putin, took political and economic power after 2000 and engaged in an assertive foreign policy. Coupled with economic growth, Russia has since regained significant global status as a world power. Russia&#x27;s 2014 annexation of the Crimean Peninsula led to economic sanctions imposed by the United States and the European Union. Russia&#x27;s 2022 invasion of Ukraine led to significantly expanded sanctions. Under Putin&#x27;s leadership, corruption in Russia is rated as the worst in Europe, and Russia&#x27;s human rights situation has been increasingly criticized by international observers.

==Prehistory==
The first human settlement on the territory of Russia dates back to the Oldowan period in the early Lower Paleolithic. About 2 million years ago, representatives of &quot;Homo erectus&quot; migrated from Western Asia to the North Caucasus (archaeological site of on the Taman Peninsula). At , in a skull of &quot;Elasmotherium caucasicum&quot;, which lived 1.5–1.2 million years ago, a stone tool was found. 1.5-million-year-old Oldowan flint tools have been discovered in the Dagestan Akusha region of the north Caucasus, demonstrating the presence of early humans in the territory of present-day Russia.

Fossils of Denisovans in Russia date to about 110,000 years ago. DNA from a bone fragment found in Denisova Cave, belonging to a female who died about 90,000 years ago, shows that she was a hybrid of a Neanderthal mother and a Denisovan father. Russia was also home to some of the last surviving Neanderthals - the partial skeleton of a Neanderthal infant in Mezmaiskaya cave in Adygea showed a carbon-dated age of only 45,000 years. In 2008, Russian archaeologists from the Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology of Novosibirsk, working at the site of Denisova Cave in the Altai Mountains of Siberia, uncovered a 40,000-year-old small bone fragment from the fifth finger of a juvenile hominin, which DNA analysis revealed to be a previously unknown species of human, which was named the Denisova hominin.

The first trace of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; on the large expanse of Russian territory dates back to 45,000 years, in central Siberia (Ust&#x27;-Ishim man). The discovery of some of the earliest evidence for the presence of anatomically modern humans found anywhere in Europe was reported in 2007 from the Kostenki archaeological site near the Don River in Russia (dated to at least 40,000 years ago) and at Sungir (34,600 years ago). Humans reached Arctic Russia (Mamontovaya Kurya) by 40,000 years ago.

During the prehistoric eras the vast steppes of Southern Russia were home to tribes of nomadic pastoralists. (In classical antiquity, the Pontic Steppe was known as &quot;Scythia&quot;.) Remnants of these long-gone steppe cultures were discovered in the course of the 20th century in such places as Ipatovo, Sintashta, Arkaim, and Pazyryk.

==Antiquity==
In the later part of the 8th century BC, Greek merchants brought classical civilization to the trade emporiums in Tanais and Phanagoria. Gelonus was described by Herodotus as a huge (Europe&#x27;s biggest) earth- and wood-fortified grad inhabited around 500 BC by Heloni and Budini. In 513 BC, the king of the Achaemenid Empire, Darius I, would launch a military campaign around the Black Sea into Scythia, modern-day Ukraine, eventually reaching the Tanais river (now known as the Don).

Greeks, mostly from the city-state of Miletus, would colonize large parts of modern-day Crimea and the Sea of Azov during the seventh and sixth centuries BC, eventually unifying into the Bosporan Kingdom by 480 BC, and would be incorporated into the large Kingdom of Pontus in 107 BC. The Kingdom would eventually be conquered by the Roman Republic, and the Bosporan Kingdom would become a client state of the Roman Empire. At about the 2nd century AD Goths migrated to the Black Sea, and in the 3rd and 4th centuries AD, a semi-legendary Gothic kingdom of Oium existed in Southern Russia until it was overrun by Huns. Between the 3rd and 6th centuries AD, the Bosporan Kingdom was also overwhelmed by successive waves of nomadic invasions, led by warlike tribes which would often move on to Europe, as was the case with the Huns and Turkish Avars.

In the second millennium BC, the territories between the Kama and the Irtysh Rivers were the home of a Proto-Uralic-speaking population that had contacts with Proto-Indo-European speakers from the south. The woodland population is the ancestor of the modern Ugrian inhabitants of Trans-Uralia. Other researchers say that the Khanty people originated in the south Ural steppe and moved northwards into their current location about 500 AD.

A Turkic people, the Khazars, ruled the lower Volga basin steppes between the Caspian and Black Seas through to the 8th century. Noted for their laws, tolerance, and cosmopolitanism, the Khazars were the main commercial link between the Baltic and the Muslim Abbasid empire centered in Baghdad. They were important allies of the Eastern Roman Empire, and waged a series of successful wars against the Arab Caliphates. In the 8th century, the Khazars embraced Judaism.

==Early history==

===Early Slavs===

Some of the ancestors of the modern Russians were the Slavic tribes, whose original home is thought by some scholars to have been the Pripet Marshes. The Early East Slavs gradually settled Western Russia in two waves: one moving from Kiev (present-day Ukraine) towards present-day Suzdal and Murom and another from Polotsk (present-day Belarus) towards Novgorod and Rostov.

From the 7th century onwards, East Slavs constituted the bulk of the population in Western Russia and slowly conquered and assimilated the native Finnic and Baltic tribes, such as the Merya, the Muromians, and the Meshchera.

===Kievan Rus&#x27; (862–1240)===
Scandinavian Norsemen, known as Vikings in Western Europe and Varangians in the East, combined piracy and trade throughout Northern Europe. In the mid-9th century, they began to venture along the waterways from the eastern Baltic to the Black and Caspian Seas. According to the legendary Calling of the Varangians, recorded in several Rus&#x27; chronicles such as the &quot;Novgorod First Chronicle&quot; and &quot;Primary Chronicle&quot;, the Varangians Rurik, Sineus and Truvor were invited in the 860s to restore order in three towns – either Novgorod (most texts) or Staraya Ladoga (&quot;Hypatian Codex&quot;); Beloozero; and Izborsk (most texts) or &quot;Slovensk&quot; (&quot;Pskov Third Chronicle&quot;), respectively. Their successors allegedly moved south and extended their authority to Kiev, which had been previously dominated by the Khazars.

Thus, the first East Slavic state, Rus&#x27;, emerged in the 9th century along the Dnieper River valley. A coordinated group of princely states with a common interest in maintaining trade along the river routes, Kievan Rus&#x27; controlled the trade route for furs, wax, and slaves between Scandinavia and the Byzantine Empire along the Volkhov and Dnieper Rivers.

By the end of the 10th century, the minority Norse military aristocracy had merged with the native Slavic population, which also absorbed Greek Christian influences in the course of the multiple campaigns to loot Tsargrad, or Constantinople. One such campaign claimed the life of the foremost Slavic druzhina leader, Svyatoslav I, who was renowned for having crushed the power of the Khazars on the Volga.
Kievan Rus&#x27; is important for its introduction of a Slavic variant of the Eastern Orthodox religion, dramatically deepening a synthesis of Byzantine and Slavic cultures that defined Russian culture for the next thousand years. The region adopted Christianity in 988 by the official act of public baptism of Kiev inhabitants by Prince Vladimir I. Some years later the first code of laws, Russkaya Pravda, was introduced by Yaroslav the Wise. From the onset, the Kievan princes followed the Byzantine example and kept the Church dependent on them.

By the 11th century, particularly during the reign of Yaroslav the Wise, Kievan Rus&#x27; displayed an economy and achievements in architecture and literature superior to those that then existed in the western part of the continent. Compared with the languages of European Christendom, the Russian language was little influenced by the Greek and Latin of early Christian writings. This was because Church Slavonic was used directly in liturgy instead.
A nomadic Turkic people, the Kipchaks (also known as the Cumans), replaced the earlier Pechenegs as the dominant force in the south steppe regions neighbouring to Rus&#x27; at the end of the 11th century and founded a nomadic state in the steppes along the Black Sea (Desht-e-Kipchak). Repelling their regular attacks, especially in Kiev, was a heavy burden for the southern areas of Rus&#x27;. The nomadic incursions caused a massive influx of Slavs to the safer, heavily forested regions of the north, particularly to the area known as Zalesye.

Kievan Rus&#x27; ultimately disintegrated as a state because of in-fighting between members of the princely family that ruled it collectively. Kiev&#x27;s dominance waned, to the benefit of Vladimir-Suzdal in the north-east, Novgorod in the north, and Halych-Volhynia in the south-west. Conquest by the Mongol Golden Horde in the 13th century was the final blow. Kiev was destroyed. Halych-Volhynia would eventually be absorbed into the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, while the Mongol-dominated Vladimir-Suzdal and independent Novgorod Republic, two regions on the periphery of Kiev, would establish the basis for the modern Russian nation.

===Mongol invasion and vassalage (1223–1480)===

The invading Mongols accelerated the fragmentation of the Rus&#x27;. In 1223, the disunited southern princes faced a Mongol raiding party at the Kalka River and were soundly defeated. In 1237–1238 the Mongols burnt down the city of Vladimir (4 February 1238) and other major cities of northeast Russia, routed the Russians at the Sit&#x27; River, and then moved west into Poland and Hungary. By then they had conquered most of the Russian principalities. Only the Novgorod Republic escaped occupation and continued to flourish in the orbit of the Hanseatic League.

The impact of the Mongol invasion on the territories of Kievan Rus&#x27; was uneven. The advanced city culture was almost completely destroyed. As older centers such as Kiev and Vladimir never recovered from the devastation of the initial attack, the new cities of Moscow, Tver and Nizhny Novgorod began to compete for hegemony in the Mongol-dominated Rus&#x27; principalities under the suzerainty of the Golden Horde. Although a coalition of Rus&#x27; princes led by Dmitry Donskoy defeated Mongol warlord Mamai at Kulikovo in 1380, forces of the new khan Tokhtamysh and his Rus&#x27; allies immediately sacked Moscow in 1382 as punishment for resisting Mongol authority. Mongol domination of the Rus&#x27; principalities, along with tax collection by various overlords such as the Crimean Khans, continued into the early 16th century, despite later claims of Muscovite bookmen that the indecisive standoff at the Ugra in 1480 had signified &quot;the end of the Tatar yoke&quot; and the &quot;liberation of Russia&quot;.

The Mongols dominated the lower reaches of the Volga and held Russia in sway from their western capital at Sarai, one of the largest cities of the medieval world. The princes had to pay tribute to the Mongols of the Golden Horde, commonly called Tatars; but in return they received charters authorizing them to act as deputies to the khans. In general, the princes were allowed considerable freedom to rule as they wished, while the Russian Orthodox Church even experienced a spiritual revival.

The Mongols left their impact on the Russians in such areas as military tactics and transportation. Under Mongol occupation, Muscovy also developed its postal road network, census, fiscal system, and military organization.

At the same time, Prince of Novgorod, Alexander Nevsky, managed to repel the offensive of the Northern Crusades against Novgorod from the West. Despite this, becoming the Grand Prince, Alexander declared himself a vassal to the Golden Horde, not having the strength to resist its power.

==Grand Duchy of Moscow (1283–1547)==
===Rise of Moscow===
 Daniil Aleksandrovich, the youngest son of Alexander Nevsky, founded the principality of Moscow (known as Muscovy in English), which first cooperated with and ultimately expelled the Tatars from Russia. Well-situated in the central river system of Russia and surrounded by protective forests and marshes, Moscow was at first only a vassal of Vladimir, but soon it absorbed its parent state.

A major factor in the ascendancy of Moscow was the cooperation of its rulers with the Mongol overlords, who granted them the title of Grand Prince of Moscow and made them agents for collecting the Tatar tribute from the Russian principalities. The principality&#x27;s prestige was further enhanced when it became the center of the Russian Orthodox Church. Its head, the Metropolitan, fled from Kiev to Vladimir in 1299 and a few years later established the permanent headquarters of the Church in Moscow under the original title of Kiev Metropolitan.

By the middle of the 14th century, the power of the Mongols was declining, and the Grand Princes felt able to openly oppose the Mongol yoke. In 1380, at Battle of Kulikovo on the Don River, the Mongols were defeated, and although this hard-fought victory did not end Tatar rule of Russia, it did bring great fame to the Grand Prince Dmitry Donskoy. Moscow&#x27;s leadership in Russia was now firmly based and by the middle of the 14th century its territory had greatly expanded through purchase, war, and marriage.

===Ivan III, the Great===
In the 15th century, the grand princes of Moscow continued to consolidate Russian land to increase their population and wealth. The most successful practitioner of this process was Ivan III, who laid the foundations for a Russian national state. Ivan competed with his powerful northwestern rival, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, for control over some of the semi-independent Upper Principalities in the upper Dnieper and Oka River basins.

Through the defections of some princes, border skirmishes, and a long war with the Novgorod Republic, Ivan III was able to annex Novgorod and Tver. As a result, the Grand Duchy of Moscow tripled in size under his rule. During his conflict with Pskov, a monk named Filofei (Philotheus of Pskov) composed a letter to Ivan III, with the prophecy that the latter&#x27;s kingdom would be the Third Rome. The Fall of Constantinople and the death of the last Greek Orthodox Christian emperor contributed to this new idea of Moscow as &quot;New Rome&quot; and the seat of Orthodox Christianity, as did Ivan&#x27;s 1472 marriage to Byzantine Princess Sophia Palaiologina.

Under Ivan III, the first central government bodies were created in Russia: Prikaz. The Sudebnik was adopted, the first set of laws since the 11th century. The double-headed eagle was adopted as the coat of arms of Russia.

Ivan proclaimed his absolute sovereignty over all Russian princes and nobles. Refusing further tribute to the Tatars, Ivan initiated a series of attacks that opened the way for the complete defeat of the declining Golden Horde, now divided into several Khanates and hordes. Ivan and his successors sought to protect the southern boundaries of their domain against attacks of the Crimean Tatars and other hordes. To achieve this aim, they sponsored the construction of the Great Abatis Belt and granted manors to nobles, who were obliged to serve in the military. The manor system provided a basis for an emerging cavalry-based army.

In this way, internal consolidation accompanied outward expansion of the state. By the 16th century, the rulers of Moscow considered the entire Russian territory their collective property. Various semi-independent princes still claimed specific territories, but Ivan III forced the lesser princes to acknowledge the grand prince of Moscow and his descendants as unquestioned rulers with control over military, judicial, and foreign affairs. Gradually, the Russian ruler emerged as a powerful, autocratic ruler, a tsar. The first Russian ruler to officially crown himself &quot;Tsar&quot; was Ivan IV.

Ivan III tripled the territory of his state, ended the dominance of the Golden Horde over the Rus&#x27;, renovated the Moscow Kremlin, and laid the foundations of the Russian state. Biographer Fennell concludes that his reign was &quot;militarily glorious and economically sound,&quot; and especially points to his territorial annexations and his centralized control over local rulers. However, Fennell argues that his reign was also &quot;a period of cultural depression and spiritual barrenness. Freedom was stamped out within the Russian lands. By his bigoted anti-Catholicism Ivan brought down the curtain between Russia and the west. For the sake of territorial aggrandizement he deprived his country of the fruits of Western learning and civilization.&quot;

==Tsardom of Russia (1547–1721)==
===Ivan IV, the Terrible===
The development of the Tsar&#x27;s autocratic powers reached a peak during the reign of Ivan IV (1547–1584), known as &quot;Ivan the Terrible&quot;. He strengthened the position of the monarch to an unprecedented degree, as he ruthlessly subordinated the nobles to his will, exiling or executing many on the slightest provocation. Nevertheless, Ivan is often seen as a farsighted statesman who reformed Russia as he promulgated a new code of laws (Sudebnik of 1550), established the first Russian feudal representative body (Zemsky Sobor), curbed the influence of the clergy, and introduced local self-management in rural regions. Tsar also created the first regular army in Russia: Streltsy.

His long Livonian War (1558–1583) for control of the Baltic coast and access to the sea trade ultimately proved a costly failure. Ivan managed to annex the Khanates of Kazan, Astrakhan, and Siberia. These conquests complicated the migration of aggressive nomadic hordes from Asia to Europe via the Volga and Urals. Through these conquests, Russia acquired a significant Muslim Tatar population and emerged as a multiethnic and state. Also around this period, the mercantile Stroganov family established a firm foothold in the Urals and recruited Russian Cossacks to colonise Siberia.

In the later part of his reign, Ivan divided his realm in two. In the zone known as the &quot;oprichnina&quot;, Ivan&#x27;s followers carried out a series of bloody purges of the feudal aristocracy (whom he suspected of treachery after prince Andrey Kurbsky&#x27;s betrayal), culminating in the Massacre of Novgorod in 1570. This combined with the military losses, epidemics, and poor harvests so weakened Russia that the Crimean Tatars were able to sack central Russian regions and burn down Moscow in 1571. However, in 1572 the Russians defeated the Crimean Tatar army at the Battle of Molodi and Ivan abandoned the &quot;oprichnina&quot;.

At the end of Ivan IV&#x27;s reign the Polish–Lithuanian and Swedish armies carried out a powerful intervention in Russia, devastating its northern and northwest regions.

===Time of Troubles===
The death of Ivan&#x27;s childless son Feodor was followed by a period of civil wars and foreign intervention known as the Time of Troubles (1606–13). Extremely cold summers (1601–1603) wrecked crops, which led to the Russian famine of 1601–1603 and increased the social disorganization. Boris Godunov&#x27;s reign ended in chaos, civil war combined with foreign intrusion, devastation of many cities and depopulation of the rural regions. The country rocked by internal chaos also attracted several waves of interventions by the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.
During the Polish–Muscovite War (1605–1618), Polish–Lithuanian forces reached Moscow and installed the impostor False Dmitriy I in 1605, then supported False Dmitry II in 1607. The decisive moment came when a combined Russian-Swedish army was routed by the Polish forces under hetman Stanisław Żółkiewski at the Battle of Klushino on . As the result of the battle, the Seven Boyars, a group of Russian nobles, deposed the tsar Vasily Shuysky on , and recognized the Polish prince Władysław IV Vasa as the Tsar of Russia on . The Poles occupied Moscow on . Moscow revolted but riots there were brutally suppressed and the city was set on fire.

The crisis provoked a patriotic national uprising against the invasion, both in 1611 and 1612. A volunteer army, led by the merchant Kuzma Minin and prince Dmitry Pozharsky, expelled the foreign forces from the capital on .

The Russian statehood survived the &quot;Time of Troubles&quot; and the rule of weak or corrupt Tsars because of the strength of the government&#x27;s central bureaucracy. Government functionaries continued to serve, regardless of the ruler&#x27;s legitimacy or the faction controlling the throne. However, the Time of Troubles caused the loss of much territory to the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in the Russo-Polish war, as well as to the Swedish Empire in the Ingrian War.

===Accession of the Romanovs and early rule===
In February 1613, after the chaos and expulsion of the Poles from Moscow, a national assembly elected Michael Romanov, the young son of Patriarch Filaret, to the throne. The Romanov dynasty ruled Russia until 1917.

The immediate task of the new monarch was to restore peace. Fortunately for Moscow, its major enemies, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and Sweden, were engaged in a bitter conflict with each other, which provided Russia the opportunity to make peace with Sweden in 1617 and to sign a truce with the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1619.

Recovery of lost territories began in the mid-17th century, when the Khmelnitsky Uprising (1648–1657) in Ukraine against Polish rule brought about the Treaty of Pereyaslav between Russia and the Ukrainian Cossacks. In the treaty, Russia granted protection to the Cossacks state in Left-bank Ukraine, formerly under Polish control. This triggered a prolonged Russo-Polish War (1654–1667), which ended with the Treaty of Andrusovo, where Poland accepted the loss of Left-bank Ukraine, Kiev and Smolensk.
The Russian conquest of Siberia, begun at the end of the 16th century, continued in the 17th century. By the end of the 1640s, the Russians reached the Pacific Ocean, the Russian explorer Semyon Dezhnev, discovered the strait between Asia and America. Russian expansion in the Far East faced resistance from Qing China. After the war between Russia and China, the Treaty of Nerchinsk was signed, delimiting the territories in the Amur region.

Rather than risk their estates in more civil war, the boyars cooperated with the first Romanovs, enabling them to finish the work of bureaucratic centralization. Thus, the state required service from both the old and the new nobility, primarily in the military. In return, the tsars allowed the boyars to complete the process of enserfing the peasants.

In the preceding century, the state had gradually curtailed peasants&#x27; rights to move from one landlord to another. With the state now fully sanctioning serfdom, runaway peasants became state fugitives, and the power of the landlords over the peasants &quot;attached&quot; to their land had become almost complete. Together, the state and the nobles placed an overwhelming burden of taxation on the peasants, whose rate was 100 times greater in the mid-17th century than it had been a century earlier. Likewise, middle-class urban tradesmen and craftsmen were assessed taxes, and were forbidden to change residence. All segments of the population were subject to military levy and special taxes.

Riots among peasants and citizens of Moscow at this time were endemic and included the Salt Riot (1648), Copper Riot (1662), and the Moscow Uprising (1682). By far the greatest peasant uprising in 17th-century Europe erupted in 1667. As the free settlers of South Russia, the Cossacks, reacted against the growing centralization of the state, serfs escaped from their landlords and joined the rebels. The Cossack leader Stenka Razin led his followers up the Volga River, inciting peasant uprisings and replacing local governments with Cossack rule. The tsar&#x27;s army finally crushed his forces in 1670; a year later Stenka was captured and beheaded. Yet, less than half a century later, the strains of military expeditions produced another revolt in Astrakhan, ultimately subdued.

==Russian Empire (1721–1917)==
===Population===
Much of Russia&#x27;s expansion occurred in the 17th century, culminating in the first Russian colonisation of the Pacific in the mid-17th century, the Russo-Polish War (1654–1667) that incorporated left-bank Ukraine, and the Russian conquest of Siberia. Poland was divided in the 1790–1815 era, with much of the land and population going to Russia. Most of the 19th century growth came from adding territory in Asia, south of Siberia.

===Peter the Great===
Peter the Great (Peter I, 1672–1725) brought centralized autocracy into Russia and played a major role in bringing his country into the European state system. Russia was now the largest country in the world, stretching from the Baltic Sea to the Pacific Ocean. The vast majority of the land was unoccupied, and travel was slow. Much of its expansion had taken place in the 17th century, culminating in the first Russian settlement of the Pacific in the mid-17th century, the reconquest of Kiev, and the pacification of the Siberian tribes. However, a population of only 14 million was stretched across this vast landscape. With a short growing season, grain yields trailed behind those in the West and potato farming was not yet widespread. As a result, the great majority of the population workforce was occupied with agriculture. Russia remained isolated from the sea trade and its internal trade, communication and manufacturing were seasonally dependent.

Peter reformed the Russian army and created the Russian navy. Peter&#x27;s first military efforts were directed against the Ottoman Turks. His aim was to establish a Russian foothold on the Black Sea by taking the town of Azov. His attention then turned to the north. Peter still lacked a secure northern seaport except at Archangel on the White Sea, whose harbor was frozen nine months a year. Access to the Baltic was blocked by Sweden, whose territory enclosed it on three sides. Peter&#x27;s ambitions for a &quot;window to the sea&quot; led him in 1699 to make a secret alliance with the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and Denmark against Sweden resulting in the Great Northern War.

The war ended in 1721 when an exhausted Sweden sued for peace with Russia. Peter acquired four provinces situated south and east of the Gulf of Finland, thus securing his coveted access to the sea. There, in 1703, he had already founded the city that was to become Russia&#x27;s new capital, Saint Petersburg. Russian intervention in the Commonwealth marked, with the Silent Sejm, the beginning of a 200-year domination of that region by the Russian Empire. In celebration of his conquests, Peter assumed the title of emperor, and the Russian Tsardom officially became the Russian Empire in 1721.

Peter re-organized his government based on the latest Western models, molding Russia into an absolutist state. He replaced the old &quot;boyar&quot; Duma (council of nobles) with a Senate, in effect a supreme council of state. The countryside was also divided into new provinces and districts. Peter told the senate that its mission was to collect taxes. In turn tax revenues tripled over the course of his reign.

Administrative Collegia (ministries) were established in St. Petersburg, to replace the old governmental departments. In 1722, Peter promulgated his famous Table of ranks. As part of the government reform, the Orthodox Church was partially incorporated into the country&#x27;s administrative structure, in effect making it a tool of the state. Peter abolished the patriarchate and replaced it with a collective body, the Holy Synod, led by a lay government official. Peter continued and intensified his predecessors&#x27; requirement of state service for all nobles.

By then, the once powerful Persian Safavid Empire to the south was heavily declining. Taking advantage, Peter launched the Russo-Persian War (1722–1723), known as &quot;The Persian Expedition of Peter the Great&quot; by Russian histographers, in order to be the first Russian emperor to establish Russian influence in the Caucasus and Caspian Sea region. After considerable success and the capture of many provinces and cities in the Caucasus and northern mainland Persia, the Safavids were forced to hand over the territories to Russia. However, by 12 years later, all the territories were ceded back to Persia, which was now led by the charismatic military genius Nader Shah, as part of the Treaty of Resht and Treaty of Ganja and the Russo-Persian alliance against the Ottoman Empire, the common neighbouring rivalling enemy.

Peter the Great died in 1725, leaving an unsettled succession, but Russia had become a great power by the end of his reign. Peter I was succeeded by his second wife, Catherine I (1725–1727), who was merely a figurehead for a powerful group of high officials, then by his minor grandson, Peter II (1727–1730), then by his niece, Anna (1730–1740), daughter of Tsar Ivan V. The heir to Anna was soon deposed in a coup and Elizabeth, daughter of Peter I, ruled from 1741 to 1762. During her reign, Russia took part in the Seven Years&#x27; War.

===Catherine the Great===

Nearly 40 years passed before a comparably ambitious ruler appeared. Catherine II, &quot;the Great&quot; (r. 1762–1796), was a German princess who married the German heir to the Russian crown. Catherine overthrew him in a coup in 1762, becoming queen regnant. Catherine enthusiastically supported the ideals of The Enlightenment, thus earning the status of an enlightened despot. She patronized the arts, science and learning. She contributed to the resurgence of the Russian nobility that began after the death of Peter the Great. Catherine promulgated the Charter to the Gentry reaffirming rights and freedoms of the Russian nobility and abolishing mandatory state service. She seized control of all the church lands, drastically reduced the size of the monasteries, and put the surviving clergy on a tight budget.

Catherine spent heavily to promote an expansive foreign policy. She extended Russian political control over the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth with actions, including the support of the Targowica Confederation. The cost of her campaigns, plus the oppressive social system that required serfs to spend almost all their time laboring on the land of their lords, provoked a major peasant uprising in 1773. Inspired by a Cossack named Yemelyan Pugachev, with the emphatic cry of &quot;Hang all the landlords!&quot;, the rebels threatened to take Moscow until Catherine crushed the rebellion. Like the other enlightened despots of Europe, Catherine made certain of her own power and formed an alliance with the nobility.

Catherine successfully waged two wars (1768–1774, 1787–1792) against the decaying Ottoman Empire and advanced Russia&#x27;s southern boundary to the Black Sea. In 1775 she liquidated the Zaporozhian Sich, and on the former lands of the Ukrainian Cossacks in the places of theirs settlements was created Novorossiya Governorate, in which new cities were formed: Yekaterinoslav (1776), Yelisavetgrad, Kherson (1778), Odessa (1794). Russia annexed Crimea in 1783 and created the Black Sea fleet. Then, by allying with the rulers of Austria and Prussia, she incorporated the territories of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, where after a century of Russian rule non-Catholic, mainly Orthodox population prevailed during the Partitions of Poland, pushing the Russian frontier westward into Central Europe.

In accordance to Russia&#x27;s treaty with the Georgians to protect them against any new invasion of their Persian suzerains and further political aspirations, Catherine waged a new war against Persia in 1796 after they had again invaded Georgia and established rule over it about a year prior, and had expelled the newly established Russian garrisons in the Caucasus.

In 1798–1799, Russian troops participated in the anti-French coalition, the troops under the command of Alexander Suvorov defeated the French in Northern Italy.

===Ruling the Empire (1725–1825)===

Russian emperors of the 18th century professed the ideas of Enlightened absolutism. However, Westernization and modernization affected only the upper classes of Russian society, while the bulk of the population, consisting of peasants, remained in a state of serfdom. Powerful Russians resented their privileged positions and alien ideas. The backlash was especially severe after the Napoleonic wars. It produced a powerful anti-western campaign that &quot;led to a wholesale purge of Western specialists and their Russian followers in universities, schools, and government service&quot;.
The mid-18th century was marked by the emergence of higher education in Russia. The first two major universities Saint Petersburg State University and Moscow State University were opened. Russian exploration of Siberia and the Far East continued. Great Northern Expedition laid the foundation for the development of Alaska by the Russians. By the end of the 18th century, Alaska became a Russian colony (Russian America). In the early 19th century, Alaska was used as a base for the First Russian circumnavigation. In 1819–1821, Russian sailors discovered Antarctica during an Antarctic expedition.

Russia was in a continuous state of financial crisis. While revenue rose from 9 million rubles in 1724 to 40 million in 1794, expenses grew more rapidly, reaching 49 million in 1794. The budget was allocated 46% to the military, 20% to government economic activities, 12% to administration, and 9% for the Imperial Court in St. Petersburg. The deficit required borrowing, primarily from Amsterdam; 5% of the budget was allocated to debt payments. Paper money was issued to pay for expensive wars, thus causing inflation. 18th-century Russia remained &quot;a poor, backward, overwhelmingly agricultural, and illiterate country&quot;.

===Alexander I and victory over Napoleon===

By the time of her death in 1796, Catherine&#x27;s expansionist policy had made Russia a major European power. Alexander I continued this policy, wresting Finland from the weakened kingdom of Sweden in 1809 and Bessarabia from the Ottomans in 1812. His key advisor was a Polish nobleman Adam Jerzy Czartoryski.

After Russian armies liberated allied Georgia from Persian occupation in 1802, they clashed with Persia over control and consolidation over Georgia, as well as the Iranian territories that comprise modern-day Azerbaijan and Dagestan. They also became involved in the Caucasian War against the Caucasian Imamate and Circassia. In 1813, the war with Persia concluded with a Russian victory, forcing Qajar Iran to cede swaths of its territories in the Caucasus to Russia, which drastically increased its territory in the region. To the south-west, Russia tried to expand at the expense of the Ottoman Empire, using Georgia at its base for the Caucasus and Anatolian front.

In European policy, Alexander I switched Russia back and forth four times in 1804–1812 from neutral peacemaker to anti-Napoleon to an ally of Napoleon, winding up in 1812 as Napoleon&#x27;s enemy. In 1805, he joined Britain in the War of the Third Coalition against Napoleon, but after the massive defeat at the Battle of Austerlitz he switched and formed an alliance with Napoleon by the Treaty of Tilsit (1807) and joined Napoleon&#x27;s Continental System. He fought a small-scale naval war against Britain, 1807–1812.

The alliance collapsed by 1810. Russia&#x27;s economy had been hurt by Napoleon&#x27;s Continental System, which cut off trade with Britain. As Esdaile notes, &quot;Implicit in the idea of a Russian Poland was, of course, a war against Napoleon&quot;. Schroeder says Poland was the root cause of the conflict but Russia&#x27;s refusal to support the Continental System was also a factor.
The invasion of Russia was a catastrophe for Napoleon and his 450,000 invasion troops. One major battle was fought at Borodino; casualties were very high, but it was indecisive, and Napoleon was unable to engage and defeat the Russian armies. He tried to force the Tsar to terms by capturing Moscow at the onset of winter, even though he had lost most of his men. Instead, the Russians retreated, burning crops and food supplies in a scorched earth policy that multiplied Napoleon&#x27;s logistic problems: 85%–90% of Napoleon&#x27;s soldiers died from disease, cold, starvation or ambush by peasant guerrillas. As Napoleon&#x27;s forces retreated, Russian troops pursued them into Central and Western Europe, defeated Napoleon&#x27;s army in the Battle of the Nations and finally captured Paris. Of a total population of around 43 million people, Russia lost about 1.5 million in the year 1812; of these about 250,000 to 300,000 were soldiers and the rest peasants and serfs.

After the defeat of Napoleon, Alexander presided over the redrawing of the map of Europe at the Congress of Vienna (1814–1815), which made him the king of Congress Poland. He formed the Holy Alliance with Austria and Prussia, to suppress revolutionary movements in Europe that he saw as immoral threats to legitimate Christian monarchs. He helped Austria&#x27;s Klemens von Metternich in suppressing all national and liberal movements.

Although the Russian Empire would play a leading role on behalf of conservatism as late as 1848, its retention of serfdom precluded economic progress of any significant degree. As West European economic growth accelerated during the Industrial Revolution, sea trade and colonialism which had begun in the second half of the 18th century, Russia began to lag ever farther behind, undermining its ability to field strong armies.

===Nicholas I and the Decembrist Revolt===
Russia&#x27;s great power status obscured the inefficiency of its government, the isolation of its people, and its economic backwardness. Following the defeat of Napoleon, Alexander I was willing to discuss constitutional reforms, and though a few were introduced, no thoroughgoing changes were attempted.

The tsar was succeeded by his younger brother, Nicholas I (1825–1855), who at the onset of his reign was confronted with an uprising. The background of this revolt lay in the Napoleonic Wars, when a number of well-educated Russian officers traveled in Europe in the course of the military campaigns, where their exposure to the liberalism of Western Europe encouraged them to seek change on their return. The result was the Decembrist Revolt (December 1825), the work of a small circle of liberal nobles and army officers who wanted to install Nicholas&#x27; brother as a constitutional monarch. But the revolt was easily crushed, leading Nicholas to turn away from liberal reforms and champion the reactionary doctrine &quot;Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality&quot;.

In 1826–1828, Russia fought another war against Persia. Russia lost almost all of its recently consolidated territories during the first year but regained them and won the war on highly favourable terms. At the 1828 Treaty of Turkmenchay, Russia gained Armenia, Nakhchivan, Nagorno-Karabakh, Azerbaijan, and Iğdır. In the 1828–1829 Russo-Turkish War Russia invaded northeastern Anatolia and occupied the strategic Ottoman towns of Erzurum and Gümüşhane and, posing as protector and saviour of the Greek Orthodox population, received extensive support from the region&#x27;s Pontic Greeks. After a brief occupation, the Russian imperial army withdrew into Georgia. By the 1830s, Russia had conquered all Persian territories and major Ottoman territories in the Caucasus.

In 1831, Nicholas crushed the November Uprising in Poland. The Russian autocracy gave Polish artisans and gentry reason to rebel in 1863 by assailing the national core values of language, religion, and culture. The resulting January Uprising was a massive Polish revolt, which also was crushed. France, Britain and Austria tried to intervene in the crisis but were unable. The Russian patriotic press used the Polish uprising to unify the Russian nation, claiming it was Russia&#x27;s God-given mission to save Poland and the world. Poland was punished by losing its distinctive political and judicial rights, with Russianization imposed on its schools and courts.

===Russian Army===
Tsar Nicholas I (reigned 1825–1855) lavished attention on his army. In a nation of 60–70 million people, it included a million men. They had outdated equipment and tactics, but the tsar took pride in its smartness on parade. The cavalry horses, for example, were only trained in parade formations, and did poorly in battle. He put generals in charge of most of his civilian agencies regardless of their qualifications. The Army became the vehicle of upward social mobility for noble youths from non-Russian areas, such as Poland, the Baltic, Finland and Georgia. On the other hand, many miscreants, petty criminals and undesirables were punished by local officials by enlisting them for life in the Army. Village oligarchies controlled employment, conscription for the army, and local patronage; they blocked reforms and sent the most unpromising peasant youth to the army. The conscription system was unpopular with people, as was the practice of forcing peasants to house the soldiers for six months of the year.

Finally the Crimean War at the end of his reign showed the world that Russia was militarily weak, technologically backward, and administratively incompetent. Despite his ambitions toward the south and Ottoman Empire, Russia had not built its railroad network in that direction, and communications were poor. The bureaucracy was riddled with corruption and inefficiency and was unprepared for war. The Navy was weak and technologically backward; the Army, although very large, was good only for parades, suffered from colonels who pocketed their men&#x27;s pay, poor morale, and was even more out of touch with the latest technology. The nation&#x27;s leaders realized that reforms were urgently needed.

===Russian society in the first half of 19th century===
The early 19th century is the time when Russian literature becomes an independent and very striking phenomenon.

Westernizers favored imitating Western Europe while others renounced the West and called for a return of the traditions of the past. The latter path was championed by Slavophiles, who heaped scorn on the &quot;decadent&quot; West. The Slavophiles were opponents of bureaucracy and preferred the collectivism of the medieval Russian &quot;mir&quot;, or village community, to the individualism of the West. A forerunner of the movement was Pyotr Chaadayev. He exposed the cultural isolation of Russia, from the perspective of Western Europe, in his &quot;Philosophical Letters&quot; of 1831. He cast doubt on the greatness of the Russian past, and ridiculed Orthodoxy for failing to provide a sound spiritual basis for the Russian mind. He called on Russia to emulate Western Europe, especially in rational and logical thought, its progressive spirit, its leadership in science, and indeed its leadership on the path to freedom. Vissarion Belinsky and Alexander Herzen were prominent Westernizers.

===Crimean War===
Since the war against Napoleon, Russia had become deeply involved in the affairs of Europe, as part of the &quot;Holy Alliance.&quot; The Holy Alliance was formed to serve as the &quot;policeman of Europe.&quot; However, to maintain the alliance required large armies. Prussia, Austria, Britain and France (the other members of the alliance) lacked large armies and needed Russia to supply the required numbers, which fit the philosophy of Nicholas I. The Tsar sent his army into Hungary in 1849 at the request of the Austrian Empire and broke the revolt there, while preventing its spread to Russian Poland. The Tsar cracked down on any signs of internal unrest.

Russia expected that in exchange for supplying the troops to be the policeman of Europe, it should have a free hand in dealing with the decaying Ottoman Empire—the &quot;sick man of Europe.&quot; In 1853, Russia invaded Ottoman-controlled areas leading to the Crimean War. Britain and France came to the rescue of the Ottomans. After a grueling war fought largely in Crimea, with very high death rates from disease, the allies won.

Historian Orlando Figes points to the long-term damage Russia suffered:
:The demilitarization of the Black Sea was a major blow to Russia, which was no longer able to protect its vulnerable southern coastal frontier against the British or any other fleet... The destruction of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, Sevastopol and other naval docks was a humiliation. No compulsory disarmament had ever been imposed on a great power previously... The Allies did not really think that they were dealing with a European power in Russia. They regarded Russia as a semi-Asiatic state...In Russia itself, the Crimean defeat discredited the armed services and highlighted the need to modernize the countries defenses, not just in the strictly military sense, but also through the building of railways, industrialization, sound finances and so on...The image many Russians had built up of their country – the biggest, richest and most powerful in the world – had suddenly been shattered. Russia&#x27;s backwardness had been exposed...The Crimean disaster had exposed the shortcomings of every institution in Russia – not just the corruption and incompetence of the military command, the technological backwardness of the army and navy, or the inadequate roads and lack of railways the accounted for the chronic problems of supply, but the poor condition and illiteracy of the serfs who made up the armed forces, the inability of the serf economy to sustain a state of war against industrial powers, and the failures of autocracy itself.

===Alexander II and the abolition of serfdom===

When Alexander II came to the throne in 1855, the demand for reform was widespread. The most pressing problem confronting the Government was serfdom. In 1859, there were 23 million serfs (out of a total population of 67 million). In anticipation of civil unrest that could ultimately foment a revolution, Alexander II chose to preemptively abolish serfdom with the emancipation reform in 1861. Emancipation brought a supply of free labor to the cities, stimulated industry, and the middle class grew in number and influence. The freed peasants had to buy land, allotted to them, from the landowners with the state assistance. The Government issued special bonds to the landowners for the land that they had lost, and collected a special tax from the peasants, called redemption payments, at a rate of 5% of the total cost of allotted land yearly. All the land turned over to the peasants was owned collectively by the &quot;mir&quot;, the village community, which divided the land among the peasants and supervised the various holdings.

Alexander was responsible for numerous reforms besides abolishing serfdom. He reorganized the judicial system, setting up elected local judges, abolishing capital punishment, promoting local self-government through the zemstvo system, imposing universal military service, ending some of the privileges of the nobility, and promoting the universities.

In foreign policy, he sold Alaska to the United States in 1867. He modernized the military command system. He sought peace, and joined with Germany and Austria in the League of the Three Emperors that stabilized the European situation. The Russian Empire expanded in Siberia and in the Caucasus and made gains at the expense of China. Faced with an uprising in Poland in 1863, he stripped that land of its separate Constitution and incorporated it directly into Russia. To counter the rise of a revolutionary and anarchistic movements, he sent thousands of dissidents into exile in Siberia and was proposing additional parliamentary reforms when he was assassinated in 1881.

In the late 1870s Russia and the Ottoman Empire again clashed in the Balkans. The Russo-Turkish War was popular among the Russian people, who supported the independence of their fellow Orthodox Slavs, the Serbs and the Bulgarians. Russia&#x27;s victory in this war allowed a number of Balkan states to gain independence: Romania, Serbia, Montenegro. In addition, Bulgaria de facto became independent. However, the war increased tension with Austria-Hungary, which also had ambitions in the region. The Tsar was disappointed by the results of the Congress of Berlin in 1878, but abided by the agreement.

During this period Russia expanded its empire into Central Asia, conquering the khanates of Kokand, Bukhara, and Khiva, as well as the Trans-Caspian region. Russia&#x27;s advance in Asia led to British fears that the Russians planned aggression against British India. Before 1815 London worried Napoleon would combine with Russia to do that in one mighty campaign. After 1815 London feared Russia alone would do it step by step. However historians report that the Russians never had any intention to move against India.

===Russian society in the second half of 19th century===

In the 1860s, a movement known as Nihilism developed in Russia. A term originally coined by Ivan Turgenev in his 1862 novel &quot;Fathers and Sons&quot;, Nihilists favoured the destruction of human institutions and laws, based on the assumption that they are artificial and corrupt. At its core, Russian nihilism was characterized by the belief that the world lacks comprehensible meaning, objective truth, or value. For some time, many Russian liberals had been dissatisfied by what they regarded as the empty discussions of the intelligentsia. The Nihilists questioned all old values and shocked the Russian establishment. They became involved in the cause of reform and became major political forces. Their path was facilitated by the previous actions of the Decembrists, who revolted in 1825, and the financial and political hardship caused by the Crimean War, which caused many Russians to lose faith in political institutions. Russian nihilists created the manifesto &quot;Catechism of a Revolutionary&quot;.

After the Nihilists failed to convert the aristocracy and landed gentry to the cause of reform, they turned to the peasants. Their campaign became known as the &quot;Narodnk&quot; (&quot;Populist&quot;) movement. It was based on the belief that the common people had the wisdom and peaceful ability to lead the nation.
As the &quot;Narodnik&quot; movement gained momentum, the government moved to extirpate it. In response to the growing reaction of the government, a radical branch of the Narodniks advocated and practiced terrorism. One after another, prominent officials were shot or killed by bombs. This represented the ascendancy of anarchism in Russia as a powerful revolutionary force. Finally, after several attempts, Alexander II was assassinated by anarchists in 1881, on the very day he had approved a proposal to call a representative assembly to consider new reforms in addition to the abolition of serfdom designed to ameliorate revolutionary demands.

The end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th is known as the Silver Age of Russian culture. The Silver Age was dominated by the artistic movements of Russian Symbolism, Acmeism, and Russian Futurism, many poetic schools flourished, including the Mystical Anarchism tendency within the Symbolist movement. The Russian avant-garde was a large, influential wave of modern art that flourished in Russian Empire and Soviet Union, approximately from 1890 to 1930—although some have placed its beginning as early as 1850 and its end as late as 1960.

===Autocracy and reaction under Alexander III===
Unlike his father, the new tsar Alexander III (1881–1894) was throughout his reign a staunch reactionary who revived the maxim of &quot;Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and National Character&quot;. A committed Slavophile, Alexander III believed that Russia could be saved from chaos only by shutting itself off from the subversive influences of Western Europe. In his reign Russia concluded the union with republican France to contain the growing power of Germany, completed the conquest of Central Asia, and exacted important territorial and commercial concessions from China.

The tsar&#x27;s most influential adviser was Konstantin Pobedonostsev, tutor to Alexander III and his son Nicholas, and procurator of the Holy Synod from 1880 to 1895. He taught his royal pupils to fear freedom of speech and press and to hate democracy, constitutions, and the parliamentary system. Under Pobedonostsev, revolutionaries were hunted down and a policy of Russification was carried out.

===Nicholas II and new revolutionary movement===
Alexander was succeeded by his son Nicholas II (1894–1918). The Industrial Revolution, which began to exert a significant influence in Russia, was meanwhile creating forces that would finally overthrow the tsar. Politically, these opposition forces organized into three competing parties: The liberal elements among the industrial capitalists and nobility, who wanted peaceful social reform and a constitutional monarchy, founded the Constitutional Democratic party or &quot;Kadets&quot; in 1905. Followers of the Narodnik tradition established the Socialist-Revolutionary Party or &quot;Esers&quot; in 1901, advocating the distribution of land among the peasants who worked it. A third radical group founded the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party or &quot;RSDLP&quot; in 1898; this party was the primary exponent of Marxism in Russia. Gathering their support from the radical intellectuals and the urban working class, they advocated complete social, economic and political revolution.

In 1903, the RSDLP split into two wings: the radical Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, and the relatively moderate Mensheviks, led by Yuli Martov. The Mensheviks believed that Russian socialism would grow gradually and peacefully and that the tsar&#x27;s regime should be succeeded by a democratic republic. The Bolsheviks advocated the formation of a small elite of professional revolutionaries, subject to strong party discipline, to act as the vanguard of the proletariat in order to seize power by force.

At the beginning of the 20th century, Russia continued its expansion in the Far East; Chinese Manchuria was in the zone of Russian interests. Russia took an active part in the intervention of the great powers in China to suppress the Boxer rebellion. During this war, Russia occupied Manchuria, which caused a clash of interests with Japan. In 1904, the Russo-Japanese War began, which ended extremely unfavourably for Russia.

===Revolution of 1905===
The disastrous performance of the Russian armed forces in the Russo-Japanese War was a major blow to the Russian State and increased the potential for unrest.

In January 1905, an incident known as &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot; occurred when Father Gapon led an enormous crowd to the Winter Palace in Saint Petersburg to present a petition to the tsar. When the procession reached the palace, Cossacks opened fire, killing hundreds. The Russian masses were so aroused over the massacre that a general strike was declared demanding a democratic republic. This marked the beginning of the Russian Revolution of 1905. Soviets (councils of workers) appeared in most cities to direct revolutionary activity.

In October 1905, Nicholas reluctantly issued the October Manifesto, which conceded the creation of a national Duma (legislature) to be called without delay. The right to vote was extended, and no law was to go into force without confirmation by the Duma. The moderate groups were satisfied; but the socialists rejected the concessions as insufficient and tried to organize new strikes. By the end of 1905, there was disunity among the reformers, and the tsar&#x27;s position was strengthened.

=== World War I ===

On 28 June 1914, Bosnian Serbs assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austro-Hungary. Austro-Hungary issued an ultimatum to Serbia, which it considered a Russian client-state. Russia had no treaty obligation to Serbia, and most Russian leaders wanted to avoid war. But in that crisis they had the support of France, and believed that supporting Serbia was important for Russia&#x27;s credibility and for its goal of a leadership role in the Balkans. Tsar Nicholas II mobilised Russian forces on 30 July 1914 to defend Serbia. Christopher Clark states: &quot;The Russian general mobilisation [of 30 July] was one of the most momentous decisions of the July crisis&quot;. Germany responded with its own mobilisation and declaration of War on 1 August 1914. At the opening of hostilities, the Russians took the offensive against both Germany and Austria-Hungary.

The very large but poorly led and under-equipped Russian army fought tenaciously. Casualties were enormous. In the 1914 campaign, Russian forces defeated Austro-Hungarian forces in the Battle of Galicia. The success of the Russian army forced the German army to withdraw troops from the western front to the Russian front. However, victories in Poland by the Central Powers in the 1915 campaign, led to a major retreat of the Russian army. In 1916, the Russians again dealt a powerful blow to the Austrians during the Brusilov offensive.

By 1915, morale was worsening. Many recruits were sent to the front unarmed. Nevertheless, the Russian army fought on, and tied down large numbers of Germans and Austrians. When the homefront showed an occasional surge of patriotism, the tsar and his entourage failed to exploit it for military benefit. The Russian army neglected to rally the ethnic and religious minorities that were hostile to Austria, such as Poles. The tsar refused to cooperate with the national legislature, the Duma, and listened less to experts than to his wife, who was in thrall to her chief advisor, the holy man Grigori Rasputin. More than two million refugees fled.
Repeated military failures and bureaucratic ineptitude soon turned large segments of the population against the government. The German and Ottoman fleets prevented Russia from importing urgently needed supplies through the Baltic and Black seas. By mid-1915 the impact of the war was demoralizing. Food and fuel were in short supply, casualties kept occurring, and inflation was mounting. Strikes increased among factory workers, and the peasants, who wanted land reforms, were restless. Meanwhile, elite distrust of the regime was deepened by reports that Rasputin was gaining influence; his assassination in late 1916 ended the scandal but did not restore the autocracy&#x27;s prestige.

==Russian Civil War (1917–1922)==
===Russian Revolution===


In late February (3 March 1917), a strike occurred in a factory in the capital Petrograd (Saint Petersburg). On 23 February (8 March) 1917, thousands of female textile workers walked out of their factories protesting the lack of food and calling on other workers to join them. Within days, nearly all the workers in the city were idle, and street fighting broke out. The tsar ordered the Duma to disband, ordered strikers to return to work, and ordered troops to shoot at demonstrators in the streets. His orders triggered the February Revolution, especially when soldiers sided with the strikers. On 2 March, Nicholas II abdicated.

To fill the vacuum of authority, the Duma declared a Provisional Government, headed by Prince Lvov, which was collectively known as the Russian Republic. Meanwhile, the socialists in Petrograd organized elections among workers and soldiers to form a soviet (council) of workers&#x27; and soldiers&#x27; deputies, as an organ of popular power that could pressure the &quot;bourgeois&quot; Provisional Government.

In July, following a series of crises that undermined their authority with the public, the head of the Provisional Government resigned and was succeeded by Alexander Kerensky, who was more progressive than his predecessor but not radical enough for the Bolsheviks or many Russians discontented with the deepening economic crisis and the war. The socialist-led soviet in Petrograd joined with soviets that formed throughout the country to create a national movement.

The German government provided over 40 million gold marks to subsidize Bolshevik publications and activities subversive of the tsarist government, especially focusing on disgruntled soldiers and workers. In April 1917 Germany provided a special sealed train to carry Vladimir Lenin back to Russia from his exile in Switzerland. After many behind-the-scenes maneuvers, the soviets seized control of the government in November 1917 and drove Kerensky and his moderate provisional government into exile, in the events that would become known as the October Revolution.

Bolshevik figures such as Anatoly Lunacharsky, Moisei Uritsky and Dmitry Manuilsky agreed that Lenin’s influence on the Bolshevik party was decisive but the October insurrection was carried out according to Trotsky’s, not to Lenin’s plan.

When the national Constituent Assembly (elected in December 1917) refused to become a rubber stamp of the Bolsheviks, it was dissolved by Lenin&#x27;s troops and all vestiges of democracy were removed. With the handicap of the moderate opposition removed, Lenin was able to free his regime from the war problem by the harsh Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (1918) with Germany. Russia lost much of her western borderlands. However, when Germany was defeated the Soviet government repudiated the Treaty.

===Russian Civil War===

The Bolshevik grip on power was by no means secure, and a lengthy struggle broke out between the new regime and its opponents, which included the Socialist Revolutionaries, the anti-Bolshevik White movement, and large numbers of peasants. At the same time the Allied powers sent several expeditionary armies to support the anti-Communist forces in an attempt to force Russia to rejoin the world war. The Bolsheviks fought against both these forces and national independence movements in the former Russian Empire. By 1921, they had defeated their internal enemies and brought most of the newly independent states under their control, with the exception of Finland, the Baltic States, the Moldavian Democratic Republic (which was annexed by Romania), and Poland (with whom they had fought the Polish–Soviet War). Finland also annexed the region Pechenga of the Russian Kola Peninsula; Soviet Russia and allied Soviet republics conceded the parts of its territory to Estonia (Petseri County and Estonian Ingria), Latvia (Pytalovo), and Turkey (Kars). Poland incorporated the contested territories of Western Belarus and Western Ukraine, the former parts of the Russian Empire (except Galicia) east to Curzon Line.

Both sides regularly committed brutal atrocities against civilians. During the civil war era for example, Petlyura and Denikin&#x27;s forces massacred 100,000 to 150,000 Jews in Ukraine and southern Russia. Hundreds of thousands of Jews were left homeless and tens of thousands became victims of serious illness. These massacres are now referred to as the White Terror (Russia).

Estimates for the total number of people killed during the Red Terror carried out by the Bolsheviks vary widely. One source asserts that the total number of victims could be 1.3 million, whereas others give estimates ranging from 10,000 in the initial period of repression to 140,000 and an estimate of 28,000 executions per year from December 1917 to February 1922. The most reliable estimations for the total number of killings put the number at about 100,000, whereas others suggest a figure of 200,000.

The Russian economy was devastated by the war, with factories and bridges destroyed, cattle and raw materials pillaged, mines flooded and machines damaged. The droughts of 1920 and 1921, as well as the 1921 famine, worsened the disaster still further. Disease had reached pandemic proportions, with 3,000,000 dying of typhus alone in 1920. Millions more also died of widespread starvation. By 1922 there were at least 7,000,000 street children in Russia as a result of nearly ten years of devastation from the Great War and the civil war. Another one to two million people, known as the White émigrés, fled Russia, many were evacuated from Crimea in the 1920, some through the Far East, others west into the newly independent Baltic countries. These émigrés included a large percentage of the educated and skilled population.

==Soviet Union (1922–1991)==
===Creation of the Soviet Union===

The Soviet Union, established in December 1922 by the leaders of the Russian Communist Party, was roughly coterminous with Russia before the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. At that time, the new nation included four constituent republics: the Russian SFSR, the Ukrainian SSR, the Belarusian SSR, and the Transcaucasian SFSR.

The constitution, adopted in 1924, established a federal system of government based on a pyramid of soviets in each constituent republic which culminated in the All-Union Congress of Soviets. However, while it appeared that the congress exercised sovereign power, this body was actually governed by the Communist Party, which in turn was controlled by the Politburo from Moscow.

===War Communism and the New Economic Policy===

The period from the consolidation of the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917 until 1921 is known as the period of war communism. Land, all industry, and small businesses were nationalized, and the money economy was restricted. Strong opposition soon developed. The peasants wanted cash payments for their products and resented having to surrender their surplus grain to the government as a part of its civil war policies. Confronted with peasant opposition, Lenin began a strategic retreat from war communism known as the New Economic Policy (NEP). The peasants were freed from wholesale levies of grain and allowed to sell their surplus produce in the open market. Commerce was stimulated by permitting private retail trading. The state continued to be responsible for banking, transportation, heavy industry, and public utilities.

Although the left opposition among the Communists criticized the rich peasants, or kulaks, who benefited from the NEP, the program proved highly beneficial and the economy revived. The NEP would later come under increasing opposition from within the party following Lenin&#x27;s death in early 1924.

===Changes to Russian society===

As the Russian Empire included during this period not only the region of Russia, but also today&#x27;s territories of Ukraine, Belarus, Poland, Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia, Finland, Moldavia and the Caucasian and Central Asian countries, it is possible to examine the firm formation process in all those regions. One of the main determinants of firm creation for given regions of Russian Empire might be urban demand of goods and supply of industrial and organizational skill.

While the Russian economy was being transformed, the social life of the people underwent equally drastic changes. The Family Code of 1918 granted women equal status to men, and permitted a couple to take either the husband or wife&#x27;s name. Divorce no longer required court procedure,
and to make women completely free of the responsibilities of childbearing, abortion was made legal as early as 1920. As a side effect, the emancipation of women increased the labor market. Girls were encouraged to secure an education and pursue a career. Communal nurseries were set up for child care, and efforts were made to shift the center of people&#x27;s social life from the home to educational and recreational groups, the soviet clubs.

The Soviet government pursued a policy of eliminating illiteracy (Likbez). After industrialization, massive urbanization began. In the field of national policy in the 1920s, the Korenizatsiya was carried out. However, from the mid-30s, the Stalinist government returned to the tsarist policy of Russification of the outskirts. In particular, the languages of all the nations of the USSR were translated into the Cyrillic alphabet Cyrillization.

===Industrialization and collectivization===

The years from 1929 to 1939 comprised a tumultuous decade in Soviet history—a period of massive industrialization and internal struggles as Joseph Stalin established near total control over Soviet society, wielding virtually unrestrained power. Following Lenin&#x27;s death Stalin wrestled to gain control of the Soviet Union with rival factions in the Politburo, especially Leon Trotsky&#x27;s. By 1928, with the Trotskyists either exiled or rendered powerless, Stalin was ready to put a radical programme of industrialisation into action.

In 1929, Stalin proposed the first five-year plan. Abolishing the NEP, it was the first of a number of plans aimed at swift accumulation of capital resources through the buildup of heavy industry, the collectivization of agriculture, and the restricted manufacture of consumer goods. For the first time in history a government controlled all economic activity. The rapid growth of production capacity and the volume of production of heavy industry was of great importance for ensuring economic independence from western countries and strengthening the country&#x27;s defense capability. At this time, the Soviet Union made the transition from an agrarian country to an industrial one.

As a part of the plan, the government took control of agriculture through the state and collective farms (&quot;kolkhozes&quot;). By a decree of February 1930, about one million individual peasants (&quot;kulaks&quot;) were forced off their land. Many peasants strongly opposed regimentation by the state, often slaughtering their herds when faced with the loss of their land. In some sections they revolted, and countless peasants deemed &quot;kulaks&quot; by the authorities were executed. The combination of bad weather, deficiencies of the hastily established collective farms, and massive confiscation of grain precipitated a serious famine, and several million peasants died of starvation, mostly in Ukraine, Kazakhstan and parts of southwestern Russia. The deteriorating conditions in the countryside drove millions of desperate peasants to the rapidly growing cities, fueling industrialization, and vastly increasing Russia&#x27;s urban population.

===Stalinist repression===
The NKVD gathered in tens of thousands of Soviet citizens to face arrest, deportation, or execution. Of the six original members of the 1920 Politburo who survived Lenin, all were purged by Stalin. Old Bolsheviks who had been loyal comrades of Lenin, high officers in the Red Army, and directors of industry were liquidated in the Great Purges. Purges in other Soviet republics also helped centralize control in the USSR.

Stalin destroyed the opposition in the party consisting of the old Bolsheviks during the Moscow trials. The NKVD under the leadership of Stalin&#x27;s commissar Nikolai Yezhov carried out a series of massive repressive operations against the kulaks and various national minorities in the USSR. During the Great Purges of 1937–38, about 700,000 people were executed.

Penalties were introduced, and many citizens were prosecuted for fictitious crimes of sabotage and espionage. The labor provided by convicts working in the labor camps of the Gulag system became an important component of the industrialization effort, especially in Siberia. An estimated 18 million people passed through the Gulag system, and perhaps another 15 million had experience of some other form of forced labor.

After the partition of Poland in 1939, the NKVD executed 20,000 captured Polish officers in the Katyn massacre. In the late 30s - first half of the 40s, the Stalinist government carried out massive deportations of various nationalities. A number of ethnic groups were deported from their settlement to Central Asia.

===Soviet Union on the international stage===

The Soviet Union viewed the 1933 accession of fervently anti-Communist Hitler to power in Germany with alarm, especially since Hitler proclaimed the Drang nach Osten as one of the major objectives in his vision of the German strategy of Lebensraum. The Soviets supported the republicans of Spain who struggled against fascist German and Italian troops in the Spanish Civil War. In 1938–1939, the Soviet Union successfully fought against Imperial Japan in the Soviet–Japanese border conflicts in the Russian Far East, which led to Soviet-Japanese neutrality and the tense border peace that lasted until August 1945.

In 1938, Germany annexed Austria and, together with major Western European powers, signed the Munich Agreement following which Germany, Hungary and Poland divided parts of Czechoslovakia between themselves. German plans for further eastward expansion, as well as the lack of resolve from Western powers to oppose it, became more apparent. Despite the Soviet Union strongly opposing the Munich deal and repeatedly reaffirming its readiness to militarily back commitments given earlier to Czechoslovakia, the Western Betrayal led to the end of Czechoslovakia and further increased fears in the Soviet Union of a coming German attack. This led the Soviet Union to rush the modernization of its military industry and to carry out its own diplomatic maneuvers. In 1939, the Soviet Union signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact: a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany dividing Eastern Europe into two separate spheres of influence. Following the pact, the USSR normalized relations with Nazi Germany and resumed Soviet–German trade.

===World War II===

On 17 September 1939, the Red Army invaded eastern Poland, stating as justification the &quot;need to protect Ukrainians and Belarusians&quot; there, after the &quot;cessation of existence&quot; of the Polish state. As a result, the Belarusian and Ukrainian Soviet republics&#x27; western borders were moved westward, and the new Soviet western border was drawn close to the original Curzon line. In the meantime negotiations with Finland over a Soviet-proposed land swap that would redraw the Soviet-Finnish border further away from Leningrad failed, and in December 1939 the USSR invaded Finland, beginning a campaign known as the Winter War (1939–1940), with the goal of annexing Finland into the Soviet Union. The war took a heavy death toll on the Red Army and the Soviets failed to conquer Finland, but forced Finland to sign the Moscow Peace Treaty and cede the Karelian Isthmus and Ladoga Karelia. In summer 1940 the USSR issued an ultimatum to Romania forcing it to cede the territories of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina. At the same time, the Soviet Union also occupied the three formerly independent Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania).
The peace with Germany was tense, as both sides were preparing for the military conflict, and abruptly ended when the Axis forces led by Germany swept across the Soviet border on 22 June 1941. By the autumn the German army had seized Ukraine, laid a siege of Leningrad, and threatened to capture the capital, Moscow, itself. Despite the fact that in December 1941 the Red Army threw off the German forces from Moscow in a successful counterattack, the Germans retained the strategic initiative for approximately another year and held a deep offensive in the south-eastern direction, reaching the Volga and the Caucasus. However, two major German defeats in Stalingrad and Kursk proved decisive and reversed the course of the entire World War as the Germans never regained the strength to sustain their offensive operations and the Soviet Union recaptured the initiative for the rest of the conflict. By the end of 1943, the Red Army had broken through the German siege of Leningrad and liberated much of Ukraine, much of Western Russia and moved into Belarus. During the 1944 campaign, the Red Army defeated German forces in a series of offensive campaigns known as Stalin&#x27;s ten blows. By the end of 1944, the front had moved beyond the 1939 Soviet frontiers into eastern Europe. Soviet forces drove into eastern Germany, capturing Berlin in May 1945. The war with Germany thus ended triumphantly for the Soviet Union.

As agreed at the Yalta Conference, three months after the Victory Day in Europe the USSR launched the Soviet invasion of Manchuria, defeating the Japanese troops in neighboring Manchuria, the last Soviet battle of World War II.
Although the Soviet Union was victorious in World War II, the war resulted in around 26–27 million Soviet deaths (estimates vary) and had devastated the Soviet economy in the struggle. Some 70,000 settlements were destroyed. The occupied territories suffered from the ravages of German occupation and deportations of slave labor by Germany. Thirteen million Soviet citizens became victims of the repressive policies of Germany and its allies in occupied territories, where people died because of mass murders, famine, absence of medical aid and slave labor. The Holocaust, carried out by German &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; along with local collaborators, resulted in almost complete annihilation of the Jewish population over the entire territory temporarily occupied by Germany and its allies. During the occupation, the Leningrad region lost around a quarter of its population, Soviet Belarus lost from a quarter to a third of its population, and 3.6 million Soviet prisoners of war (of 5.5 million) died in German camps.

===Cold War===
Collaboration among the major Allies had won the war and was supposed to serve as the basis for postwar reconstruction and security. USSR became one of the founders of the UN and a permanent member of the UN Security Council. However, the conflict between Soviet and U.S. national interests, known as the Cold War, came to dominate the international stage.

The Cold War emerged from a conflict between Stalin and U.S. President Harry Truman over the future of Eastern Europe during the Potsdam Conference in the summer of 1945. Stalin&#x27;s goal was to establish a buffer zone of states between Germany and the Soviet Union. Truman charged that Stalin had betrayed the Yalta agreement. With Eastern Europe under Red Army occupation, Stalin was also biding his time, as his own atomic bomb project was steadily and secretly progressing.
In April 1949 the United States sponsored the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), a mutual defense pact. The Soviet Union established an Eastern counterpart to NATO in 1955, dubbed the Warsaw Pact. The division of Europe into Western and Soviet blocks later took on a more global character, especially after 1949, when the U.S. nuclear monopoly ended with the testing of a Soviet bomb and the Communist takeover in China.

The foremost objectives of Soviet foreign policy were the maintenance and enhancement of national security and the maintenance of hegemony over Eastern Europe. The Soviet Union maintained its dominance over the Warsaw Pact through crushing the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, suppressing the Prague Spring in Czechoslovakia in 1968, and supporting the suppression of the Solidarity movement in Poland in the early 1980s. The Soviet Union opposed the United States in a number of proxy conflicts all over the world, including the Korean War and Vietnam War.

As the Soviet Union continued to maintain tight control over its sphere of influence in Eastern Europe, the Cold War gave way to &quot;Détente&quot; and a more complicated pattern of international relations in the 1970s. The nuclear race continued, the number of nuclear weapons in the hands of the USSR and the United States reached a menacing scale, giving them the ability to destroy the planet multiple times. Less powerful countries had more room to assert their independence, and the two superpowers were partially able to recognize their common interest in trying to check the further spread and proliferation of nuclear weapons in treaties such as SALT I, SALT II, and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.

U.S.–Soviet relations deteriorated following the beginning of the nine-year Soviet–Afghan War in 1979 and the 1980 election of Ronald Reagan, a staunch anti-communist, but improved as the communist bloc started to unravel in the late 1980s. With the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia lost the superpower status that it had won in the Second World War.

===De-Stalinization and the era of stagnation===

Nikita Khrushchev solidified his position in a speech before the Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party in 1956 detailing Stalin&#x27;s atrocities.

In 1964, Khrushchev was impeached by the Communist Party&#x27;s Central Committee, charging him with a host of errors that included Soviet setbacks such as the Cuban Missile Crisis. After a period of collective leadership led by Leonid Brezhnev, Alexei Kosygin and Nikolai Podgorny, Brezhnev took Khrushchev&#x27;s place as Soviet leader. Brezhnev emphasized heavy industry, instituted the Soviet economic reform of 1965, and also attempted to ease relationships with the United States. Soviet science and industry peaked in the Khrushchev and Brezhnev years. The world&#x27;s first nuclear power plant was established in 1954 in Obninsk, and the Baikal Amur Mainline was built. In the 1950s the USSR became a leading producer and exporter of petroleum and natural gas. In 1980 Moscow hosted the Summer Olympic Games.

While all modernized economies were rapidly moving to computerization after 1965, the USSR fell behind. Moscow&#x27;s decision to copy the IBM 360 of 1965 proved a decisive mistake for it locked scientists into an antiquated system they were unable to improve. They had enormous difficulties in manufacturing the necessary chips reliably and in quantity, in programming workable and efficient programs, in coordinating entirely separate operations, and in providing support to computer users.

One of the greatest strengths of Soviet economy was its vast supplies of oil and gas; world oil prices quadrupled in 1973–1974, and rose again in 1979–1981, making the energy sector the chief driver of the Soviet economy, and was used to cover multiple weaknesses. At one point, Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin told the head of oil and gas production, &quot;things are bad with bread. Give me 3 million tons [of oil] over the plan.&quot; Former prime minister Yegor Gaidar, an economist looking back three decades, in 2007 wrote:
===Soviet space program===

The Soviet space program, founded by Sergey Korolev, was especially successful. On 4 October 1957, the Soviet Union launched the first satellite, Sputnik. On 12 April 1961, Yuri Gagarin became the first human to travel into space in the Soviet spaceship Vostok 1. Other achievements of Russian space program include: the first photo of the far side of the Moon; exploration of Venus; the first spacewalk by Alexei Leonov; first female spaceflight by Valentina Tereshkova. In 1970 and 1973, the world&#x27;s first planetary rovers were sent to the moon: Lunokhod 1 and Lunokhod 2. More recently, the Soviet Union produced the world&#x27;s first space station, Salyut, which in 1986 was replaced by Mir, the first consistently inhabited long-term space station, that served from 1986 to 2001.

===Perestroika and Glasnost===
Two developments dominated the decade that followed: the increasingly apparent crumbling of the Soviet Union&#x27;s economic and political structures, and the patchwork attempts at reforms to reverse that process. After the rapid succession of Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko, Mikhail Gorbachev implemented perestroika in an attempt to modernize Soviet communism, and made significant changes in the party leadership. However, Gorbachev&#x27;s social reforms led to unintended consequences. His policy of &quot;glasnost&quot; facilitated public access to information after decades of government repression, and social problems received wider public attention, undermining the Communist Party&#x27;s authority. &quot;Glasnost&quot; allowed ethnic and nationalist disaffection to reach the surface, and many constituent republics, especially the Baltic republics, Georgian SSR and Moldavian SSR, sought greater autonomy, which Moscow was unwilling to provide. In the revolutions of 1989 the USSR lost its allies in Eastern Europe. Gorbachev&#x27;s attempts at economic reform were not sufficient, and the Soviet government left intact most of the fundamental elements of communist economy. Suffering from low pricing of petroleum and natural gas, the ongoing war in Afghanistan, and outdated industry and pervasive corruption, the Soviet planned economy proved to be ineffective, and by 1990 the Soviet government had lost control over economic conditions. Due to price control, there were shortages of almost all products. Control over the constituent republics was also relaxed, and they began to assert their national sovereignty.

The tension between Soviet Union and Russian SFSR authorities came to be personified in the power struggle between Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin. Squeezed out of Union politics by Gorbachev in 1987, Yeltsin, who represented himself as a committed democrat, presented a significant opposition to Gorbachev&#x27;s authority. In a remarkable reversal of fortunes, he gained election as chairman of the Russian republic&#x27;s new Supreme Soviet in May 1990.

===Priority over Soviet Union laws and negotiations on a new Treaty===
The following month, Yeltsin secured legislation giving Russian laws priority over Soviet laws. Article 5 of the Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic establishes the full authority of the RSFSR, with the exception of those which it voluntarily transfers to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, as well as the supremacy of the Constitution of the RSFSR and the laws of the RSFSR over the entire territory of the RSFSR. Acts of the Union of SSR which conflict with the sovereign rights of the RSFSR shall be suspended by the Republic on its territory. And also Yeltsin withholding two-thirds of the budget. In the first Russian presidential election in 1991 Yeltsin became president of the Russian SFSR. At last Gorbachev attempted to restructure the Soviet Union into a less centralized state. However, on 19 August 1991, a coup against Gorbachev was attempted. The coup faced wide popular opposition and collapsed in three days, but disintegration of the Union became imminent. The Russian government took over most of the Soviet Union government institutions on its territory. Because of the dominant position of Russians in the Soviet Union, most gave little thought to any distinction between Russia and the Soviet Union before the late 1980s. In the Soviet Union, only Russian SFSR lacked its own republic-level Communist Party branch, trade union councils, Academy of Sciences, and the like.

=== Soviet coup attempt, the Transition Period and the end of the Soviet Union ===

The Communist Party of the Soviet Union was banned in Russia in 1991, although no lustration has ever taken place, and many of its members became top Russian officials. However, as the Soviet government was still opposed to immediate market reforms, the economic situation continued to deteriorate.

On 24 September, RSFSR State Secretary Gennady Burbulis arrived to Boris Yeltsin, who was on vacation at the Black Sea coast. He brought a document “Russia&#x27;s Strategy for the Transition Period”, which later received the unofficial name “Burbulis Memorandum”. The “memorandum” contained an analysis of the situation in the country, proposals on what should be done without delay, prepared by Yegor Gaidar&#x27;s group. The document concluded that Russia should take the course of economic independence with a “soft”, “temporary” political alliance with other republics, i.e. to create not a declared, but a truly independent state of Russia. 30 years later, Burbulis recalled that the Burbulis Memorandum was the reform concept of Gaidar&#x27;s group: There was not any secrecy. First Yegor Gaidar made a report at the State Council of the RSFSR, and then Burbulis spoke at the State Council and said he would make a report for Yeltsin.

As the Kommersant newspaper wrote on 7 October 1991, a series of conflicts occurred in the RSFSR government during preparations for the signing of the Treaty on the Economic Community. In his speech to members of the Russian parliament, RSFSR State Secretary Gennady Burbulis declared Russia&#x27;s special role as the legal successor to the Soviet Union. Accordingly, the ways of drafting agreements with the republics should be determined by the Russian leadership. Instead of the planned order, he suggested signing a political agreement first, followed by an economic one. The newspaper suggested that Burbulis&#x27; goal was to persuade Yeltsin not to sign the agreement as it stands at the time. Yegor Gaidar, Alexander Shokhin and Konstantin Kagalovsky were named as the developers of the statement made by Burbulis. In the same time, a group of &quot;isolationist patriots&quot; consisting of Mikhail Maley, Nikolai Fedorov, Alexander Shokhin, Igor Lazarev and Mikhail Poltoranin criticized Ivan Silaev and Yevgeny Saburov for wanting to preserve the Soviet Union.

The Treaty on Economic Community was signed in Moscow on 18 October 1991 in a single copy in the Russian language by the competent representatives, including Boris Yeltsin.

By December 1991, the shortages had resulted in the introduction of food rationing in Moscow and Saint Petersburg for the first time since World War II. Russia received humanitarian food aid from abroad. After the Belavezha Accords, the Supreme Soviet of Russia withdrew Russia from the Soviet Union on 12 December. The Soviet Union officially ended on 25 December 1991, and the Russian Federation (formerly the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic) took power on 26 December. The Russian government lifted price control on 2 January 1992. Prices rose dramatically, but shortages disappeared.

==Russian Federation (1991–present)==
=== Independent country and the Commonwealth ===
Post-Soviet countries have signed a series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union multilaterally and bilaterally in particular status in international organizations, nuclear weapons and debts and assets and general agreements.

===Liberal reforms of the 1990s===
Although Yeltsin came to power on a wave of optimism, he never recovered his popularity after endorsing Yegor Gaidar&#x27;s &quot;shock therapy&quot; of ending Soviet-era price controls, drastic cuts in state spending, and an open foreign trade regime in early 1992 (&quot;see&quot; Russian economic reform in the 1990s). The reforms immediately devastated the living standards of much of the population. In the 1990s Russia suffered an economic downturn that was, in some ways, more severe than the United States or Germany had undergone six decades earlier in the Great Depression. Hyperinflation hit the ruble, due to monetary overhang from the days of the planned economy.

Meanwhile, the profusion of small parties and their aversion to coherent alliances left the legislature chaotic. During 1993, Yeltsin&#x27;s rift with the parliamentary leadership led to the September–October 1993 constitutional crisis. The crisis climaxed on 3 October, when Yeltsin chose a radical solution to settle his dispute with parliament: he called up tanks to shell the Russian White House, blasting out his opponents. As Yeltsin was taking the unconstitutional step of dissolving the legislature, Russia came close to a serious civil conflict. Yeltsin was then free to impose the current Russian constitution with strong presidential powers, which was approved by referendum in December 1993. The cohesion of the Russian Federation was also threatened when the republic of Chechnya attempted to break away, leading to the First and Second Chechen Wars.

Economic reforms also consolidated a semi-criminal oligarchy with roots in the old Soviet system. Advised by Western governments, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund, Russia embarked on the largest and fastest privatization ever to reform the fully nationalized Soviet economy. By mid-decade, retail, trade, services, and small industry was in private hands. Most big enterprises were acquired by their old managers, engendering a new rich (Russian tycoons) in league with criminal mafias or Western investors. Corporate raiders such as Andrei Volgin engaged in hostile takeovers of corrupt corporations by the mid-1990s.

By the mid-1990s Russia had a system of multiparty electoral politics. But it was harder to establish a representative government because of the struggle between president and parliament and the anarchic party system.

Meanwhile, the central government had lost control of the localities, bureaucracy, and economic fiefdoms, and tax revenues had collapsed. Still in a deep depression, Russia&#x27;s economy was hit further by the financial crash of 1998. At the end of 1999, Yeltsin made a surprise announcement of his resignation, leaving the government in the hands of the Prime Minister Vladimir Putin.

===Era of Putin===

In 2000, the new acting president won the presidential election on 26 March and won in a landslide four years later. The Second Chechen war ended with the victory of Russia. After the 11 September terrorist attacks, there was a rapprochement between Russia and the United States. Putin created a system of guided democracy in Russia by subjugating parliament, suppressing independent media and placing major oil and gas companies under state control.

International observers were alarmed by moves in late 2004 to further tighten the presidency&#x27;s control over parliament, civil society, and regional officeholders. In 2008, Dmitri Medvedev, Putin&#x27;s head of staff, was elected President. In 2012, Putin became president again, prompting massive protests in Moscow.

Russia&#x27;s long-term problems include a shrinking workforce, rampant corruption, and underinvestment in infrastructure. Nevertheless, reversion to a socialist command economy seemed almost impossible. The economic problems are aggravated by massive capital outflows, as well as extremely difficult conditions for doing business, due to pressure from the security forces &quot;Siloviki&quot; and government agencies.

Due to high oil prices, from 2000 to 2008, Russia&#x27;s GDP at PPP doubled. Although high oil prices and a relatively cheap ruble initially drove this growth, since 2003 consumer demand and, more recently, investment have played a significant role. Russia is well ahead of most other resource-rich countries in its economic development, with a long tradition of education, science, and industry. Russia hosted the 2014 Winter Olympic Games in Sochi.

In 2014, following a controversial referendum, in which separation was favored by a large majority of voters according to official results, the Russian leadership announced the accession of Crimea into the Russian Federation, thus starting the Russo-Ukrainian War. Following Russia&#x27;s annexation of Crimea and alleged Russian interference in the war in eastern Ukraine, international sanctions were imposed on Russia.

On 4 December 2011, elections to the State Duma were held, as a result of which United Russia won for the third time in a row. The official voting results caused significant protests in the country; a number of political scientists and journalists noted various falsifications on election day. In 2012, according to another pre-election agreement, a &quot;castling&quot; took place; Vladimir Putin again became president and Dmitry Medvedev took over as chairman of the government, after which the protests acquired an anti-Putin orientation, but soon began to decline.

Since 2015, Russia has been conducting military intervention in Syria in support of the Bashar al-Assad regime.

In 2018, Vladimir Putin was re-elected for a fourth presidential term.

In 2022, Russia launched the invasion of Ukraine, which was denounced by NATO and the European Union. They aided Ukraine and imposed massive International sanctions during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. A leading banker in Moscow said the damage might take a decade to recover, as half of its international trade has been lost. Despite international opposition, Russia officially annexed the Donetsk People&#x27;s Republic and the Luhansk People&#x27;s Republic, along with most of the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia Oblasts on 30 September. According to the United Nations, Russia has committed war crimes during the invasion.

On 23 June 2023, the Wagner Group, a Russian paramilitary organization led by Yevgeny Prigozhin, rebelled against the government. As of August 2023, the total number of Russian and Ukrainian soldiers killed or wounded during the Russian invasion of Ukraine was nearly 500,000.

==Historiography==
==See also==

* Dissolution of the Soviet Union
* Family tree of the Russian monarchs
* General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
* History of Central Asia
* History of Siberia
* History of the administrative division of Russia
* History of the Caucasus
* History of the Jews in Russia
* History of the Soviet Union
* List of heads of government of Russia
* List of Mongol and Tatar raids against Rus&#x27;
* List of presidents of Russia
* List of Russian explorers
* List of Russian rulers
* List of wars involving Russia
* Military history of the Russian Empire
* Military history of the Soviet Union
* Politics of Russia
* Russian Armed Forces
* Russian colonization of the Americas
* Russian Empire
* Soviet Union
* Timeline of Moscow
* Timeline of Russian history
* Timeline of Russian innovation
==References==
==Further reading==

===Surveys===
* Auty, Robert, and Dimitri Obolensky, eds. &quot;Companion to Russian Studies: vol 1: An Introduction to Russian History&quot; (1981) 403 pages; surveys by scholars.
* Bartlett, Roger P. &quot;A History of Russia&quot; (2005) online
* Brown, Archie et al. eds. &quot;The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Russia and the Former Soviet Union&quot; (2nd ed. 1994) 664 pages online
* Bushkovitch, Paul. &quot;A Concise History of Russia&quot; (2011) excerpt and text search 
* Connolly, Richard. &quot;The Russian Economy: A Very Short Introduction&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2020). Online review 
* Figes, Orlando. &quot;Natasha&#x27;s Dance: A Cultural History of Russia&quot; (2002). excerpt 
* Florinsky, Michael T. ed. &quot;McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Russia and the Soviet Union&quot; (1961).
* Freeze, Gregory L., ed.. &quot;Russia: A History&quot;. 2nd ed. (Oxford UP, 2002). .
* Harcave, Sidney, ed. &quot;Readings in Russian history&quot; (1962) excerpts from scholars. online
* Hosking, Geoffrey A. &quot;Russia and the Russians: a History&quot; (2011) online
* Jelavich, Barbara. &quot; St. Petersburg and Moscow: Tsarist and Soviet Foreign Policy, 1814–1974&quot; (1974).
* Kort, Michael. &quot;A Brief History of Russia&quot; (2008) online
* McKenzie, David &amp; Michael W. Curran. &quot;A History of Russia, the Soviet Union, and Beyond&quot;. 6th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing, 2001. .
* Millar, James, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of Russian History&quot; (4 vol. 2003). online
* Pares, Bernard. &quot;A History of Russia&quot; (1926) By a leading historian. Online
* Paxton, John. &quot;Encyclopedia of Russian History&quot; (1993) online
* Paxton, John. &quot;Companion to Russian history&quot; (1983) online
* Perrie, Maureen, et al. &quot;The Cambridge History of Russia&quot;. (3 vol. Cambridge University Press, 2006). excerpt and text search 
* Riasanovsky, Nicholas V., and Mark D. Steinberg. &quot;A History of Russia&quot; (9th ed. 2018) 9th edition 1993 online
* Service, Robert. &quot;A History of Modern Russia: From Tsarism to the Twenty-First Century&quot; (Harvard UP, 3rd ed., 2009) excerpt 
* Stone, David. &quot;A Military History of Russia: From Ivan the Terrible to the War in Chechnya&quot; excerpts 
* Ziegler; Charles E. &quot;The History of Russia&quot; (Greenwood Press, 1999)

===Russian Empire===

* Baykov, Alexander. “The Economic Development of Russia.” &quot;Economic History Review&quot; 7#2 1954, pp. 137–149. online 
* Billington, James H. &quot;The icon and the axe; an interpretive history of Russian culture&quot; (1966) online 
* Christian, David. &quot;A History of Russia, Central Asia and Mongolia&quot;. Vol. 1: &quot;Inner Eurasia from Prehistory to the Mongol Empire&quot;. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 1998. .
* De Madariaga, Isabel. &quot;Russia in the Age of Catherine the Great&quot; (2002), comprehensive topical survey
* Fuller, William C. &quot;Strategy and Power in Russia 1600–1914&quot; (1998) excerpts 
* Hughes, Lindsey. &quot;Russia in the Age of Peter the Great&quot; (Yale UP, 1998), Comprehensive topical survey. online
* Kahan, Arcadius. &quot;The Plow, the Hammer, and the Knout: An Economic History of Eighteenth-Century Russia&quot; (1985)
* Kahan, Arcadius. &quot;Russian Economic History: The Nineteenth Century&quot; (1989)
** Gatrell, Peter. &quot;Review: Russian Economic History: The Legacy of Arcadius Kahan&quot; &quot;Slavic Review&quot; 50#1 (1991), pp. 176–178 online 
* Lincoln, W. Bruce. &quot;The Romanovs: Autocrats of All the Russias&quot; (1983) online, sweeping narrative history
* Lincoln, W. Bruce. &quot;The great reforms : autocracy, bureaucracy, and the politics of change in Imperial Russia&quot; (1990) online
* Manning, Roberta. &quot;The Crisis of the Old Order in Russia: Gentry and Government&quot;. Princeton University Press, 1982.
* Markevich, Andrei, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2018. “Economic Effects of the Abolition of Serfdom: Evidence from the Russian Empire.” &quot;American Economic Review&quot; 108.4–5: 1074–1117.
* Mironov, Boris N., and Ben Eklof. &quot;The Social History of Imperial Russia, 1700–1917&quot; (2 vol Westview Press, 2000) 
* Moss, Walter G. &quot;A History of Russia&quot;. Vol. 1: &quot;To 1917&quot;. 2d ed. Anthem Press, 2002.
* Oliva, Lawrence Jay. ed. &quot;Russia in the era of Peter the Great&quot; (1969), excerpts from primary and secondary sources online
* Pipes, Richard. &quot;Russia under the Old Regime&quot; (2nd ed. 1997)
* Seton-Watson, Hugh. &quot;The Russian Empire 1801–1917&quot; (Oxford History of Modern Europe) (1988) excerpt and text search 
* Treasure, Geoffrey. &quot;The Making of Modern Europe, 1648–1780&quot; (3rd ed. 2003). pp. 550–600.

===Soviet era===

* Chamberlin, William Henry. &quot;The Russian Revolution 1917–1921&quot; (2 vol 1935) online free
* Cohen, Stephen F. &quot;Rethinking the Soviet Experience: Politics and History since 1917&quot;. (Oxford University Press, 1985)
* Davies, R. W. &quot;Soviet economic development from Lenin to Khrushchev&quot; (1998) excerpt 
* Davies, R.W., Mark Harrison and S.G. Wheatcroft. &quot;The Economic transformation of the Soviet Union, 1913-1945&quot; (1994)
* Figes, Orlando. &quot;A people&#x27;s tragedy a history of the Russian Revolution&quot; (1997) online
* Fitzpatrick, Sheila. &quot;The Russian Revolution&quot;. (Oxford University Press, 1982), 208 pages. 
* Gregory, Paul R. and Robert C. Stuart, &quot;Russian and Soviet Economic Performance and Structure&quot; (7th ed. 2001)
* Hosking, Geoffrey. &quot;The First Socialist Society: A History of the Soviet Union from Within&quot; (2nd ed. Harvard UP 1992) 570 pages
* Kennan, George F. &quot;Russia and the West under Lenin and Stalin&quot; (1961) online
* Kort, Michael. &quot;The Soviet Colossus: History and Aftermath&quot; (7th ed. 2010) 502 pages
* Kotkin, Stephen. &quot;Stalin: Paradoxes of Power, 1878–1928&quot; (2014); vol 2 (2017)
* Library of Congress. &quot;Russia: a country study&quot; edited by Glenn E. Curtis. (Federal Research Division, Library of Congress, 1996). online 
* Lincoln, W. Bruce. &quot;Passage Through Armageddon: The Russians in War and Revolution, 1914–1918&quot; (1986)
* Lewin, Moshe. &quot;Russian Peasants and Soviet Power&quot;. (Northwestern University Press, 1968)
* McCauley, Martin. &quot;The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union &quot; (2007), 522 pages.
* Moss, Walter G. &quot;A History of Russia&quot;. Vol. 2: Since 1855. 2d ed. Anthem Press, 2005.
* Nove, Alec. &quot;An Economic History of the USSR, 1917–1991&quot;. 3rd ed. London: Penguin Books, 1993. .
* Ofer, Gur. &quot;Soviet Economic Growth: 1928-1985,&quot; &quot;Journal of Economic Literature&quot; (1987) 25#4: 1767–1833. online 
* Pipes, Richard. &quot;A concise history of the Russian Revolution&quot; (1995) online
* Regelson, Lev. &quot;Tragedy of Russian Church. 1917–1953.&quot; http://www.regels.org/Russian-Church.htm 
* Remington, Thomas. &quot;Building Socialism in Bolshevik Russia&quot;. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1984.
* Service, Robert. &quot;A History of Twentieth-Century Russia&quot;. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999. .
* Service, Robert. &quot;Stalin: A Biography&quot; (2004), along with Tucker and Kotkin, a standard biography
* Steinberg, Mark D. &quot;The Russian Revolution, 1905–1921&quot; (Oxford Histories, 2017).
* Tucker, Robert C. &quot;Stalin as Revolutionary, 1879–1929&quot; (1973); &quot;Stalin in Power: The Revolution from Above, 1929–1941.&quot; (1990)along with Kotkin and Service books, a standard biography; online at ACLS e-books

===Post-Soviet era===
* Asmus, Ronald. &quot;A Little War that Shook the World : Georgia, Russia, and the Future of the West&quot;. NYU (2010). 
* Cohen, Stephen. &quot;Failed Crusade: America and the Tragedy of Post-Communist Russia&quot;. New York: W.W. Norton, 2000, 320 pages. 
* Gregory, Paul R. and Robert C. Stuart, &quot;Russian and Soviet Economic Performance and Structure&quot;, Addison-Wesley, Seventh Edition, 2001.
* Medvedev, Roy. &quot;Post-Soviet Russia A Journey Through the Yeltsin Era&quot;, Columbia University Press, 2002, 394 pages. 
* Moss, Walter G. &quot;A History of Russia&quot;. Vol. 2: &quot;Since 1855&quot;. 2d ed. Anthem Press, 2005. Chapter 22.
* Smorodinskaya, Tatiana, and Karen Evans-Romaine, eds. &quot;Encyclopedia of Contemporary Russian Culture&quot; (2014) excerpt ; 800 pp covering art, literature, music, film, media, crime, politics, business, and economics.
* Stent, Angela. &quot;The Limits of Partnership: U.S.-Russian Relations in the Twenty-First Century&quot; (2014)
===Atlases, geography===
* Blinnikov, Mikhail S. &quot;A geography of Russia and its neighbors&quot; (Guilford Press, 2011)
* Barnes, Ian. &quot;Restless Empire: A Historical Atlas of Russia&quot; (2015), copies of historic maps
* Catchpole, Brian. &quot;A Map History of Russia&quot; (Heinemann Educational Publishers, 1974), new topical maps.
* Channon, John, and Robert Hudson. &quot;The Penguin Historical Atlas of Russia&quot; (Viking, 1995), new topical maps.
* Chew, Allen F. &quot;An Atlas of Russian History: Eleven Centuries of Changing Borders&quot; (Yale UP, 1970), new topical maps.
* Gilbert, Martin. &quot;Routledge Atlas of Russian History&quot; (4th ed. 2007) excerpt and text search online
* Henry, Laura A. &quot;Red to Green: environmental activism in post-Soviet Russia&quot; (2010)
* Kaiser, Robert J. &quot;The Geography of Nationalism in Russia and the USSR&quot; (1994).
* Medvedev, Andrei. &quot;Economic Geography of the Russian Federation&quot; by (2000)
* Parker, William Henry. &quot;An historical Geography of Russia&quot; (University of London Press, 1968)
* Shaw, Denis J. B. &quot;Russia in the Modern World: A New Geography&quot; (Blackwell, 1998) of Finland.

===Historiography===
* Baron, Samuel H., and Nancy W. Heer. &quot;The Soviet Union: Historiography Since Stalin.&quot; in Georg G. Iggers and Harold Talbot Parker, eds. &quot;International handbook of historical studies: contemporary research and theory&quot; (Taylor &amp; Francis, 1979). pp. 281–94.
* 
* David-Fox, Michael et al. eds. &quot;After the Fall: Essays in Russian and Soviet Historiography&quot; (Bloomington: Slavica Publishers, 2004)
* Firestone, Thomas. &quot;Four Sovietologists: A Primer.&quot; &quot;National Interest&quot; No. 14 (Winter 1988–9), pp. 102–107 on the ideas of Zbigniew Brzezinski, Stephen F. Cohen, Jerry F. Hough, and Richard Pipes.
* Fitzpatrick, Sheila. &quot;Revisionism in Soviet History&quot; &quot;History and Theory&quot; (2007) 46#4 pp. 77–91 online, covers the scholarship of the three major schools, totalitarianism, revisionism, and post-revisionism.
* (e-book).
* (digital printing 2004)
* (third edition)
* 
* Sanders, Thomas, ed. &quot;Historiography of Imperial Russia: The Profession and Writing of History in a Multinational State&quot; (1999).
* Suny, Ronald Grigor. &quot;Rehabilitating Tsarism: The Imperial Russian State and Its Historians. A Review Article&quot; &quot;Comparative Studies in Society and History&quot; 31#1 (1989) pp. 168–179 online
* Topolski, Jerzy. &quot;Soviet Studies and Social History&quot; in Georg G. Iggers and Harold Talbot Parker, eds. &quot;International handbook of historical studies: contemporary research and theory&quot; (Taylor &amp; Francis, 1979. pp. 295–300.

===Primary sources===
* Kaiser, Daniel H. and Gary Marker, eds. &quot;Reinterpreting Russian History: Readings 860-1860s&quot; (1994) 464 pages excerpt and text search; primary documents and excerpts from historians
* Vernadsky, George, et al. eds. &quot;Source Book for Russian History from Early Times to 1917&quot; (3 vol 1972)
* Seventeen Moments in Soviet History (An on-line archive of primary source materials on Soviet history.)

==External links==
* Guides to Sources on Russian History and Historiography
* History of Russia: Primary Documents
* Дневник Истории России A historic project supported by the Ministry of Culture of the Russian Federation.
* Williams, Henry Smith (Ed.) 1905, The historians&#x27; history of the world in twenty-five volumes, volume 17: Switzerland (concluded), Russia and Poland, New York: The Outlook Company.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161414" start="4" end="21" title="History of Russia" label="history of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="55" end="65" title="East Slavs" label="East Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q914114" start="154" end="163" title="Rus&amp;#x27; people" label="Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="209" end="219" title="Varangians" label="Varangians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131983" start="236" end="252" title="Oleg of Novgorod" label="Oleg of Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="260" end="264" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q573211" start="514" end="560" title="Christianization of Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="adopted Christianity from the Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="596" end="605" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="607" end="613" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="618" end="630" title="Scandinavians" label="Scandinavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="653" end="668" title="Russia" label="Russian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="694" end="710" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134220" start="758" end="774" title="Mongol invasion of Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Mongol invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="813" end="819" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330381" start="887" end="921" title="Collector of Russian lands" label="unification of Russian territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798550" start="967" end="987" title="petty kingdom" label="petty principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="1027" end="1048" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Grand Duchy of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q171185" start="1103" end="1117" title="Ivan III of Russia" label="Ivan the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="1120" end="1137" title="Ivan the Terrible" label="Ivan the Terrible"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="1175" end="1192" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Tsardom of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186321" start="1240" end="1248" title="Feodor I of Russia" label="Feodor I"/>
<link wikidata="Q86447" start="1257" end="1262" title="Issue (genealogy)" label="issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632608" start="1281" end="1298" title="succession crisis" label="succession crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q94080" start="1364" end="1380" title="Time of Troubles" label="Time of Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q181915" start="1412" end="1427" title="Michael of Russia" label="Michael Romanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="1453" end="1468" title="Romanov dynasty" label="Romanov dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q735349" start="1543" end="1578" title="Russian conquest of Siberia" label="exploration and conquest of Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="1768" end="1775" title="Cossack" label="Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q193175" start="1783" end="1795" title="Stenka Razin" label="Stenka Razin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="1856" end="1874" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="1881" end="1896" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1922" end="1936" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="1972" end="1986" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="2123" end="2142" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560581" start="2234" end="2255" title="Russian Enlightenment" label="Russian Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="2284" end="2295" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="2309" end="2348" title="French invasion of Russia" label="invasion by the French Emperor Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="2395" end="2406" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="2486" end="2498" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192212" start="2499" end="2509" title="Emancipation reform of 1861" label="abolishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498278" start="2510" end="2525" title="Serfdom in Russia" label="Russian serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221926" start="2588" end="2603" title="Stolypin reform" label="Stolypin reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583213" start="2623" end="2643" title="Russian Constitution of 1906" label="constitution of 1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649453" start="2653" end="2663" title="State Duma (Russian Empire)" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057121" start="2782" end="2797" title="Tsarist autocracy" label="autocratic rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942912" start="2888" end="2928" title="Russia in World War I" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s involvement in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="3000" end="3018" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="3032" end="3051" title="February Revolution" label="end of the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="3168" end="3186" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="3197" end="3210" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Soviet Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="3227" end="3240" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="3242" end="3258" title="Byelorussian SSR" label="Byelorussian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q545205" start="3264" end="3283" title="Transcaucasian SFSR" label="Transcaucasian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443926" start="3295" end="3329" title="Treaty on the Creation of the USSR" label="Treaty on the Creation of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q462252" start="3480" end="3507" title="history of the Soviet Union" label="history of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3533" end="3545" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="3557" end="3568" title="Allies of World War II" label="the victors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426435" start="3572" end="3584" title="Soviet Union in World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="3609" end="3634" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="surprise invasion in 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3638" end="3650" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342294" start="3659" end="3672" title="Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy" label="collaborators"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="3704" end="3723" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="3782" end="3797" title="satellite state" label="satellite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090550" start="3846" end="3865" title="Soviet Empire" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="3933" end="3943" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3981" end="3994" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="4030" end="4038" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="4139" end="4156" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="4229" end="4244" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="communist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="4249" end="4280" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293292" start="4343" end="4372" title="History of Russia (1991–present)" label="history of post-Soviet Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4445" end="4463" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263317" start="4487" end="4522" title="Lisbon Protocol" label="successor state to the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="4544" end="4559" title="nuclear arsenal" label="nuclear arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="4573" end="4583" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="4606" end="4622" title="planned economy" label="central planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="4717" end="4731" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q74532" start="4806" end="4820" title="Foreign policy of Russia" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="4941" end="4976" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="annexation of the Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="5040" end="5054" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="5075" end="5094" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111022187" start="5125" end="5134" title="International sanctions during the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972130" start="5167" end="5187" title="corruption in Russia" label="corruption in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953879" start="5239" end="5261" title="Human rights in Russia" label="human rights situation"/>
<link wikidata="Q746287" start="5411" end="5418" title="Oldowan" label="Oldowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="5439" end="5456" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="5510" end="5522" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216664" start="5609" end="5624" title="Taman Peninsula" label="Taman Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q131678" start="5652" end="5676" title="Elasmotherium" label="Elasmotherium caucasicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q746287" start="5768" end="5775" title="Oldowan" label="Oldowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="5816" end="5824" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151055" start="5957" end="5967" title="Denisova hominin" label="Denisovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029322" start="6045" end="6058" title="Denisova Cave" label="Denisova Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q56233289" start="6136" end="6189" title="Denny (hybrid hominin)" label="hybrid of a Neanderthal mother and a Denisovan father"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="6242" end="6253" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34003" start="6305" end="6321" title="Mezmaiskaya cave" label="Mezmaiskaya cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734" start="6325" end="6331" title="Adygea" label="Adygea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="6397" end="6411" title="Archaeology" label="archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q883" start="6463" end="6474" title="Novosibirsk" label="Novosibirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029322" start="6499" end="6512" title="Denisova Cave" label="Denisova Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="6520" end="6535" title="Altai Mountains" label="Altai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="6539" end="6546" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107588" start="6632" end="6639" title="hominin" label="hominin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151055" start="6734" end="6750" title="Denisova hominin" label="Denisova hominin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357554" start="6887" end="6906" title="Ust&amp;#x27;-Ishim man" label="Ust&amp;#x27;-Ishim man"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="6976" end="7001" title="anatomically-modern human" label="anatomically modern human"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235785" start="7058" end="7086" title="Kostyonki–Borshchyovo archaeological complex" label="Kostenki archaeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="7096" end="7105" title="Don (river)" label="Don River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779534" start="7160" end="7166" title="Sungir" label="Sungir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285047" start="7217" end="7234" title="Mamontovaya Kurya" label="Mamontovaya Kurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="7295" end="7301" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="7335" end="7340" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361802" start="7345" end="7365" title="nomadic pastoralists" label="nomadic pastoralists"/>
<link wikidata="Q599529" start="7396" end="7409" title="Pontic Steppe" label="Pontic Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q845909" start="7429" end="7436" title="Scythia" label="Scythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q586868" start="7557" end="7564" title="Ipatovo kurgan" label="Ipatovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090987" start="7566" end="7575" title="Sintashta" label="Sintashta"/>
<link wikidata="Q672602" start="7577" end="7583" title="Arkaim" label="Arkaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273537" start="7589" end="7596" title="Pazyryk burials" label="Pazyryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="7678" end="7700" title="classical civilization" label="classical civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153416" start="7727" end="7733" title="Tanais" label="Tanais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344411" start="7738" end="7748" title="Phanagoria" label="Phanagoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499805" start="7750" end="7757" title="Gelonus" label="Gelonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="7775" end="7784" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q88598" start="7845" end="7849" title="Grad (Slavic settlement)" label="grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q851432" start="7888" end="7894" title="Budini" label="Budini"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="7923" end="7940" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="7942" end="7950" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="7996" end="8005" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="8095" end="8098" title="Don (river)" label="Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="8140" end="8147" title="Miletus" label="Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35000" start="8205" end="8216" title="Sea of Azov" label="Sea of Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q321371" start="8289" end="8305" title="Bosporan Kingdom" label="Bosporan Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380487" start="8358" end="8375" title="Kingdom of Pontus" label="Kingdom of Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="8436" end="8450" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8512" end="8524" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432491" start="8659" end="8663" title="Oium" label="Oium"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="8715" end="8719" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="8927" end="8931" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="8936" end="8949" title="Avars (Carpathians)" label="Turkish Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q476030" start="9277" end="9283" title="Khanty" label="Khanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q173282" start="9412" end="9419" title="Khazars" label="Khazars"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="9437" end="9442" title="Volga River" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="9449" end="9455" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="9469" end="9476" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="9481" end="9490" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="9650" end="9657" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="9677" end="9684" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9720" end="9740" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="9792" end="9796" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="9797" end="9806" title="Caliphate" label="Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="9934" end="9942" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="9952" end="9965" title="Slavic peoples" label="Slavic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117504" start="10032" end="10046" title="Pripet Marshes" label="Pripet Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="10052" end="10068" title="Early East Slavs" label="Early East Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q875134" start="10087" end="10101" title="Western Russia" label="Western Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="10132" end="10136" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="10150" end="10157" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15757" start="10179" end="10185" title="Suzdal" label="Suzdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162677" start="10190" end="10195" title="Murom" label="Murom"/>
<link wikidata="Q200797" start="10213" end="10220" title="Polotsk" label="Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="10234" end="10241" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="10251" end="10259" title="Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q193342" start="10264" end="10270" title="Rostov, Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367703" start="10419" end="10425" title="Finnic peoples" label="Finnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="10430" end="10443" title="Baltic peoples" label="Baltic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144528" start="10457" end="10462" title="Merya people" label="Merya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439159" start="10468" end="10477" title="Muromians" label="Muromians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308743" start="10487" end="10496" title="Meshchera" label="Meshchera"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="10533" end="10544" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="10565" end="10572" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="10595" end="10604" title="Varangian" label="Varangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="10628" end="10634" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="10756" end="10762" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="10770" end="10775" title="Black Sea" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="10780" end="10791" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378226" start="10821" end="10846" title="Calling of the Varangians" label="Calling of the Varangians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966817" start="10868" end="10887" title="Rus&amp;#x27; chronicle" label="Rus&amp;#x27; chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297698" start="10907" end="10931" title="Novgorod First Chronicle" label="Novgorod First Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192551" start="10948" end="10965" title="Primary Chronicle" label="Primary Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990" start="10988" end="10993" title="Rurik" label="Rurik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738563" start="10995" end="11012" title="Sineus and Truvor" label="Sineus and Truvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="11079" end="11087" title="Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q216794" start="11104" end="11118" title="Staraya Ladoga" label="Staraya Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q545413" start="11126" end="11140" title="Hypatian Codex" label="Hypatian Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q104764" start="11149" end="11158" title="Beloozero" label="Beloozero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135534" start="11164" end="11171" title="Izborsk" label="Izborsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="11331" end="11335" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="11425" end="11434" title="Kievan Rus" label="Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="11473" end="11486" title="Dnieper River" label="Dnieper River"/>
<link wikidata="Q378346" start="11630" end="11671" title="Trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks" label="the trade route for furs, wax, and slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="11700" end="11716" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243" start="11727" end="11734" title="Volkhov River" label="Volkhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="11801" end="11806" title="Old Norse language" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905322" start="11894" end="11899" title="Byzantine Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119206" start="11951" end="11960" title="Rus&amp;#x27;–Byzantine War (disambiguation)" label="campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258133" start="11969" end="11977" title="Tsargrad" label="Tsargrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="11982" end="11996" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q782900" start="12056" end="12064" title="druzhina" label="druzhina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058572" start="12073" end="12085" title="Svyatoslav I" label="Svyatoslav I"/>
<link wikidata="Q173282" start="12140" end="12147" title="Khazars" label="Khazars"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="12218" end="12232" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Slavic variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="12240" end="12256" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q573211" start="12404" end="12431" title="Christianization of Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="adopted Christianity in 988"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="12462" end="12469" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14974" start="12493" end="12510" title="Vladimir I of Kiev" label="Prince Vladimir I"/>
<link wikidata="Q783761" start="12553" end="12568" title="Russkaya Pravda" label="Russkaya Pravda"/>
<link wikidata="Q188943" start="12588" end="12605" title="Yaroslav the Wise" label="Yaroslav the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q188943" start="12767" end="12784" title="Yaroslav the Wise" label="Yaroslav the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="13003" end="13019" title="Russian language" label="Russian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="13049" end="13054" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="13059" end="13064" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33251" start="13111" end="13126" title="Church Slavonic" label="Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="13148" end="13155" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q682597" start="13194" end="13202" title="Kipchaks" label="Kipchaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="13252" end="13261" title="Pechenegs" label="Pechenegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338372" start="13703" end="13710" title="Zalesye" label="Zalesye"/>
<link wikidata="Q83546" start="13903" end="13918" title="Vladimir-Suzdal" label="Vladimir-Suzdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151536" start="13938" end="13946" title="Novgorod Republic" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q239502" start="13965" end="13980" title="Halych-Volhynia" label="Halych-Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="14016" end="14022" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="14023" end="14035" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="14150" end="14180" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q151536" start="14241" end="14258" title="Novgorod Republic" label="Novgorod Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="14418" end="14425" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="14463" end="14466" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Rus"/>
<link wikidata="Q570204" start="14550" end="14561" title="Battle of the Kalka River" label="Kalka River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684" start="14637" end="14645" title="Vladimir, Russia" label="Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q183249" start="14728" end="14750" title="Battle of the Sit River" label="at the Sit&amp;#x27; River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="14777" end="14783" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="14788" end="14795" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q151536" start="14869" end="14886" title="Novgorod Republic" label="Novgorod Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="14952" end="14968" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288" start="15244" end="15248" title="Tver" label="Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q891" start="15253" end="15268" title="Nizhny Novgorod" label="Nizhny Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q393871" start="15323" end="15347" title="Rus&amp;#x27; principalities" label="Rus&amp;#x27; principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="15376" end="15388" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q188995" start="15439" end="15453" title="Dmitry Donskoy" label="Dmitry Donskoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333218" start="15478" end="15483" title="Mamai" label="Mamai"/>
<link wikidata="Q210354" start="15487" end="15495" title="Battle of Kulikovo" label="Kulikovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q309585" start="15528" end="15538" title="Tokhtamysh" label="Tokhtamysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618099" start="15576" end="15597" title="Siege of Moscow (1382)" label="sacked Moscow in 1382"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="15754" end="15767" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimean Khans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25628" start="15859" end="15898" title="Great Stand on the Ugra River" label="indecisive standoff at the Ugra in 1480"/>
<link wikidata="Q477152" start="16101" end="16106" title="Sarai (city)" label="Sarai"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="16240" end="16246" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="16427" end="16450" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q174044" start="16752" end="16768" title="Alexander Nevsky" label="Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q14689" start="16781" end="16800" title="Battle on the Ice" label="repel the offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q51662" start="16808" end="16825" title="Northern Crusades" label="Northern Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q151536" start="16834" end="16842" title="Novgorod Republic" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q295186" start="17062" end="17083" title="Daniil Aleksandrovich" label="Daniil Aleksandrovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="17135" end="17157" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="principality of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="17394" end="17400" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="17785" end="17808" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q189854" start="17824" end="17836" title="Metropolitan bishop" label="Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83546" start="17856" end="17864" title="Vladimir-Suzdal" label="Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134220" start="18134" end="18145" title="Mongol yoke" label="Mongol yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q210354" start="18159" end="18177" title="Battle of Kulikovo" label="Battle of Kulikovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="18185" end="18194" title="Don River, Russia" label="Don River"/>
<link wikidata="Q188995" start="18339" end="18353" title="Dmitry Donskoy" label="Dmitry Donskoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171185" start="18729" end="18737" title="Ivan III of Russia" label="Ivan III"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="18850" end="18874" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939894" start="18922" end="18942" title="Upper Principalities" label="Upper Principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="18956" end="18963" title="Dnieper River" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q172089" start="18968" end="18977" title="Oka River" label="Oka River"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="19152" end="19173" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Grand Duchy of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917813" start="19251" end="19258" title="Filofei" label="Filofei"/>
<link wikidata="Q96590840" start="19374" end="19384" title="Third Rome" label="Third Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="19390" end="19412" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="Fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q65167706" start="19504" end="19534" title="Moscow, third Rome" label="Moscow as &amp;quot;New Rome&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q234944" start="19629" end="19648" title="Sophia Palaiologina" label="Sophia Palaiologina"/>
<link wikidata="Q523058" start="19727" end="19733" title="Prikaz" label="Prikaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q970743" start="19739" end="19747" title="Sudebnik of 1497" label="Sudebnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q165508" start="19850" end="19872" title="coat of arms of Russia" label="coat of arms of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="20089" end="20101" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q331644" start="20128" end="20135" title="Khanate" label="Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="20254" end="20268" title="Khanate of Crimea" label="Crimean Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q86659878" start="20347" end="20364" title="Great Abatis Belt" label="Great Abatis Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="21086" end="21090" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="21101" end="21108" title="Ivan IV" label="Ivan IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="21183" end="21195" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="21230" end="21244" title="Moscow Kremlin" label="Moscow Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="22026" end="22033" title="Ivan IV of Russia" label="Ivan IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376942" start="22386" end="22402" title="Sudebnik of 1550" label="Sudebnik of 1550"/>
<link wikidata="Q177904" start="22463" end="22475" title="Zemsky Sobor" label="Zemsky Sobor"/>
<link wikidata="Q860413" start="22621" end="22629" title="Streltsy" label="Streltsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q246863" start="22641" end="22653" title="Livonian War" label="Livonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q186537" start="22788" end="22805" title="Khanate of Kazan" label="Khanates of Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210163" start="22807" end="22816" title="Khanate of Astrakhan" label="Astrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190513" start="22822" end="22829" title="Siberia Khanate" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="22940" end="22945" title="Urals" label="Urals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641089" start="23043" end="23054" title="multiethnic" label="multiethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849792" start="23106" end="23115" title="Stroganov" label="Stroganov"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="23186" end="23194" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q611162" start="23311" end="23321" title="oprichnina" label="oprichnina"/>
<link wikidata="Q381373" start="23460" end="23474" title="Andrey Kurbsky" label="Andrey Kurbsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663703" start="23512" end="23532" title="Massacre of Novgorod" label="Massacre of Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q117458" start="23639" end="23653" title="Crimean Tatars" label="Crimean Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q923852" start="23700" end="23724" title="Russo–Crimean War (1571)" label="burn down Moscow in 1571"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760784" start="23795" end="23811" title="Battle of Molodi" label="Battle of Molodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q186321" start="24094" end="24100" title="Feodor I of Russia" label="Feodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q94080" start="24178" end="24194" title="Time of Troubles" label="Time of Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192836" start="24273" end="24300" title="Russian famine of 1601–1603" label="Russian famine of 1601–1603"/>
<link wikidata="Q170172" start="24343" end="24356" title="Boris Godunov" label="Boris Godunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="24585" end="24615" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044829" start="24628" end="24660" title="Polish–Muscovite War (1605–1618)" label="Polish–Muscovite War (1605–1618)"/>
<link wikidata="Q209535" start="24729" end="24744" title="False Dmitriy I" label="False Dmitriy I"/>
<link wikidata="Q469791" start="24769" end="24784" title="False Dmitry II" label="False Dmitry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q625652" start="24894" end="24900" title="hetman" label="hetman"/>
<link wikidata="Q453523" start="24901" end="24921" title="Stanisław Żółkiewski" label="Stanisław Żółkiewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q932228" start="24929" end="24947" title="Battle of Klushino" label="Battle of Klushino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4415421" start="24986" end="24998" title="Seven Boyars" label="Seven Boyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q193232" start="25044" end="25058" title="Vasily Shuysky" label="Vasily Shuysky"/>
<link wikidata="Q54054" start="25097" end="25114" title="Władysław IV Vasa" label="Władysław IV Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371259" start="25146" end="25167" title="Polish–Lithuanian occupation of Moscow" label="Poles occupied Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q467011" start="25323" end="25331" title="invasion" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q469785" start="25394" end="25405" title="Kuzma Minin" label="Kuzma Minin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15756" start="25417" end="25433" title="Dmitry Pozharsky" label="Dmitry Pozharsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="25855" end="25885" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044829" start="25889" end="25909" title="Russo-Polish War (1605-1618)" label="the Russo-Polish war"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="25929" end="25943" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962709" start="25951" end="25962" title="Ingrian War" label="Ingrian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q177904" start="26088" end="26105" title="Zemsky Sobor" label="national assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q181915" start="26114" end="26129" title="Michael I of Russia" label="Michael Romanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q547759" start="26148" end="26165" title="Patriarch Filaret (Feodor Romanov)" label="Patriarch Filaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="26186" end="26193" title="Romanov" label="Romanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="26335" end="26365" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="26370" end="26376" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q641479" start="26640" end="26660" title="Chmielnicki Uprising" label="Khmelnitsky Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q525758" start="26722" end="26742" title="Treaty of Pereyaslav" label="Treaty of Pereyaslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076173" start="26766" end="26784" title="Ukrainian Cossacks" label="Ukrainian Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q212439" start="26834" end="26848" title="Cossack Hetmanate" label="Cossacks state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068981" start="26852" end="26869" title="Left-bank Ukraine" label="Left-bank Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q631991" start="26929" end="26957" title="Russo-Polish War (1654–1667)" label="Russo-Polish War (1654–1667)"/>
<link wikidata="Q721168" start="26980" end="26999" title="Treaty of Andrusovo" label="Treaty of Andrusovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="27054" end="27058" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="27063" end="27071" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q735349" start="27077" end="27104" title="Russian conquest of Siberia" label="Russian conquest of Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q333210" start="27261" end="27275" title="Semyon Dezhnev" label="Semyon Dezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="27381" end="27391" title="Qing China" label="Qing China"/>
<link wikidata="Q696094" start="27437" end="27456" title="Treaty of Nerchinsk" label="Treaty of Nerchinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498278" start="28028" end="28035" title="Russian serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q600898" start="28659" end="28668" title="Salt Riot" label="Salt Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968043" start="28677" end="28688" title="Copper Riot" label="Copper Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633167" start="28705" end="28720" title="Moscow Uprising of 1682" label="Moscow Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="28848" end="28856" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q193175" start="28992" end="29004" title="Stenka Razin" label="Stenka Razin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098701" start="29315" end="29334" title="Bulavin Rebellion" label="revolt in Astrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302120" start="29486" end="29527" title="history of Siberia" label="first Russian colonisation of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q631991" start="29557" end="29585" title="Russo-Polish War (1654–1667)" label="Russo-Polish War (1654–1667)"/>
<link wikidata="Q735349" start="29631" end="29658" title="Russian conquest of Siberia" label="Russian conquest of Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="29864" end="29879" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="30843" end="30855" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Russian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q583941" start="30872" end="30884" title="Imperial Russian Navy" label="Russian navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="30948" end="30961" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763834" start="31027" end="31033" title="Azov campaigns (1695–1696)" label="taking"/>
<link wikidata="Q102762" start="31046" end="31050" title="Azov" label="Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851" start="31147" end="31156" title="Arkhangelsk" label="Archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44133" start="31164" end="31173" title="White Sea" label="White Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="31417" end="31447" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="31492" end="31510" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="31805" end="31821" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q561415" start="31881" end="31892" title="Silent Sejm" label="Silent Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="32086" end="32100" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="32204" end="32214" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="absolutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q844793" start="32260" end="32264" title="Duma" label="Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788871" start="32292" end="32298" title="Governing Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q86622" start="32380" end="32389" title="Guberniya" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639012" start="32541" end="32549" title="Collegium (ministry)" label="Collegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q929093" start="32682" end="32696" title="Table of ranks" label="Table of ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282276" start="32890" end="32902" title="patriarchate" label="patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q911924" start="32947" end="32957" title="Holy Synod" label="Holy Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="33129" end="33143" title="Safavid Empire" label="Safavid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418582" start="33217" end="33246" title="Russo-Persian War (1722–1723)" label="Russo-Persian War (1722–1723)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="33416" end="33424" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="33760" end="33770" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964224" start="33787" end="33802" title="Treaty of Resht" label="Treaty of Resht"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686520" start="33807" end="33822" title="Treaty of Ganja" label="Treaty of Ganja"/>
<link wikidata="Q15208" start="34090" end="34101" title="Catherine I of Russia" label="Catherine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q160227" start="34211" end="34219" title="Peter II of Russia" label="Peter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q160165" start="34252" end="34256" title="Anna of Russia" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q183698" start="34287" end="34293" title="Ivan V" label="Ivan V"/>
<link wikidata="Q151781" start="34299" end="34311" title="Ivan VI of Russia" label="heir to Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q130752" start="34343" end="34352" title="Elizabeth of Russia" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="34442" end="34463" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="34562" end="34574" title="Catherine II of Russia" label="Catherine II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="34804" end="34821" title="The Enlightenment" label="The Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q219934" start="34853" end="34871" title="enlightened despot" label="enlightened despot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147671" start="35051" end="35072" title="Charter to the Gentry" label="Charter to the Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q911889" start="35497" end="35520" title="Targowica Confederation" label="Targowica Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154100" start="35688" end="35712" title="Pugachev&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="peasant uprising in 1773"/>
<link wikidata="Q154240" start="35742" end="35759" title="Yemelyan Pugachev" label="Yemelyan Pugachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q123070" start="36067" end="36076" title="Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774)" label="1768–1774"/>
<link wikidata="Q123210" start="36078" end="36087" title="Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792)" label="1787–1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119650" start="36200" end="36231" title="Liquidation of the Zaporozhian Sich" label="liquidated the Zaporozhian Sich"/>
<link wikidata="Q326191" start="36331" end="36354" title="Novorossiya Governorate" label="Novorossiya Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q48256" start="36389" end="36403" title="Dnipro" label="Yekaterinoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q158292" start="36412" end="36425" title="Kropyvnytskyi" label="Yelisavetgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q156732" start="36427" end="36434" title="Kherson" label="Kherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="36443" end="36449" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18408564" start="36465" end="36479" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Empire" label="annexed Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="36557" end="36564" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="36569" end="36576" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="36750" end="36770" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q525997" start="36863" end="36869" title="Treaty of Georgievsk" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q525097" start="37018" end="37032" title="Persian Expedition of 1796" label="against Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615347" start="37115" end="37125" title="Battle of Krtsanisi" label="year prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="37191" end="37199" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26749" start="37251" end="37272" title="War of the Second Coalition" label="anti-French coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q122890272" start="37324" end="37361" title="Italian and Swiss expedition" label="defeated the French in Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219934" start="37461" end="37483" title="Enlightened absolutism" label="Enlightened absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498273" start="37494" end="37508" title="Westernization" label="Westernization"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="37660" end="37667" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27621" start="38103" end="38136" title="Saint Petersburg State University" label="Saint Petersburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="38141" end="38164" title="Moscow State University" label="Moscow State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q233260" start="38237" end="38262" title="Great Northern Expedition" label="Great Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="38394" end="38409" title="Russian America" label="Russian America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349237" start="38473" end="38503" title="First Russian circumnavigation" label="First Russian circumnavigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349082" start="38567" end="38587" title="First Russian Antarctic Expedition" label="Antarctic expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="39380" end="39391" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="39480" end="39490" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q342889" start="39556" end="39578" title="Adam Jerzy Czartoryski" label="Adam Jerzy Czartoryski"/>
<link wikidata="Q238246" start="39619" end="39626" title="History of Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139887" start="39665" end="39684" title="Russo-Persian War (1804–1813)" label="clashed with Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="39790" end="39800" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="39805" end="39813" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q382116" start="39848" end="39861" title="Caucasian War" label="Caucasian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088141" start="39874" end="39891" title="Caucasian Imamate" label="Caucasian Imamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408764" start="39896" end="39905" title="Circassia" label="Circassia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="39978" end="39988" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Qajar Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="40171" end="40185" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q249232" start="40483" end="40509" title="War of the Third Coalition" label="War of the Third Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q134114" start="40564" end="40584" title="Battle of Austerlitz" label="Battle of Austerlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q154596" start="40641" end="40657" title="Treaty of Tilsit" label="Treaty of Tilsit"/>
<link wikidata="Q258081" start="40692" end="40710" title="Continental System" label="Continental System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441248" start="40722" end="40772" title="Anglo-Russian War (1807–1812)" label="a small-scale naval war against Britain, 1807–1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="41167" end="41185" title="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s invasion of Russia" label="invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184320" start="41281" end="41289" title="Battle of Borodino" label="Borodino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4332537" start="41445" end="41461" title="French occupation of Moscow" label="capturing Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q151005" start="41910" end="41931" title="Battle of the Nations" label="Battle of the Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="42237" end="42255" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="42296" end="42311" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q154640" start="42327" end="42340" title="Holy Alliance" label="Holy Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="42503" end="42525" title="Klemens von Metternich" label="Klemens von Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="43403" end="43413" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q126306" start="43780" end="43797" title="Decembrist Revolt" label="Decembrist Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455145" start="44082" end="44119" title="Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality" label="Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420115" start="44168" end="44182" title="Russo-Persian War (1826-1828)" label="against Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q875512" start="44344" end="44365" title="Treaty of Turkmenchay" label="Treaty of Turkmenchay"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="44381" end="44388" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131083" start="44390" end="44400" title="Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic" label="Nakhchivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44302" start="44402" end="44418" title="Nagorno-Karabakh" label="Nagorno-Karabakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="44420" end="44430" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125506" start="44436" end="44441" title="Iğdır Province" label="Iğdır"/>
<link wikidata="Q287942" start="44460" end="44477" title="Russo-Turkish War (1828–1829)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="44506" end="44514" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122803" start="44559" end="44566" title="Erzurum" label="Erzurum"/>
<link wikidata="Q214303" start="44571" end="44580" title="Gümüşhane" label="Gümüşhane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="44625" end="44639" title="Greek Orthodox" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q679524" start="44702" end="44715" title="Pontic Greeks" label="Pontic Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="44929" end="44946" title="November Uprising" label="November Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="45124" end="45140" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="45589" end="45599" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="46612" end="46623" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179161" start="47400" end="47418" title="Russian literature" label="Russian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q370870" start="47473" end="47485" title="Westernizers" label="Westernizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q46699" start="47640" end="47650" title="Slavophile" label="Slavophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="47768" end="47780" title="Collectivism and individualism" label="collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038910" start="47811" end="47814" title="mir (social)" label="mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038910" start="47825" end="47842" title="obshchina" label="village community"/>
<link wikidata="Q471220" start="47911" end="47926" title="Pyotr Chaadayev" label="Pyotr Chaadayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q192885" start="48400" end="48418" title="Vissarion Belinsky" label="Vissarion Belinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q201221" start="48423" end="48439" title="Alexander Herzen" label="Alexander Herzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="48949" end="48975" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="sent his army into Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="49413" end="49424" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q513285" start="49596" end="49609" title="Orlando Figes" label="Orlando Figes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="51161" end="51173" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498278" start="51297" end="51304" title="Russian serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="51337" end="51342" title="serfs" label="serfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192212" start="51521" end="51540" title="Emancipation reform of 1861 in Russia" label="emancipation reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040503" start="52269" end="52303" title="Judicial reform of Alexander II" label="He reorganized the judicial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q309029" start="52568" end="52579" title="Alaska Purchase" label="sold Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="53300" end="53321" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="The Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q958291" start="53543" end="53550" title="United Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q684030" start="53552" end="53558" title="Principality of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779011" start="53560" end="53570" title="Principality of Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q815731" start="53585" end="53593" title="Principality of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="53663" end="53678" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q151423" start="53768" end="53786" title="Congress of Berlin" label="Congress of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25591101" start="53852" end="53889" title="Russian conquest of Central Asia" label="expanded its empire into Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696241" start="53918" end="53924" title="Khanate of Kokand" label="Kokand"/>
<link wikidata="Q746558" start="53926" end="53933" title="Emirate of Bukhara" label="Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q491106" start="53939" end="53944" title="Khanate of Khiva" label="Khiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960533" start="53961" end="53981" title="Transcaspian Oblast" label="Trans-Caspian region"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="54439" end="54447" title="Nihilism" label="Nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="54497" end="54510" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q29424" start="54535" end="54551" title="Fathers and Sons (novel)" label="Fathers and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="54935" end="54949" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217366" start="55384" end="55412" title="Catechism of a Revolutionary" label="Catechism of a Revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q216741" start="55581" end="55632" title="Narodnik" label="&amp;quot;Narodnk&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Populist&amp;quot;) movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033142" start="56060" end="56079" title="anarchism in Russia" label="anarchism in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092371" start="56463" end="56492" title="Silver Age of Russian Poetry" label="Silver Age of Russian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879488" start="56552" end="56569" title="Russian Symbolism" label="Russian Symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q420245" start="56571" end="56578" title="Acmeism" label="Acmeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q617166" start="56584" end="56600" title="Russian Futurism" label="Russian Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823401" start="56648" end="56666" title="Mystical Anarchism" label="Mystical Anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401605" start="56711" end="56730" title="Russian avant-garde" label="Russian avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="56794" end="56808" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="56813" end="56825" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="57027" end="57040" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455145" start="57131" end="57175" title="Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and National Character" label="Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and National Character"/>
<link wikidata="Q243799" start="57380" end="57408" title="Franco-Russian Alliance" label="union with republican France"/>
<link wikidata="Q359754" start="57609" end="57633" title="Konstantin Pobedonostsev" label="Konstantin Pobedonostsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="57933" end="57946" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="58049" end="58060" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q155820" start="58448" end="58479" title="Constitutional Democratic party" label="Constitutional Democratic party"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="58563" end="58592" title="Socialist-Revolutionary Party" label="Socialist-Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q204911" start="58727" end="58765" title="Russian Social Democratic Labour Party" label="Russian Social Democratic Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="58835" end="58842" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="59059" end="59068" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="59078" end="59092" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191515" start="59122" end="59131" title="Menshevik" label="Menshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="59693" end="59734" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="intervention of the great powers in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="59871" end="59889" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="60032" end="60050" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185642" start="60174" end="60187" title="Bloody Sunday (1905)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q299681" start="60208" end="60220" title="Father Gapon" label="Father Gapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182147" start="60250" end="60263" title="Winter Palace" label="Winter Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="60267" end="60283" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="60553" end="60579" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="Russian Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q211201" start="60581" end="60588" title="Soviet (workers council)" label="Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q109878" start="60719" end="60736" title="October Manifesto" label="October Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="61216" end="61272" title="Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand" label="assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austro-Hungary."/>
<link wikidata="Q639522" start="61713" end="61730" title="Christopher Clark" label="Christopher Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q917435" start="61838" end="61849" title="July crisis" label="July crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="62030" end="62045" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q659246" start="62233" end="62250" title="Battle of Galicia" label="Battle of Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221967" start="62566" end="62584" title="Brusilov offensive" label="Brusilov offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="63179" end="63195" title="Grigori Rasputin" label="Grigori Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="64064" end="64073" title="Petrograd" label="Petrograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="64512" end="64531" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q239543" start="64672" end="64694" title="Russian Provisional Government" label="Provisional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q297032" start="64706" end="64717" title="Georgy Lvov" label="Prince Lvov"/>
<link wikidata="Q139319" start="64755" end="64771" title="Russian Republic" label="Russian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48211" start="65188" end="65206" title="Alexander Kerensky" label="Alexander Kerensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="65766" end="65780" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="66045" end="66063" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q18809" start="66092" end="66111" title="Anatoly Lunacharsky" label="Anatoly Lunacharsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q366790" start="66113" end="66127" title="Moisei Uritsky" label="Moisei Uritsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383086" start="66132" end="66148" title="Dmitry Manuilsky" label="Dmitry Manuilsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468062" start="66315" end="66344" title="Russian Constituent Assembly" label="national Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="66630" end="66653" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (Russia–Central Powers)" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="67018" end="67032" title="White movement" label="White movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001082" start="67086" end="67133" title="Allied intervention in Russia" label="Allied powers sent several expeditionary armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q964024" start="67514" end="67543" title="Moldavian Democratic Republic" label="Moldavian Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="67566" end="67573" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="67618" end="67635" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="Polish–Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367345" start="67663" end="67678" title="region Pechenga" label="region Pechenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q165608" start="67694" end="67708" title="Kola Peninsula" label="Kola Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510359" start="67800" end="67814" title="Petseri County" label="Petseri County"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688" start="67819" end="67834" title="Leander Reijo" label="Estonian Ingria"/>
<link wikidata="Q184361" start="67845" end="67853" title="Pytalovo" label="Pytalovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q127063" start="67868" end="67872" title="Kars" label="Kars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337514" start="67924" end="67939" title="Western Belarus" label="Western Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="67944" end="67959" title="Ukraine" label="Western Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="68008" end="68015" title="Galicia (Central Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335255" start="68025" end="68036" title="Curzon Line" label="Curzon Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q108314" start="68158" end="68165" title="Denikin" label="Denikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q525197" start="68395" end="68416" title="White Terror (Russia)" label="White Terror (Russia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q542291" start="68478" end="68488" title="Red Terror" label="Red Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172846" start="69129" end="69140" title="Russian famine of 1921" label="1921 famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="69245" end="69251" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="69514" end="69526" title="White émigré" label="White émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242923" start="69552" end="69573" title="Evacuation of the Crimea (1920)" label="evacuated from Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="69823" end="69835" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="69960" end="69983" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (Russia–Central Powers)" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="70055" end="70067" title="Russian SFSR" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="70073" end="70086" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="70092" end="70106" title="Belarusian SSR" label="Belarusian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q545205" start="70116" end="70135" title="Transcaucasian SFSR" label="Transcaucasian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q842008" start="70494" end="70503" title="Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q622751" start="70674" end="70687" title="war communism" label="war communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="70735" end="70747" title="Nationalization" label="nationalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q45745" start="71082" end="71101" title="New Economic Policy" label="New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q220790" start="71477" end="71482" title="kulak" label="kulak"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="72450" end="72457" title="Divorce" label="Divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359357" start="73006" end="73012" title="Likbez" label="Likbez"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="73048" end="73060" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784393" start="73118" end="73131" title="Korenizatsiya" label="Korenizatsiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="73235" end="73248" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654890" start="73370" end="73383" title="Cyrillization" label="Cyrillization"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="73572" end="73585" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="73807" end="73819" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="73846" end="73856" title="Trotskyist" label="Trotskyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661958" start="74003" end="74023" title="First five-year plan (Soviet Union)" label="first five-year plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q821122" start="74175" end="74206" title="Collectivisation in the USSR" label="collectivization of agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164701" start="74242" end="74256" title="consumer goods in the Soviet Union" label="consumer goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q485016" start="74772" end="74779" title="kolkhoz" label="kolkhoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q220790" start="74865" end="74871" title="kulaks" label="kulaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497254" start="75336" end="75354" title="Soviet famine of 1932-1934" label="died of starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165058" start="75356" end="75373" title="Holodomor" label="mostly in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4142069" start="75375" end="75385" title="Famine in Kazakhstan of 1932–33" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="75649" end="75653" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q85125" start="75719" end="75730" title="population transfer in the Soviet Union" label="deportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="75976" end="75988" title="Great Purges" label="Great Purges"/>
<link wikidata="Q117320" start="76157" end="76170" title="Moscow trials" label="Moscow trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q141860" start="76229" end="76243" title="Nikolai Yezhov" label="Nikolai Yezhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784078" start="76268" end="76297" title="Mass operations of the NKVD" label="massive repressive operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q628505" start="76591" end="76601" title="labor camp" label="labor camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="76610" end="76615" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="76700" end="76707" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134301" start="76952" end="76966" title="Katyn massacre" label="Katyn massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q85125" start="77046" end="77091" title="Population transfer in the Soviet Union" label="massive deportations of various nationalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="77276" end="77290" title="anti-Communist" label="anti-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="77291" end="77297" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="77310" end="77317" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q313099" start="77369" end="77385" title="Drang nach Osten" label="Drang nach Osten"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="77457" end="77467" title="Lebensraum" label="Lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="77579" end="77596" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="77657" end="77671" title="Imperial Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q696389" start="77679" end="77711" title="Soviet–Japanese border conflicts" label="Soviet–Japanese border conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="77719" end="77735" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q696256" start="77750" end="77776" title="Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact" label="Soviet-Japanese neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="77853" end="77868" title="Anschluss" label="annexed Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="77930" end="77946" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q954443" start="78343" end="78359" title="Western Betrayal" label="Western Betrayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="78629" end="78652" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157281" start="78798" end="78825" title="Germany–Soviet Union relations, 1918–1941" label="relations with Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="78906" end="78914" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="78915" end="78937" title="Soviet invasion of Poland" label="invaded eastern Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335255" start="79264" end="79275" title="Curzon line" label="Curzon line"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="79311" end="79318" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="79414" end="79423" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="79513" end="79523" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="79633" end="79641" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q695285" start="79716" end="79735" title="Moscow Peace Treaty" label="Moscow Peace Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q209010" start="79749" end="79765" title="Karelian Isthmus" label="Karelian Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436524" start="79770" end="79784" title="Ladoga Karelia" label="Ladoga Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="79820" end="79840" title="June 1940 Soviet Ultimatum" label="ultimatum to Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="79879" end="79889" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="79894" end="79911" title="Northern Bukovina" label="Northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q58473" start="79972" end="80006" title="occupation of Baltic states" label="formerly independent Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="80008" end="80015" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="80017" end="80023" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="80028" end="80037" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="80158" end="80169" title="Axis forces" label="Axis forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="80185" end="80215" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="swept across the Soviet border"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="80251" end="80262" title="Wehrmacht" label="German army"/>
<link wikidata="Q162284" start="80267" end="80281" title="Battle of Kiev (1941)" label="seized Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="80290" end="80308" title="siege of Leningrad" label="siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="80314" end="80347" title="Battle of Moscow" label="threatened to capture the capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="80417" end="80456" title="Battle of Moscow" label="threw off the German forces from Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="80636" end="80641" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="80650" end="80658" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="80697" end="80707" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="80712" end="80717" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="80772" end="80781" title="World War II" label="World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q313836" start="81026" end="81051" title="Battle of the Dnieper" label="liberated much of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q275019" start="81080" end="81098" title="Battle of Smolensk (1943)" label="moved into Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159297" start="81206" end="81229" title="Stalin&amp;#x27;s ten blows" label="Stalin&amp;#x27;s ten blows"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="81367" end="81383" title="battle of Berlin" label="capturing Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="81482" end="81498" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q270706" start="81523" end="81544" title="Victory Day (Eastern Europe)" label="Victory Day in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165880" start="81567" end="81595" title="Soviet invasion of Manchuria" label="Soviet invasion of Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="81642" end="81651" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="82010" end="82021" title="slave labor" label="slave labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="82203" end="82209" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="82251" end="82264" title="The Holocaust" label="The Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="82294" end="82308" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="82475" end="82485" title="Axis forces" label="its allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="82660" end="82676" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="82904" end="82906" title="UN" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688521" start="82913" end="82929" title="Permanent members of the United Nations Security Council" label="permanent member"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="83037" end="83045" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="83161" end="83173" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="83219" end="83237" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q128499" start="83403" end="83408" title="Yalta" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006230" start="83511" end="83530" title="Soviet atomic bomb project" label="atomic bomb project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="83616" end="83650" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="83762" end="83773" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q586755" start="83948" end="83961" title="Joe-1" label="a Soviet bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="83970" end="83979" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="83992" end="83997" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="84130" end="84158" title="Eastern Bloc" label="hegemony over Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="84244" end="84272" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="84290" end="84303" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="84369" end="84379" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="84477" end="84492" title="proxy conflicts" label="proxy conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="84527" end="84537" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="84542" end="84553" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="84691" end="84698" title="Détente" label="Détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q550452" start="84781" end="84793" title="nuclear race" label="nuclear race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="85050" end="85060" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="85212" end="85218" title="SALT I" label="SALT I"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="85220" end="85227" title="SALT II" label="SALT II"/>
<link wikidata="Q287422" start="85237" end="85266" title="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty" label="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="85345" end="85362" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="85379" end="85409" title="1980 U.S. presidential election" label="1980 election of Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="85421" end="85435" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="85457" end="85471" title="communist bloc" label="communist bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="85683" end="85700" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140920" start="85748" end="85789" title="20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q480498" start="85859" end="85868" title="Impeachment" label="impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="85995" end="86015" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146169" start="86035" end="86056" title="collective leadership" label="collective leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="86064" end="86079" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="86081" end="86095" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q295781" start="86100" end="86116" title="Nikolai Podgorny" label="Nikolai Podgorny"/>
<link wikidata="Q839920" start="86159" end="86172" title="Soviet leader" label="Soviet leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530429" start="86225" end="86255" title="Soviet economic reform of 1965" label="Soviet economic reform of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="86418" end="86437" title="nuclear power plant" label="nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739453" start="86462" end="86472" title="Obninsk Nuclear Power Plant" label="in Obninsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q377967" start="86482" end="86502" title="Baikal Amur Mainline" label="Baikal Amur Mainline"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="86631" end="86651" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="87442" end="87456" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82695" start="87606" end="87618" title="Yegor Gaidar" label="Yegor Gaidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="87708" end="87728" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviet space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q170842" start="87741" end="87755" title="Sergey Korolev" label="Sergey Korolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="87839" end="87848" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="87850" end="87857" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327" start="87877" end="87889" title="Yuri Gagarin" label="Yuri Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182524" start="87958" end="87966" title="Vostok 1" label="Vostok 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="88044" end="88064" title="far side of the Moon" label="far side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="88081" end="88086" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="88098" end="88107" title="Extra-vehicular activity" label="spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q154269" start="88111" end="88124" title="Alexei Leonov" label="Alexei Leonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="88154" end="88174" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q261052" start="88257" end="88267" title="Lunokhod 1" label="Lunokhod 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051675" start="88272" end="88282" title="Lunokhod 2" label="Lunokhod 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q207933" start="88363" end="88369" title="Salyut" label="Salyut"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="88401" end="88404" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="88771" end="88784" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q127442" start="88789" end="88809" title="Konstantin Chernenko" label="Konstantin Chernenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="88811" end="88828" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="88841" end="88852" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="89045" end="89053" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="89378" end="89394" title="Baltic republics" label="Baltic republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q130229" start="89396" end="89408" title="Georgian SSR" label="Georgian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="89413" end="89426" title="Moldavian SSR" label="Moldavian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="89499" end="89518" title="revolutions of 1989" label="revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="89791" end="89809" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="war in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="89870" end="89885" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="89996" end="90009" title="price control" label="price control"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="90296" end="90309" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156971" start="90741" end="90786" title="Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="giving Russian laws priority over Soviet laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363982" start="91356" end="91391" title="1991 Russian presidential election" label="first Russian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q218877" start="91464" end="91488" title="New Union Treaty" label="attempted to restructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="91567" end="91589" title="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="coup against Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="91955" end="91967" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="92084" end="92095" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q414147" start="92106" end="92125" title="Academy of Sciences" label="Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="92230" end="92265" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q14614313" start="92308" end="92318" title="lustration" label="lustration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92543" end="92564" title="RSFSR State Secretary" label="RSFSR State Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970048" start="92565" end="92581" title="Gennady Burbulis" label="Gennady Burbulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780189" start="93475" end="93485" title="Kommersant" label="Kommersant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140115" start="93559" end="93575" title="RSFSR government" label="RSFSR government"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="93619" end="93651" title="Treaty on the Economic Community (post-Soviet states)" label="Treaty on the Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q82695" start="94170" end="94182" title="Yegor Gaidar" label="Yegor Gaidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526318" start="94184" end="94201" title="Alexander Shokhin" label="Alexander Shokhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207082" start="94206" end="94227" title="Konstantin Kagalovsky" label="Konstantin Kagalovsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94369" end="94382" title="Mikhail Maley" label="Mikhail Maley"/>
<link wikidata="Q734866" start="94384" end="94399" title="Nikolay Fyodorov (politician)" label="Nikolai Fedorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526318" start="94401" end="94418" title="Alexander Shokhin" label="Alexander Shokhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217566" start="94420" end="94432" title="Igor Lazarev" label="Igor Lazarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370878" start="94437" end="94455" title="Mikhail Poltoranin" label="Mikhail Poltoranin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714552" start="94467" end="94478" title="Ivan Silaev" label="Ivan Silaev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94483" end="94498" title="Yevgeny Saburov" label="Yevgeny Saburov"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="94546" end="94574" title="Treaty on Economic Community" label="Treaty on Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="94789" end="94798" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q76986" start="94930" end="94947" title="Belavezha Accords" label="Belavezha Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626571" start="94953" end="94977" title="Supreme Soviet of Russia" label="Supreme Soviet of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="95095" end="95113" title="Russia" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="95128" end="95172" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="95405" end="95426" title="Post-Soviet countries" label="Post-Soviet countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q129985088" start="95441" end="95522" title="Succession, continuity and legacy of the Soviet Union" label="series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q82695" start="95808" end="95820" title="Yegor Gaidar" label="Yegor Gaidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648240" start="95834" end="95847" title="shock therapy (economics)" label="shock therapy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95987" end="96023" title="Economy of Russia#History" label="Russian economic reform in the 1990s"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="96288" end="96302" title="Hyperinflation" label="Hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790297" start="96325" end="96342" title="monetary overhang" label="monetary overhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q862099" start="96573" end="96617" title="Russian constitutional crisis of 1993" label="September–October 1993 constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844124" start="96762" end="96781" title="White House of Russia" label="Russian White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q652062" start="96973" end="97001" title="constitution of the Russian Federation" label="current Russian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="97166" end="97174" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q29269" start="97215" end="97220" title="First Chechen War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q120843" start="97225" end="97243" title="Second Chechen War" label="Second Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="97381" end="97391" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="97401" end="97428" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="97473" end="97486" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="97512" end="97524" title="Nationalization" label="nationalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919633" start="97704" end="97719" title="Russian oligarch" label="Russian tycoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q817144" start="97736" end="97751" title="Russian Mafia" label="criminal mafias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134741" start="97774" end="97790" title="Corporate raider" label="Corporate raider"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756003" start="97800" end="97813" title="Andrei Volgin (businessman)" label="Andrei Volgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416898" start="97825" end="97841" title="hostile takeover" label="hostile takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142572" start="98316" end="98339" title="1998 Russian financial crisis" label="financial crash of 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="98476" end="98490" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499669" start="98819" end="98835" title="guided democracy" label="guided democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23530" start="99142" end="99157" title="Dmitri Medvedev" label="Dmitri Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q629636" start="99259" end="99285" title="2011–2013 Russian protests" label="massive protests in Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="99440" end="99449" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="99450" end="99465" title="command economy" label="command economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197144" start="99667" end="99675" title="Siloviki" label="Siloviki"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="100123" end="100148" title="2014 Winter Olympic Games" label="2014 Winter Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838763" start="100195" end="100205" title="2014 Crimean status referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="100404" end="100423" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="100449" end="100469" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="annexation of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335075" start="100510" end="100532" title="War in Donbas (2014–2022)" label="war in eastern Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17373979" start="100534" end="100557" title="International sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="international sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q58406" start="100603" end="100630" title="2011 Russian legislative election" label="elections to the State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="100663" end="100676" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q629636" start="100745" end="100765" title="2011–2013 Russian protests" label="significant protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q102877" start="100939" end="100947" title="castling" label="castling"/>
<link wikidata="Q21032720" start="101193" end="101223" title="Russian military intervention in the Syrian Civil War" label="military intervention in Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="101368" end="101387" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="101412" end="101416" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="101425" end="101439" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q111022187" start="101480" end="101547" title="International sanctions during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="International sanctions during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150196" start="101738" end="101768" title="Donetsk People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Donetsk People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746854" start="101777" end="101807" title="Luhansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Luhansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163271" start="101832" end="101839" title="Kherson Oblast" label="Kherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q171334" start="101844" end="101863" title="Zaporizhzhia Oblast" label="Zaporizhzhia Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="101899" end="101913" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q111018958" start="101936" end="101946" title="War crimes in the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36597284" start="101990" end="102002" title="Wagner Group" label="Wagner Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q20850503" start="102047" end="102064" title="Yevgeny Prigozhin" label="Yevgeny Prigozhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q119860532" start="102066" end="102074" title="Wagner Group rebellion" label="rebelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q17199349" start="102169" end="102186" title="Casualties of the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="killed or wounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="102282" end="102313" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="Dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379009" start="102316" end="102351" title="Rulers of Russia family tree" label="Family tree of the Russian monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="102354" end="102414" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q635111" start="102417" end="102440" title="History of Central Asia" label="History of Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302120" start="102443" end="102461" title="History of Siberia" label="History of Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192440" start="102464" end="102512" title="History of the administrative division of Russia" label="History of the administrative division of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286626" start="102515" end="102538" title="History of the Caucasus" label="History of the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="102541" end="102570" title="History of the Jews in Russia" label="History of the Jews in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q462252" start="102573" end="102600" title="History of the Soviet Union" label="History of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q13502826" start="102603" end="102640" title="List of heads of government of Russia" label="List of heads of government of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941668" start="102643" end="102691" title="List of Mongol and Tatar raids against Rus&amp;#x27;" label="List of Mongol and Tatar raids against Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861127" start="102694" end="102722" title="List of presidents of Russia" label="List of presidents of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11793481" start="102725" end="102750" title="List of Russian explorers" label="List of Russian explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q896086" start="102753" end="102775" title="List of Russian rulers" label="List of Russian rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644994" start="102778" end="102807" title="List of wars involving Russia" label="List of wars involving Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742078" start="102810" end="102848" title="Military history of the Russian Empire" label="Military history of the Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134808" start="102851" end="102887" title="Military history of the Soviet Union" label="Military history of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155561" start="102890" end="102908" title="Politics of Russia" label="Politics of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="102911" end="102931" title="Russian Armed Forces" label="Russian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="102934" end="102970" title="Russian colonization of the Americas" label="Russian colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="102973" end="102987" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="102990" end="103002" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056573" start="103005" end="103023" title="Timeline of Moscow" label="Timeline of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372147" start="103026" end="103053" title="Timeline of Russian history" label="Timeline of Russian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805904" start="103056" end="103086" title="Timeline of Russian innovation" label="Timeline of Russian innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949264" start="109338" end="109350" title="Moshe Lewin" label="Lewin, Moshe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995982" start="109627" end="109637" title="Alec Nove" label="Nove, Alec"/>
<link wikidata="Q978484" start="110774" end="110787" title="Ronald Asmus" label="Asmus, Ronald"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999982" start="111656" end="111669" title="Angela Stent" label="Stent, Angela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728457" start="115185" end="115212" title="Henry Smith Williams" label="Williams, Henry Smith (Ed.)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14117" wikidata="Q235329" url="?curid=14117" title="History of Christianity">
<text>The history of Christianity begins with the ministry of Jesus, a Jewish teacher and healer, who was crucified and died in Jerusalem in the Roman province of Judea. Afterwards, his followers, a set of apocalyptic Jews, proclaimed him risen from the dead. Christianity began as a Jewish sect and remained so for centuries in some locations, diverging gradually from Judaism over doctrinal, social and historical differences. Despite the persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire, the faith spread as a grassroots movement that by the third century was established both in and outside the empire. New Testament texts were written and church government was loosely organized in its first centuries, though the biblical canon did not become official until 382.

Constantine the Great was the first Roman emperor to declare himself a Christian. In 313, he issued the Edict of Milan expressing tolerance for all religions. He did not make Christianity the state religion, but he did provide it with crucial support. Constantine called the first of seven ecumenical councils. Reaction to the fourth council produced the first split between Eastern and Western Christianity, creating the Church of the East. After 476, monks in the West preserved Western culture, spread Christianity across western Europe, and established the Christendom of the High Middle Ages that influenced every aspect of medieval European life. 

Between 600 and 750, Christianity was in retreat in the Near and Middle East and North Africa, while the Eastern church prospered along the Silk Road, and all of the main trade routes of Central Asia, into Tibet and China, among the Mongols, the Nubian kingdoms, Ethiopia, Caucasian Armenia, and Georgia. Constant war turned the Eastern Roman Empire into the Byzantine Empire. Between the ninth and twelfth centuries, politicization and Christianization formed the states of East-Central Europe. Byzantine missionaries there developed the Cyrillic script, which allowed the spread of literacy, literature, and culture in the Slavic countries and Russia. Western Christianity centralized and became bureaucratic, and by 1054, Eastern and Western Christianity had grown far enough apart that differences produced the East–West Schism creating Byzantine Orthodoxy. This did not prevent the request for aid by the Byzantines that led to the Crusades. Temporary reunion of East and West was achieved in 1452; it lasted until Constantinople fell in 1453 and Byzantium became part of the empire of the Ottoman Turks. 

During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, various crises in Europe, coupled with growing criticism of the Catholic Church, led to the sixteenth-century Reformation. The Catholic Church responded in the Counter-Reformation. Royal houses already involved in disputes precipitated the European wars of religion. This was followed by the Age of Enlightenment and modern political concepts of tolerance. In the eighteenth century, biblical criticism was created, challenging literal interpretations of the Bible. Parts of Christianity influenced the American Revolution, worked for societal reforms, and formed an important part of the ideology of Abolitionism which shut down the Atlantic slave trade. Nineteenth century Protestant missionaries shaped multiple societies through literacy and indigenization.

In the twentieth century, Christianity faced many challenges and conflicts both internal and external. Traditional Christianity declined in the West, while new forms developed. The centre of growth shifted from West to East and from the North to the Global South. In the twenty-first century, it is the world&#x27;s largest religion with more than two billion Christians worldwide.

== Early Christianity (c. 27 – fourth century) ==

=== The first century ===
Christianity began with the itinerant preaching of Jesus (), a Jewish man, who lived in the Roman province of Judea during the first century. Jesus&#x27; existence and his crucifixion are well attested. The religious, social, and political climate in Judea was extremely diverse and characterized by turmoil with numerous religious and political movements. One such movement, Jewish messianism, promised a messianic redeemer descended from King David who would save Israel. Christians saw Jesus of Nazareth as that Messiah.

Jesus saw his identity and mission, and that of his followers, in light of the present and future kingdom of God and the prophetic tradition of Israel. His followers believed God&#x27;s spirit was incarnated (embodied) in Jesus and that after his crucifixion, he rose from the dead. The Christian church established incarnation and resurrection as its first doctrines, with baptism and the celebration of the Eucharist meal (Jesus&#x27;s Last Supper) as its two primary rites and rituals.

The first Christian communities were predominantly Jewish. They gathered in small groups inside private homes, where the typical setting for worship was the communal meal. Presbyters or bishops oversaw the economic requirements of the meal, alongside charitable distributions, and any ceremonial role they took was initially connected to this more prosaic role.

Beginning with fewer than 1000 adherents, Christianity grew to around one hundred small household churches consisting of an average of seventy members each by the year 100. It spread through the dispersed peoples along the trade and travel routes followed by merchants, soldiers, and migrating tribes. In the first century it reached ancient Greece, and probably Alexandria, Egypt where Coptic Christianity developed. Paul was one of several apostles who spread Christianity in the first century, making at least three missionary journeys and founding numerous churches in Asia Minor; Christianity in Antioch is mentioned in his epistles.

The Jews of Alexandria had produced a Greek translation of their Hebrew Bible between the third and first centuries BC which the apostles and early Christians used. Unlike Judaism, Christianity has no sacred language. In the early centuries, the languages most used to spread Christianity were Latin, Greek and Syriac. Christian writings in Koine Greek, including the four gospels (the accounts of Jesus&#x27;s ministry), letters of Paul, and letters attributed to other early Christian leaders, were written in the first century and had considerable authority even in the formative period. The letters of the Apostle Paul sent to the early Christian communities were circulating in collected form by the end of the first century. First century Christians put these writings in a codex, the ancestor of modern books, and the Egyptian church likely invented the papyrus codex during the next decades.

At the Council of Jerusalem, (c. 49), the Jerusalem church gathered to determine if the increasing numbers of non-Jews needed to follow Jewish law. The council decided to allow Gentile Christians their form of Christianity and Jews theirs. The departure of Christians before the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans in 70, alongside the development of what would become Rabbinic Judaism, disagreements about Jewish law, and insurrections against Rome, contributed to Jewish Christianity and Gentile Christianity growing apart. Nevertheless, Jewish Christianity remained influential in Palestine, Syria, and Asia Minor into the second and third centuries.

=== Ante-Nicene period (100–312) ===

Christianity achieved critical mass in the years between 150 and 250, when it grew from fewer than 50,000 adherents to over a million. Paul&#x27;s missionary journeys had spread the Christian faith east into Syria and Mesopotamia where the population spoke Aramaic, not Greek. Aramaic Christians were in Adiabene (northern Iraq) by the second century. By the third century, it had spread into North Africa and across the Mediterranean region, from Greece and Anatolia into the Balkans in the East and as far as Roman Britain in the northwest. A more formal Church structure grew over the second and third centuries AD, but at different times in different locations. Bishops rose in power and influence, beginning to preside over larger areas with multiple churches. Bishops were important to the development of Christianity.

Early Christianity was open to everyone. Baptism was free, and there were no fees, which made Christianity more affordable than traditional Roman models. The religion&#x27;s inclusivity extended to women, who made up significant numbers of Christianity&#x27;s earliest members. Women could attain greater freedom through religious activities than Roman customs otherwise permitted. Women in the church were prominent in church rolls, the Pauline epistles, and in early Christian art, while much early anti-Christian criticism was linked to &quot;female initiative&quot; indicating their role in the movement.

Monasticism began in Syria and was key to the development of Christianity. The ascetic life was attractive to large numbers of women because it granted them some control over their destinies, offered them escape from marriage and motherhood, and an intellectual life with access to social and economic power. 

A key characteristic of early Christianity was its unique type of exclusivity. Believing was the crucial and defining characteristic of membership – believers were separated from the &quot;unbelievers&quot; and heretics by a strong social and theological boundary. This exclusivity gave Christianity the powerful psychological attraction of elitism. 

The four gospels and the letters of Paul were generally regarded as authoritative, but other writings, such as the Book of Revelation and the epistles to the Hebrews, James, and I John, were assigned different degrees of authority. Gnostic texts challenged the physical nature of Jesus, Montanism suggested that the apostles could be superseded, and Monarchianism emphasized the unity of God over the Trinity. In the face of such diversity, unity was provided by the shared scriptures and the bishops. In the early church, canon law did not yet exist.

The Ante-Nicene period included sporadic but increasing persecution from Roman authorities, and the rise of Christian sects, cults, and movements. In the 250s, the emperors Decius and Valerian made it a capital offence to refuse to make sacrifices to Roman gods, resulting in widespread persecution of Christians. Official persecution reached its height under Diocletian in 303–311. Authorities in the Sasanian Empire also periodically persecuted Christians.

There are few early records of early Christian art. The oldest forms emerged in funerary environments . It typically fused Graeco-Roman style and Christian symbolism: the most common image was Jesus as the good shepherd.

== Late antiquity (313 – c. 600) ==

Late Antiquity was an age of change as Christianity became a permitted religion, then a favored one, and transformed in every capacity. In 313, the emperor Constantine, a self-declared Christian, issued the Edict of Milan expressing tolerance for all religions. Thereafter, he supported Christianity, giving bishops judicial power, and legally establishing them as equal to polytheistic priests. He devoted personal and public funds to building churches and endowed them with funds for maintenance and support of their clergy. 

There were churches in the majority of Roman cities by the end of the fourth century. Even so, polytheism remained widespread for centuries, as late as the ninth century in Greece. There was no legislation forcing the conversion of pagans before the Eastern Emperor Justinian I (); religious violence in Late Antiquity was &quot;mostly restricted to violent rhetoric&quot; and was not otherwise a general phenomenon. However, there were hostile imperial laws aimed at suppressing sacrifice and magic that contributed to one of the most significant changes of this age; blood sacrifice had been a central rite of virtually all religious groups in the pre-Christian Mediterranean, but it disappeared by the end of the fourth century. 

Christian art, literature and architecture blossomed under Constantine. The basilica, a type of Roman municipal court hall, became the model for Christian architecture. Frescoes, mosaics, statues, and paintings blended classical and Christian styles. Similarly, a hybrid form of poetry written in classical styles with Christian concepts emerged.

In the late fourth century, Jerome was commissioned to translate the Greek biblical texts into the Latin language; this translation was called the Vulgate. Church fathers of this period, such as Augustine of Hippo, John Chrysostom, Gregory of Nyssa, Athanasius of Alexandria, Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nazianzus, Cyril of Alexandria, and Ambrose of Milan, wrote vast numbers of works, contributing to a golden age of writing. 

Constantine and his successors attempted to fit the Church into their political program. Church leaders responded by articulating the first limitations on a secular ruler&#x27;s authority, arguing that religious authority must be separate from State authority. For most of Late Antiquity, the popesthe successors to Saint Peter as bishop of Romehad limited influence, and did not yet have the power needed to break free of secular interference in church affairs. However, papal power began to rise in this age as eastern patriarchs increasingly looked to the Roman Pope to resolve disagreements. 

In the fourth century, Augustine of Hippo argued that Jews should not be killed or forcibly converted, instead, they should be left alone because they preserved the teachings of the Old Testament and were &quot;living witnesses&quot; of the New Testament. Most Jews and Christians, (with the exception of the Visigoths in Spain), lived peacefully alongside each other into the High Middle Ages. The theology of supersessionism emerged claiming Christians had displaced the Jews as God&#x27;s chosen people; many scholars attribute antisemitism to this concept while others distinguish between them.

Monastic communities were associated with the urban holy places in Palestine (which became a center of pilgrimage), Cappadocia, Italy, Gaul, and Roman North Africa. In the 370s, Basil the Great founded the Basileias, a monastic community in Caesarea (Mazaca) that developed the first health care system for the poor which became the model of public hospitals into the modern day.

===After 476===
After 476 and the breakup of the Western Roman Empire, there was no center of political power in the European West. The ensuing socio-political fragmentation left the church with responsibility for the folk. Thereafter, western Europe developed in a manner distinctively different from the remaining empire in the East. For the next five centuries, Western culture and civilization were preserved and passed on primarily by monks while the Eastern Roman Empire continued to be a Roman Empire with an emperor, a civil government, and a large army.

The religious policies of the Eastern Roman Emperor Justinian I () reflected his conviction that the unity of the Empire presupposed unity of faith: he persecuted pagans and religious minorities and purged government and church bureaucracies of those who disagreed with him. He contributed to cultural development, and integrated Christian concepts with Roman law in his &quot;&quot; which remains the basis of civil law in many modern states. In the 530s in Constantinople, he had the Hagia Sophia built by inventing &quot;pendentives,&quot; inverted triangles that allowed a dome to be suspended. Many later Byzantine and Ottoman architects used the Hagia Sophia as a model. It was the world&#x27;s largest cathedral for nearly a thousand years, and its dome remains the third largest in the modern world. 

In Gaul, the Frankish king Clovis I converted to Catholicism; his kingdom became the dominant polity in the West in 507, gradually converting into a Christian kingdom over the next centuries. Papal influence rose as competition within the church continued to lead people to Rome to resolve their problems. Gregory the Great (590-604) gained prestige and power for the papacy by leading the response to invasion by the Lombards in 592 and 593, reforming the clergy, standardizing music in worship, sending out missionaries and founding new monasteries. Until 751, the Pope remained a subject of the Byzantine emperor.

=== Geographical spread ===

Christianity continued to grow rapidly, both westwards and eastwards. Christians in Persia, (present-day Iraq), were deeply persecuted in Late Antiquity, but their numbers still grew. A form of Christianity made inroads among Arabs in Palestine, Yemen, and Arabia. In the fourth century the percentage of Christians was as high in the Sasanian Empire as in the Roman Empire. Even as the Huns, Ostrogoths, Visigoths, and Vandals caused havoc in the Roman Empire in the fourth and fifth centuries, many converted to Christianity. Syria was home to a vibrant Christianity. The gospel was first brought to Central Asia and China by Syriac-speaking missionaries. 

Christian institutions in Asia or East Africa never developed the intellectual or sociopolitical power that the European churches and Byzantium did. However, Armenia became the first state to adopt Christianity as its religion in 301. It was followed by others in the Caucasus, such as Albania, and Ethiopia and Eritrea in Africa. Christianity, a minority faith in Britain since the second century, began to be displaced by Anglo-Saxon paganism in the fifth century; this process began reversing after the Gregorian mission of 597. Missionaries also began to convert the Irish in the early fifth century.

=== Heresies, schisms and councils ===

Regional Christianities produced diverse and sometimes competing churches. Ancient Christian authors identified any practice or doctrine which differed from apostolic tradition as heresy. The number of laws directed at heresy indicate it was a much higher priority than paganism for Christians of this period. For decades, Arianism embroiled the entire church, lay people who were not clergy and clergy alike, in arguing whether Jesus&#x27; divinity was equal to the Father&#x27;s. The First Council of Nicaea in 325 attempted to resolve the controversy with the Nicene Creed. Along the Eastern Mediterranean where Christian factions struggled without accepting resolution, Christian communities were weakened, affecting their long-term survival.

Christian scriptures were formalized as the New Testament and distinguished from the Old Testament by the fourth century. Despite agreement on these texts, differences between East and West were becoming evident. Latin was the primary language of the church in the West and while the East did use Latin to a small degree, it used Greek, Syriac, and other languages more. The West condemned Roman culture as sinful and resisted state control, whereas the East harmonized with Greek culture and aimed for unanimity between church and state. There were also tensions surrounding the marriage of clerics which continued in the East but was forbidden in the West. The East advocated sharing the government of the church between five church leaders, arguing that the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem were equal to the Pope. Rome asserted papal primacy.

Controversies over how Jesus&#x27; human and divine natures coexisted came to a head when Nestorius declared Mary as the mother of Jesus&#x27; humanity, not his divinity, thereby giving Jesus two distinct natures. This led to a series of ecumenical councils: the Council of Ephesus was the church&#x27;s third council, and it condemned Nestorius. Held in 431, the church in the Persian Empire refused to recognize its authority. In 451 the fourth council was the influential Council of Chalcedon; the Fifth was in 583, and the Sixth in 680681. The seventh council of the church in 787, the Second Council of Nicaea, was the last one the Byzantine Church recognized as a general council.

While most of Christianity accepted the Chalcedonian Definition which emphasizes that the Son is a single person, the church in Persia rejected it and embraced Nestorianism instead. This led to the first separation between East and West in 482 when Oriental Orthodoxy formed in two general groups of Persians and Syrians. One group became the Church of the East (also known as the Assyrian, Nestorian, or Persian Church), while the majority of Christians in Syria and Mesopotamia became Syrian Orthodox (Jacobite). This cut off the flourishing school of Syrian Semitic Christian theologians and writers from the rest of Christendom. The Church of the East lay almost entirely outside the Byzantine Empire. It became the principal Church in Asia in the Middle Ages.

== Early Middle Ages (c. 600–1000) ==

By the early 600s, Christianity had spread around the Mediterranean. However, between 632 and 750, the Islamic caliphates conquered the Middle East, North Africa and the Iberian Peninsula. Muslim rule devastated Asian churches in the cities, but between the fifth and the eighth centuries Christianity had also been adopted in remote areas better enabling their survival. In the same period, war on multiple fronts turned the Eastern Roman Empire into the Byzantine Empire. Until the eighth century, Germanic Europe remained largely impoverished, politically fragmented and dependent on the church. 

The Early Middle Ages was the formative period of Western &quot;Christendom&quot; which emerged at the end of this age. In and around this largely Christian world, barbarian invasion, deportation, and neglect produced large &quot;unchurched&quot; populations for whom Christianity was one religion among many that could be fused with aspects of local paganism. The church of this age was only indirectly influenced by the Bible. 

=== Monasticism and art ===
Until the end of the Early Middle Ages, Western culture was preserved and passed on primarily by monks known as &quot;regular clergy&quot; because they followed a : a rule. The rule included chastity, obedience and poverty sought through prayer, memorization of scripture, celibacy, fasting, manual labour, and almsgiving.

Monasteries served as orphanages and inns for travelers, and provided food for those in need. They supported literacy, practiced classical arts and crafts, and copied and preserved ancient texts in their scriptoria and libraries. Dedicated monks created illuminated manuscripts. From the sixth to the eighth centuries, most schools were connected to monasteries, but methods of teaching an illiterate populace could also include mystery plays, vernacular sermons, saints&#x27; lives in epic form, and artwork.

The early Middle Ages was an age of uncertainty, and the role of relics and &quot;holy men&quot; able to provide &quot;special access&quot; to the divine became increasingly important. Donations for the dead to receive prayers (with that special access) provided an ongoing source of wealth. Monasteries became increasingly organized, gradually establishing their own authority as separate from political and familial authorities, thereby revolutionizing social history. Medical practice was highly important, and medieval monasteries were best known for their public hospitals, hospices and their contributions to medicine. The sixth-century Rule of Saint Benedict has had extensive influence.

The East developed an approach to sacred art unknown in the West, adapting ancient portraiture in icons as intercessors between God and humankind. In the 720s, the Byzantine Emperor Leo banned the pictorial representation of Christ, saints, and biblical scenes, and destroyed much early representational art. The West condemned Leo&#x27;s iconoclasm. By the tenth and early eleventh centuries, Byzantine culture began to recover its artistic heritage.

===Regional differences===

Eastern Europe had been exposed to Christianity during Roman rule, but it was Byzantine Christianity, brought by the ninth-century saints Cyril and Methodius, that was influential in state development there. The brothers developed the Glagolitic alphabet to translate the Bible into the local language. Their disciples then developed the Cyrillic script which became the cultural and religious foundation for all Slavic nations. 

The Church of the East brought Christianity to the Chinese Emperor in 635 whose decree to license the Christian faith was copied onto the Sianfu stele. It spread into northwestern China, Khotan, Turfan, and south of Lake Balkash in southeastern Kazakhstan, but its growth was halted in 845 by Emperor Wu-Tsung, who favoured Taoism. The Church of the East evangelized all along the Silk Road and was instrumental in converting some of the Mongol/Turkic peoples. After 700, when much of Christianity was declining, there were flourishing Christian societies along all the main trade routes of Asia, South India, the Nubian kingdoms, Ethiopia, and in Caucasian Armenia and Georgia. 

In Western Europe, canon law was instrumental in developing key norms concerning oaths of loyalty, homage, and fidelity. These norms were incorporated into civil law, where traces remain. Within the tenets of feudalism, the church created a new model of consecrated kingship unknown in the East, and in 800, Clovis&#x27; descendant Charlemagne became its recipient when Pope Leo III crowned him emperor. Charlemagne engaged in a number of reforms which began the Carolingian Renaissance, a period of intellectual and cultural revival. His crowning set the precedent that only a pope could crown a Western emperor enabling popes to claim emperors derived their power from God through them. The Papacy became free from Byzantine control, and the former lands of the Exarchate became States of the Church. However, the papacy was still in need of aid and protection, so the Holy Roman emperors often used that need to attempt domination of the Papacy and the Papal States. In Rome, the papacy came under the control of the city&#x27;s aristocracy.
In Russia, the baptism of Vladimir of Kiev in 989 is traditionally associated with the conversion of the Kievan Rus&#x27;. Their new religious structure included dukes maintaining control of a financially-dependent church. Monasticism was the dominant form of piety for both peasants and elites who identified themselves as Christian while retaining many pre-Christian practices.

Viking raids in the ninth and tenth centuries destroyed many churches and monasteries, inadvertently leading to reform. Patrons competed in rebuilding so that &quot;by the mid-eleventh century, a wealthy, unified, better-organized, better-educated, more spiritually sensitive Latin Church&quot; resulted. There was another rise in papal power in the tenth century when William IX, Duke of Aquitaine, and other powerful lay founders of monasteries, placed their institutions under the protection of the papacy.

== High Middle Ages (c. 1000–1300) ==

Membership in the Christendom of this age began with baptism at birth. Every follower was supposed to have some knowledge of the Apostles&#x27; Creed and the Lord&#x27;s Prayer, to rest on Sunday and feast days, attend mass, fast at specified times, take communion at Easter, pay various fees for the needy, and receive last rites at death. The medieval papacy gained authority in every domain of European life as it gradually came to resemble the monarchies of its day. Canon law became a huge, highly complex, system of laws that omitted Christianity&#x27;s earlier principles of inclusivity.

The High Middle Ages saw the formation of several fundamental Christian doctrines, such as the seven sacraments, the just reward for labour, &quot;the terms of Christian marriage, the nature of clerical celibacy and the appropriate lifestyle for priests&quot;. Heresy was defined with new precision. Purgatory became an official doctrine. In 1215, confession became required for all. The rosary was created after veneration of Mary, mother of Jesus became a central aspect of the period.

=== Monks, reform, and renaissance ===
Certain monasteries adopted a Cluniac model of self-reform. They used Romanesque architecture to convey a sense of awe and wonder and inspire obedience. Their cultural and religious dominance began to decline in the mid-eleventh century when secular clergy, who were not members of religious orders, rose in influence. Monastery schools lost influence as cathedral schools spread, independent schools arose, and universities formed as self-governing corporations chartered by popes and kings. Canon and civil law became professionalized, and a new literate elite formed, further displacing monks. Throughout this period, the clergy and the laity became &quot;more literate, more worldly, and more self-assertive&quot;. 

Byzantine art exerted a powerful influence on Western art in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Gothic architecture, intended to inspire contemplation of the divine, began in the same centuries. The twelfth century saw a change in the ideal of a monk, from one of contemplative devotion to one of active reform. Among these novel charismatic preachers was Saint Dominic, who founded the Dominican Order. The Cistercian movement was a wave of monastic reform after 1098; the Cistercians later became instrumental in technological advancement in medieval Europe. 
The Christian wars of reconquest, which lasted 200 years, had begun in Italy in 915 and in Spain in 1009 to retake territory lost to Muslims, causing fleeing Muslims in Sicily and Spain to leave behind their libraries. Between 1150 and 1200, monks searched them and found the works of Aristotle, Euclid and other ancient writers. The rediscovery of the complete works of Aristotle led to the Renaissance of the twelfth century. It also created conflict between faith and reason, resolved by a revolution in thought called scholasticism. The scholastic writings of Thomas Aquinas provided the foundation for much modern theology, philosophy and law. The renaissance revived the scientific study of natural phenomena which led to the scientific revolution in the West. There was no parallel renaissance in the East.

=== Centralization ===
The Gregorian Reform under Pope Gregory VII (1073–1085) began &quot;a new period in church history&quot;. Previously, the power of kings and emperors had been at least partly founded on connection to the sacred. Gregorian Reform intended to divest Western rulership of its sacramental character, and to establish the preeminence of the church by freeing it from state control. This shift reinforced the popes&#x27; temporal power, enabling a reorganization of the administration of the Papal States which brought a substantial increase in wealth. This enabled popes to become patrons in their own right, consolidate territory, centralize authority, and establish a bureaucracy. 
State administrations were also centralizing, and competition between church and state, who claimed legal and tax jurisdiction over the same populace, created conflicts. A major example was the Investiture Controversy in the Holy Roman Empire, a conflict between the Holy Roman Emperor Henry IV and Pope Gregory VII over the secular appointment of bishops and abbots and control of their revenues. For the church, ending lay investiture would support independence from the state, encourage reform, and provide better pastoral care. For the kings, who could better control the powers and revenues of appointed bishops than those of hereditary noblemen, ending lay investiture meant the power of the Holy Roman Emperor and the European nobility would be reduced. 

The &quot;&quot; of 1075 declared the pope alone could invest bishops. Disobedience to the Pope became equated with heresy; when Henry IV rejected the decree, he was excommunicated, which contributed to a civil war. A similar controversy occurred in England.

===Schism, crusade, spread, and retraction===
The second separation of East and West took place in 1054 when the Eastern Church formed Byzantine Eastern Orthodoxy, which thereafter remained in communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. The Oriental Orthodox Church, which had separated after Chalcedon, had survived against the odds with help from Byzantium. At the height of its expansion in the thirteenth century, the Church of the East stretched from Syria to eastern China and from Siberia to southern India and southern Asia.

Along with geographical separation, there had long been many cultural differences, geopolitical disagreements, and a lack of respect between east and west. Nevertheless, the Byzantine emperor Alexios I Komnenos still asked Pope Urban II for help with the Seljuk Turks in 1081, and Urban appealed in 1095 to European Christians to &quot;go to the aid of their brethren in the Holy Land&quot;. 

Urban&#x27;s message had great popular appeal and resulted in the First Crusade. Drawing on powerful and prevalent aspects of folk religion, crusading connected pilgrimage, charity, and remission of sin with a willingness to fight. It gave ordinary Christians a tangible means of expressing brotherhood with the East and carried a sense of historical responsibility. The Crusades contributed to the development of national identities in European nations and increased division with the East. The evolving cult of chivalry of the Christian knight became a social and cultural influence before its decline during the 1400s. One significant effect of the Crusades was the invention of the indulgence.

Christianity was disappearing in Mesopotamia and inner Iran, although some Christian communities continued to exist further to the east. As churches in Egypt, Syria, and Iraq became subject to fervently Islamic militaristic regimes Christians were designated as dhimma, a status that guaranteed their protection but enforced their legal inferiority. Different communities adopted various survival strategies: some withdrew from interaction, others converted to Islam, and others sought outside help. 

The Christianization of Scandinavia occurred in two stages: first, in the ninth century, missionaries operated without secular support; then a secular ruler would begin to oversee Christianization in their territory until an organized ecclesiastical network was established. By 1350, Scandinavia was an integral part of Western Christendom.

===Challenges and repression===
Moral misbehaviour and heresy committed by the laity and clergy were prosecuted in inquisitorial courts, composed of both church and civil authorities, and were established only when needed. Though these courts had neither actual joint leadership nor joint organization, the Dominican Order held the primary responsibility for conducting inquisitions. The Medieval Inquisition brought between 8,000 and 40,000 people to interrogation and sentencing; death sentences were relatively rare. The penalty imposed most often was an act of penance which might include public confession. Bishops were the lead inquisitors, but they did not possess absolute power, nor were they universally supported. Inquisition became stridently contested as public opposition grew and riots against the Dominicans occurred. The Fourth Lateran Council of 1215 empowered inquisitors to search out moral and religious &quot;crimes&quot; even when there was no accuser. In theory, this granted them extraordinary powers. In practice, without sufficient local secular support, their task became so overwhelmingly difficult that inquisitors were endangered and some were murdered.

A turning point in Jewish-Christian relations occurred when the Talmud was put &quot;on trial&quot; in 1239 by Pope Gregory IX because of contents that mocked the central figures of Christianity. Talmudic Judaism came to be seen as so different from biblical Judaism that old Augustinian obligations to leave the Jews alone no longer applied. A rhetoric with elaborate stories casting Jews as enemies accused of ritual murder, the blood libel, and desecration of the Christian eucharist host grew among ordinary folk. The spread of the Black Death led to attacks on Jewish communities throughout the Holy Roman Empire by people who blamed them for the epidemic. Jews often acted as financial agents for the nobility, providing them loans with interest while being exempt from certain financial obligations. This attracted jealousy and resentment. Count Emicho of Leiningen massacred Jews in search of supplies and protection money, while the York massacre of 1190 also appears to have originated in a conspiracy by local leaders to liquidate their debts.

A military campaign conducted by papal and French forces to eliminate the Catharism heresy began in 1209, and continued until 1229, while Catharism itself lasted until 1350. The nobility of Eastern Europe prioritized subduing the Balts, the last major polytheistic population in Europe, over crusading in the Holy Land. In 1147, the &quot;&quot; gave these nobles indulgences for the first of the Northern Crusades, which intermittently continued until 1316. The clergy pragmatically accepted the forced conversions the nobles perpetrated despite continued theological emphasis on voluntary conversion.

== Renaissance and Reformation (c. 1300–1650) ==

=== Division in the West ===
The many calamities of the &quot;long fourteenth century&quot; – plague, famine, wars, and social unrestled ordinary European people to believe the end of the world was imminent. This belief ran throughout society and became intertwined with anticlerical and anti-papal sentiments. Criticism of the church became an integral part of late medieval European life, and was expressed in both secular and religious writings, and movements of heresy or internal reform, although most attempts at reform between 1300 and 1500 failed. 

In 1309, Pope Clement V fled Rome&#x27;s factional politics by moving to Avignon in southern France. This Avignon Papacy, consisting of seven successive popes, unintentionally diminished papal prestige and power. Pope Gregory XI returned to Rome in 1377. After Gregory&#x27;s death the following year, the papal conclave elected Urban VI to succeed him, but the French cardinals disapproved and elected Robert of Geneva instead. This began the Western Schism, during which there was more than one pope. In 1409, the Council of Pisa&#x27;s attempted resolution resulted in the election of a third separate pope. The schism was finally resolved in 1417, with the election of Pope Martin V.

Throughout the Late Middle Ages, the church faced powerful challenges and vigorous political confrontations. The English scholastic philosopher John Wycliffe (1320–1384) urged the Church to again embrace simplicity by giving up its property and wealth, to stop being subservient to secular politics, and to deny papal authority. Wycliffe&#x27;s teachings were condemned as heresy, but he was allowed to live out the last two years of his life in his home parish. Wycliffe&#x27;s teachings influenced the Czech theologian Jan Hus (1369–1415) who also spoke out against what he saw as corruption in the church. Hus was convicted of heresy and burned at the stake. This was the impetus for the Bohemian Reformation and led to the Hussite Wars. 

Meanwhile, a vernacular religious culture called the &quot;Devotio Moderna&quot; attempted to work toward a pious society of ordinary people. Through the Dutch scholar Desiderius Erasmus Roterodamus (1466–1536), Christian humanism grew and impacted literature and education.

=== The East and Renaissance ===
A 1452 reunion agreement between the Orthodox and Catholic churches was negated by the Fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453, which sealed off Orthodoxy from the West for more than a century. Islamic law did not acknowledge the Byzantine church as an institution, but a concern for societal stability allowed it to survive. Financial handicaps, constant upheaval, simony, and corruption, impoverished many, and made conversion an attractive solution. This led to the state confiscating churches and turning them into mosques. The patriarchate became a part of the Ottoman system under Suleiman the Magnificent (1520–1566), and by the end of the sixteenth century, widespread desperation and low morale had produced crisis and decline. When Cyril I Loukaris (1572 – 1638) became Patriarch in 1620, he began leading the church toward renewal. A shared hostility towards Catholicism led Cyril to reach out to the Protestants of Europe and to be deeply impacted by their Reformation doctrines. Protestant pressure produced the Lukaris Confession.
The flight of Eastern Christians from Constantinople, and the manuscripts they carried with them, were important factors in stimulating literary renaissance in the West. The Catholic church became a leading patron of art and architecture, commissioning many works and supporting renowned artists such as Michelangelo, Brunelleschi, Bramante, Raphael, Fra Angelico, Donatello, and Leonardo da Vinci. Although fifteenth-century popes struggled to reestablish papal authority, the Renaissance Papacy transformed Rome by rebuilding St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica and establishing the city as a prestigious centre of learning. Reformation Protestants condemned these popes as corrupt for their lack of chastity, their nepotism, and the selling of &quot;hats and indulgences&quot;. 

In Russia, Ivan III of Russia adopted the style of the Byzantine imperial court to gain support among the Rus&#x27; elite who saw themselves as the new &#x27;chosen&#x27; and Moscow as the New Jerusalem. Jeremias II (1536–1595), the first Orthodox patriarch to visit north-eastern Europe, founded the Orthodox Patriarchate of Russia during his journey.

The sixteenth-century success of Christianity in Japan was followed by one of the greatest persecutions in Christian history.

=== Colonialism and missions ===

Colonialism, which began in the fifteenth century, originated either on a militaristic/political path, a commercial one, or with settlers who wanted land. Christian missionaries soon followed with their own separate agenda. &quot;Companies, politicians, missionaries, settlers, and traders rarely acted together&quot; and were often in conflict. Some missionaries supported colonialism while just as many took stances against colonial oppression. Between 1500 and 1800, Catholic Christianity gained followers worldwide through missionaries from the Spanish, Portuguese, and French empires, although this was only one factor in Christianity&#x27;s global spread along with migration, trade and cultural contacts, and indigenous initiatives. 

Long before the first European colonists arrived, indigenous Christian communities, which were often in conflict with the newcomers, had existed in Asia and Africa. St.Thomas Christian communities in southern India existed continuously for more than 1000 years. In the 16th century, baptized Kongolese Christians were taken by Portuguese slavers to the Caribbean and Brazil where there are clear traces that they evangelized among their fellow sufferers. Preceding the arrival of European Protestant missionaries to West Africa, former slaves had already returned &quot;with Bible in hand&quot; founding Freetown which would play a central role in the Christianization of West Africa.

During the Hispanic colonization of the Americas, some 1,000 urban centers were founded in the 16th and early 17th century in Baroque style. In the center was a square and around it were magnificent churches, spacious monasteries, the cathedral, the bishop’s residence, the governor’s palace, and the town hall. Even the simple country towns were always built around a large square with a church as the center. This did not produce consistency; instead, the merging of traditions created a multitude of indigenous Christianities.

In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Reductionist villages for Indians in regions of Paraguay, Argentina and Brazil were established by Jesuits and other orders. Villagers were shielded from the rest of colonial society and protected from serfdom and forced labor. Spanish settlers were forbidden. Jesuits promoted local skills and technical innovations, working exclusively in the native language to form an &quot;agrarian collective&quot; that also allowed private property and ensured equitable provision for all families. Work 2-3 days a week was required, but education was sufficient motivation. There were no revolts, and the most severe punishment was expulsion. The Spanish crown resented this autonomy, and attempted resettlement. When Jesuits resisted, the order was banned, and its members were expelled from Spain in 1767. Thereafter, reduction territories became open to settlers, and Indians often became bondmen.

===Women, witch frenzy, expulsion and inquisition===

Women in the Middle Ages were considered incapable of moral judgment and authority. However, there were women who became distinguished leaders of nunneries, exercising the same powers and privileges as their male counterparts, such as Hildegard of Bingen (d. 1179), Elisabeth of Schönau (d. 1164/65), and Marie d&#x27;Oignies (d. 1213). Although the Catholic Church had long ruled that witches did not exist, the conviction that witches were both real and malevolent developed throughout fifteenth-century European society. No single cause of &quot;witch frenzy&quot; is known, although the Little Ice Age is thought to have been a factor. Approximately 100,000 people, of whom 80% were women accused by those in their own villages, were prosecuted in mostly civil trials between 1561 and 1670; 40,000 to 50,000 were executed.
While the medieval church never officially repudiated Augustine&#x27;s doctrine of protecting the Jews, defining them as heretical outsiders became increasingly common throughout society during the fifteenth century. Local rulers repeatedly evicted Jews from their lands and confiscated Jewish property. 

Between 1478 and 1542, the Spanish and Portuguese inquisitions were initially authorized by the church but soon became state institutions. Authorized by Pope Sixtus IV in 1478, the Spanish Inquisition was established to combat fears that Jewish converts were conspiring with Muslims to sabotage the new state. Five years later a papal bull conceded control of the Spanish Inquisition to the Spanish crown making it the first national, unified, centralized institution of the nascent Spanish state. The Portuguese Inquisition, controlled by a state board of directors, incorporated anti-Judaism before the end of the fifteenth century and forced conversion led many Jewish converts to Portuguese colonies in India, where they suffered as targets of the Goa Inquisition. The bureaucratic and intellectual Roman Inquisition, best known for its condemnation of Galileo, served the papacy&#x27;s political aims in Italy.

=== Reformation ===

The Protestant Reformation is traditionally said to have begun when the Catholic monk Martin Luther nailed his &quot;Ninety-five Theses&quot; to the church door in Wittenberg in 1517. Luther&#x27;s theses challenged the church&#x27;s selling of indulgences, the authority of the Pope, and other church teachings. The three primary religious traditions to emerge from the Reformation were the Lutheran, the Reformed, and the Anglican traditions. At the same time, a collection of loosely related groups including Anabaptists, Spiritualists, and Evangelical Rationalists, began the Radical Reformation in Germany and Switzerland. 

Edicts of the Diet of Worms condemned Luther. The Roman Catholic Church responded in the Counter-Reformation, spearheaded by ten reforming popes between 1534 to 1605. The Council of Trent (1545–1563) denied each Protestant claim, and laid the foundation of modern Catholic policies. New monastic orders were formed, including the Society of Jesus – the &quot;Jesuits&quot; – who adopted military-style discipline and strict loyalty to the Pope.

Quarreling royal houses, already involved in dynastic disagreements, became polarized into the two religious camps. In 1562, France became the centre of a series of wars, of which the largest and most destructive was the Thirty Years&#x27; War (1618–1648). While some scholars argue that these wars were varieties of the just war tradition for liberty and freedom, most historians argue that the wars were more about nationalistic state-building and economics, and less about religion.

== Modern period (1650–1945) ==
=== Ideological movements ===
The era of politically absolutist states followed the breakdown of Christian universalism in Europe. Abuses from absolutist Catholic kings gave rise to a virulent critique of Christianity that first emerged among the more extreme Protestant reformers in the 1680s as an aspect of the Age of Enlightenment. By the 1690s, many secular thinkers had rethought the state&#x27;s reasons for persecution and begun advocating for religious toleration, as Protestants and other Christian moderates had long argued. Concepts of freedom of religion, speech, and thought became established in the West.

Secularisation spread at every level of European society. Pioneered by Protestants, Biblical criticism advocated historicism and rationalism to make study of the Bible more scholarly and secular in the 1700s. In reaction to rationalism, Pietism began in Europe, spread to the Thirteen Colonies, and contributed to the First Great Awakening of the 1700s. Beginning among the Presbyterians, this revival gave birth to American Evangelicalism and Wesleyan Methodism. Divisions over the movement turned political and led to support for the American Revolution. In 1791, the new United States became the first Christian nation to mandate a separation of church and state; theological pluralism became the norm.

The rise of Protestantism contributed to human capital formation, the development of a new work ethic, economic growth, the European state system, and the development of modern capitalism in Northern Europe. However, urbanization and industrialisation created a plethora of new social problems. In Europe and North America, both Protestants and Catholics provided massive aid to the poor, supporting family welfare, and providing medicine and education.

The French Revolution led to a 1794 attempt by radical revolutionaries to violently de-Christianize France. As a result, the Eastern Orthodox church rejected Enlightenment ideas as too dangerous to embrace.

=== Nineteenth and twentieth centuries ===

In the United States, the Second Great Awakening (1800s–1830s) produced the Latter Day Saint movement, the Restoration Movement and the Holiness movement. Moral reform, (focused on women&#x27;s rights, temperance, literacy and the abolition of slavery), necessitated the establishment of nationwide societies that businesses emulated leading to mergers that reshaped the nineteenth-century U.S. economy.. The 300-year-old trans-Atlantic slave trade, in which some Christians had participated, had always garnered moral objections: by the eighteenth century, individual Quakers, Methodists, Presbyterians and Baptists began a written campaign against it. Congregations led by black preachers kept abolitionism alive into the early nineteenth century when some American Protestants organized the first anti-slavery societies. This ideological opposition eventually ended the Trans-Atlantic slave trade, changing economic and human history on three continents.

The Third Great Awakening began in 1857 and took root throughout the world, especially in English-speaking countries. Restorationists were prevalent in America, giving rise to the Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement, Adventism, and the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses.

Protestant missionaries, many of them women, played a significant role in shaping nations and societies. Missionaries translated the Bible into local languages, generating in the process a written grammar, a lexicon of native traditions, and a dictionary of the local language. These were used to teach in missionary schools, resulting in the spread of literacy and indigenization. According to historian Lamin Sanneh, Protestant missionaries thus stimulated the &quot;largest, most diverse and most vigorous movement of cultural renewal&quot; in African history.

Liberal Christians embraced seventeenth-century rationalism, but its disregard of faith and ritual in maintaining Christianity led to its decline. Fundamentalist Christianity rose in the early 1900s as a reaction against modern rationalism. The Roman Catholic Church became increasingly centralized, conservative, and focused on loyalty to the Pope. By 1930, Protestant fundamentalism appeared to be dying. However, in the second half of the 1930s, Evangelicalism, which included a theology against liberalism based on a reevaluation of Reformation teachings, began uniting moderates of both sides.

In the early twentieth century, authoritarian European governments tended to establish state-supported churches. Such consanguinity would implicate the church in abuses of power. Nevertheless, Pope Pius XI declared that fascist governments had hidden &quot;pagan intentions&quot; and expressed the irreconcilability of the Catholic position with totalitarian fascist states which placed the nation above God. Most leaders and members of the largest Protestant church in Germany, the German Evangelical Church, supported the Nazi Party when they came to power in 1933. About a third of German Protestants formed the Confessing Church which opposed Nazism; its members were harassed, arrested, and otherwise targeted. In Poland, Catholic priests were arrested and Polish priests and nuns were executed en masse.

=== Russian Orthodoxy ===

The Church reform of Peter I in the early 1700s had placed the Orthodox authorities under the control of the tsar who involved the church in various campaigns of russification which contributed to antisemitism. The communist revolutionaries who established the Soviet Union saw the Church as an enemy of the people and part of the tsarist state. The communist Soviet Union heavily persecuted the Russian Orthodox Church, executing up to 8,000 people by 1922. The League of Militant Atheists adopted a five-year plan in 1932 &quot;aimed at the total eradication of religion by 1937&quot;. Despite this, the Orthodox Church continued to contribute to theology and culture. At the beginning of the fourteenth century, Gregory of Sinai had begun a mystical revival called Athonite hesychasm which was revived in the Orthodox church of the eighteenth century and again in the twentieth.

== After World War II ==
Before 1945, about a third of the people in the world were Christians, and about 80% lived in Europe, Russia, and the Americas. After World War II, Christian missionaries played a transformative role in many colonial societies, moving them toward independence through decolonization. By 2000, the percentage of Christians living in Asia and Africa had risen to 32 percent. In the twenty-first century, Christianity is present in all six continents and a multitude of different cultures. It has had multiple regional &quot;centers&quot; since its beginnings, and these have produced different indigenous forms, initiatives, and expressions that have all contributed to its global expansion. In the first quarter of the twenty-first century, most Christians live outside North America and Western Europe, white Christians are a global minority, and slightly over half of worldwide Christians are female. It is the world&#x27;s largest religion with roughly 2.4 billion followers constituting around 31.2% of the world&#x27;s population.

In 2000, approximately one-quarter of all Christians worldwide were part of Pentecostalism and its associated movements. By 2025, Pentecostals are expected to constitute one-third of the nearly three billion Christians worldwide making it the largest branch of Protestantism and the fastest-growing religious movement in worldwide Christianity.

Modern Western Christians have a common background in the Papal centralization and scholasticism of the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, Reformation and Counter-Reformation, and the Enlightenment era. None of these were important influences on the three main branches of Eastern Christianity: the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Oriental Orthodox Communion, and the Eastern Catholic Church. 

Roughly half of Eastern Orthodox Christians live in post-Eastern Bloc countries. The oldest communities in Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, Constantinople, and Georgia, are decreasing due to forced migration from religious persecution. Highly authoritarian and totalitarian governments have brought about crises and decline in many areas. The world&#x27;s first Marxist super-power, and other communist governments, pursued anti-religious policies. In 2013, 17 Muslim majority states reported discrimination against religious minorities, including Christianity. Anti-Christian persecution has become a consistent human rights concern. 

Christianity faced multiple challenges in the twentieth century leading to a decline in church attendance in the West. The challenges of secularism, and the changing moral climate concerning sexual ethics, gender, and exclusivity produced a demand for greater individual freedom. &quot;New Age&quot; spirituality formed. It is private, individualistic, embraces the sacred as a deeper understanding of the self, and differs radically from Christian tradition. Hugh McLeod writes that political criticisms concerning power have had an even wider impact. Orthodox Christians in the East tend to be more conservative on most issues than Westerners. The Orthodox Church of the twenty-first century accepts Papal primacy but rejects the Papal supremacy that exerts external power and jurisdiction over the internal affairs of self-governing churches. In Orthodoxy, there is no position equivalent to the Roman Pope. 

Less than four-in-ten Orthodox favor reconciliation with the Roman Catholic Church. Unity between Protestants and Catholics also made little progress until 11 October 1962, when Pope John XXIII opened the Second Vatican Council. Roman Catholic ecumenical goals are to establish full communion amongst all the various Christian churches, however there is no agreement amongst evangelicals. Since then, the ecumenical movement has stalled, however there is also a trend at the local level toward discussion, pulpit exchanges, and shared social action. In Hugh MacLeod&#x27;s view, &quot;A liberal Catholic is likely to have a lot in common with a liberal Methodist,&quot; and the influence of the internet will probably increase this.

=== Theological revolution ===
For theologians writing after 1945, theology depended on the context of those applying it. The multiple wars of the twentieth century brought questions of theodicy to the forefront. For the first time since the pre-Constantinian era, Christian pacifism became an alternative to war. The Holocaust forced many to realize supersessionism can underlie hatred, ethnocentrism, and racism. Supersessionist texts are increasingly challenged in the twenty first century.

Liberation theology combined with the social gospel to redefine social justice and expose institutionalized sin to aid Latin American poor, but its context limited its application to other environments. Different historical and socio-political situations produced black theology and Feminist theology. Combining Christianity with questions of civil rights, aspects of the Black Power movement, and responses to black Muslims produced a black theology that spread to the United Kingdom, parts of Africa, and confronted apartheid in South Africa. The feminist movement of the mid-twentieth century began with an anti-Christian ethos but soon developed an influential feminist theology dedicated to transforming churches and society. Feminist theology developed at the local level as womanist theology of African-American women, the &quot;mujerista&quot; theology of Hispanic women, and Asian feminist theology.

In the mid to late 1990s, postcolonial theology emerged globally from multiple sources. It analyzes structures of power and ideology to recover what colonialism erased or suppressed in indigenous cultures. The missionary movement of the twenty-first century has transformed into a multi-cultural, multi-faceted global network of NGO&#x27;s, short-term amateur volunteers, and traditional long-term bilingual, bicultural professionals who focus on evangelism and local development and not on &#x27;civilizing&#x27; native people.

== See also ==

* Chronology of Jesus
* Historical background of the New Testament
* Historical Jesus
* Jesus in Christianity
* Life of Jesus
* Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church

== Notes ==
== References ==

== Sources ==
=== Books &amp; periodicals ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 


=== Encyclopedia &amp; web sources ===
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 


* 
* 
* 
* 

* 

== External links ==
The following links give an overview of the history of Christianity:
* &quot;Historical Christianity: The Ancient Communal Faith&quot;: Print, ebook, and audiobook
* History of Christianity Reading Room: Extensive online resources for the study of global church history (Tyndale Seminary).
* &quot;Dictionary of the History of Ideas&quot;: Christianity in History
* &quot;Dictionary of the History of Ideas&quot;: Church as an Institution
* Sketches of Church History From AD 33 to the Reformation by Rev. J. C Robertson, M.A., Canon of Canterbury
* A History of Christianity in 15 Objects online series in association with Faculty of Theology, Uni. of Oxford from September 2011
The following links provide quantitative data related to Christianity and other major religions, including rates of adherence at different points in time:
* American Religion Data Archive
* Historical Christianity, A timeline with references to the descendants of the early church.
* Reformation Timeline, A short timeline of the Protestant Reformation.
* Fourth-Century Christianity</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235329" start="4" end="27" title="History of Christianity" label="history of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q749771" start="44" end="52" title="Ministry of Jesus" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="56" end="61" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="100" end="109" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="122" end="131" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="139" end="153" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="157" end="162" title="Judaea (Roman province)" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="200" end="211" title="Apocalypticism" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="233" end="252" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="risen from the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="276" end="289" title="Jewish Christianity" label="a Jewish sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q467124" start="339" end="371" title="Split of Christianity and Judaism" label="diverging gradually from Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078506" start="435" end="480" title="persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire" label="persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="504" end="514" title="grassroots" label="grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="598" end="611" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="710" end="724" title="Biblical canon#Christian canons" label="biblical canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="761" end="782" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568524" start="811" end="841" title="Constantine the Great and Christianity" label="to declare himself a Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="865" end="879" title="Edict of Milan" label="Edict of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="953" end="967" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543393" start="1045" end="1070" title="seven ecumenical councils" label="seven ecumenical councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="1136" end="1143" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="1148" end="1155" title="Western Christianity" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="1183" end="1201" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q96406211" start="1259" end="1278" title="spread Christianity" label="spread Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="1322" end="1333" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="1341" end="1357" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="1556" end="1565" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1775" end="1791" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="1853" end="1869" title="Christianization" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16389571" start="1891" end="1910" title="East-Central Europe" label="East-Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="1955" end="1970" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="2041" end="2057" title="Slavic countries" label="Slavic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2062" end="2068" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="2231" end="2247" title="East–West Schism" label="East–West Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="2257" end="2276" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Byzantine Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="2353" end="2361" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="2436" end="2455" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="Constantinople fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q620992" start="2622" end="2654" title="criticism of the Catholic Church" label="criticism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="2685" end="2696" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="2735" end="2754" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490042" start="2815" end="2840" title="European wars of religion" label="European wars of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="2867" end="2887" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="3078" end="3097" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="3176" end="3188" title="Abolitionism" label="Abolitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="3209" end="3229" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200776" start="3321" end="3335" title="indigenization" label="indigenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="3588" end="3600" title="Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965842" start="3676" end="3718" title="Christianity by country" label="more than two billion Christians worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3798" end="3810" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q749771" start="3826" end="3854" title="ministry of Jesus" label="itinerant preaching of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="3890" end="3913" title="Roman province of Judea" label="Roman province of Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="3970" end="3981" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="4174" end="4191" title="Jewish messianism" label="Jewish messianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="4204" end="4213" title="messianic" label="messianic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="4238" end="4248" title="King David" label="King David"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="4287" end="4292" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363589" start="4421" end="4435" title="kingdom of God" label="kingdom of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="4586" end="4604" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="rose from the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q41374" start="4639" end="4650" title="incarnation" label="incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="4655" end="4667" title="resurrection" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="4697" end="4704" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="4732" end="4741" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q51633" start="4761" end="4772" title="Last Supper" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944691" start="4793" end="4810" title="Rite (Christianity)" label="rites and rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q681375" start="4889" end="4922" title="house church" label="small groups inside private homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q831474" start="4985" end="4994" title="Presbyter" label="Presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="5258" end="5282" title="Early centres of Christianity" label="small household churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="5371" end="5388" title="Jewish diaspora" label="dispersed peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="5510" end="5524" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="5539" end="5549" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q146744" start="5563" end="5582" title="Coptic Christianity" label="Coptic Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="5594" end="5598" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="5618" end="5626" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="5749" end="5759" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057751" start="5761" end="5784" title="Church of Antioch" label="Christianity in Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="5801" end="5813" title="Paul&amp;#x27;s epistles" label="his epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354069" start="5820" end="5838" title="Jews of Alexandria" label="Jews of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="5852" end="5871" title="Septuagint" label="a Greek translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="5881" end="5893" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="6157" end="6168" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="6184" end="6196" title="four gospels" label="four gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="6451" end="6478" title="Early centers of Christianity" label="early Christian communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q213924" start="6596" end="6601" title="codex" label="codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q619950" start="6724" end="6744" title="Council of Jerusalem" label="Council of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="6894" end="6901" title="Gentile" label="Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="6996" end="7040" title="Siege of Jerusalem (70 CE)" label="destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans in 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="7089" end="7105" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="7186" end="7205" title="Jewish Christianity" label="Jewish Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q947987" start="7435" end="7448" title="Critical mass (sociodynamics)" label="critical mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="7670" end="7677" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q149747" start="7717" end="7725" title="Adiabene" label="Adiabene"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="7924" end="7937" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="8079" end="8085" title="Bishop" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234721" start="8437" end="8442" title="Women in Church history" label="women"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="9627" end="9645" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="9663" end="9677" title="Epistle to the Hebrews" label="to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q131097" start="9679" end="9684" title="Epistle of James" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q131101" start="9690" end="9696" title="I John" label="I John"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="9744" end="9757" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostic texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q138681" start="9799" end="9808" title="Montanism" label="Montanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180430" start="9862" end="9875" title="Monarchianism" label="Monarchianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="10035" end="10044" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078506" start="10121" end="10155" title="Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire" label="persecution from Roman authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="10183" end="10187" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038979" start="10190" end="10194" title="cult" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546241" start="10201" end="10210" title="Sociological classifications of religious movements" label="movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830" start="10238" end="10244" title="Decius" label="Decius"/>
<link wikidata="Q46750" start="10249" end="10257" title="Valerian (emperor)" label="Valerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="10316" end="10326" title="Roman gods" label="Roman gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265674" start="10400" end="10435" title="Diocletianic Persecution" label="reached its height under Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="10467" end="10482" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q429811" start="10556" end="10575" title="early Christian art" label="early Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="10940" end="10951" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="10991" end="11005" title="Edict of Milan" label="Edict of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163814" start="11058" end="11083" title="Religious policies of Constantine the Great" label="he supported Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="11559" end="11590" title="Justinian I" label="the Eastern Emperor Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="12123" end="12131" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="12423" end="12429" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="12542" end="12549" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="12590" end="12608" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="12610" end="12625" title="John Chrysostom" label="John Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q191734" start="12627" end="12643" title="Gregory of Nyssa" label="Gregory of Nyssa"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="12645" end="12669" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="Athanasius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44258" start="12671" end="12688" title="Basil of Caesarea" label="Basil of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44011" start="12690" end="12710" title="Gregory of Nazianzus" label="Gregory of Nazianzus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="12712" end="12731" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43689" start="12737" end="12753" title="Ambrose of Milan" label="Ambrose of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="13120" end="13125" title="popes" label="popes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="13143" end="13154" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="13448" end="13466" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="13734" end="13743" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q792023" start="13836" end="13851" title="supersessionism" label="supersessionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156645" start="13898" end="13930" title="Jews as the chosen people" label="Jews as God&amp;#x27;s chosen people"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="13956" end="13968" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44258" start="14203" end="14218" title="Basil the Great" label="Basil the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q131465662" start="14231" end="14240" title="Basileias" label="Basileias"/>
<link wikidata="Q10439273" start="14266" end="14283" title="Caesarea (Mazaca)" label="Caesarea (Mazaca)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000047" start="14309" end="14327" title="health care system" label="health care system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136991" start="14367" end="14383" title="History of hospitals" label="public hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="14455" end="14475" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="14862" end="14882" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="15022" end="15033" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="15456" end="15468" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="15807" end="15815" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="16086" end="16113" title="Pope Gregory I" label="Gregory the Great (590-604)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="16198" end="16206" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="16762" end="16777" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="16814" end="16818" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="16820" end="16830" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="16832" end="16841" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="16847" end="16854" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="17245" end="17252" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177076" start="17373" end="17380" title="Caucasian Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="17399" end="17406" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q537514" start="17511" end="17531" title="Anglo-Saxon paganism" label="Anglo-Saxon paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044905" start="17593" end="17610" title="Gregorian mission" label="Gregorian mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="17913" end="17919" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="18056" end="18064" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407657" start="18094" end="18097" title="Laity" label="lay"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="18219" end="18242" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="18296" end="18308" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="18525" end="18538" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="18566" end="18579" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="18818" end="18824" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q226106" start="19159" end="19195" title="pentarchy" label="sharing the government of the church"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="19242" end="19252" title="Patriarch" label="Patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="19256" end="19270" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q622216" start="19272" end="19282" title="Patriarch of Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q865026" start="19284" end="19291" title="Patriarch of Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q877458" start="19297" end="19306" title="Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q649263" start="19345" end="19358" title="papal primacy" label="papal primacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185073" start="19451" end="19460" title="Nestorius" label="Nestorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="19599" end="19617" title="ecumenical council" label="ecumenical council"/>
<link wikidata="Q184332" start="19624" end="19642" title="Council of Ephesus" label="Council of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="19836" end="19856" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q205227" start="19862" end="19867" title="Second Council of Constantinople" label="Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q208037" start="19888" end="19893" title="Third Council of Constantinople" label="Sixth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187201" start="19951" end="19975" title="Second Council of Nicaea" label="Second Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037472" start="20089" end="20112" title="Chalcedonian Definition" label="Chalcedonian Definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004701" start="20298" end="20316" title="History of Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="20392" end="20410" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="20440" end="20449" title="Nestorian Church of Persia" label="Nestorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="20536" end="20551" title="Syriac Orthodox Church" label="Syrian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="20932" end="20951" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="between 632 and 750"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="20965" end="20974" title="caliphate" label="caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="21024" end="21041" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="21310" end="21326" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="21354" end="21362" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21519" end="21530" title="Christendom#Late Antiquity and Early Middle Ages" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="22347" end="22355" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q655185" start="22442" end="22452" title="scriptoria" label="scriptoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="22492" end="22514" title="illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q240911" start="22667" end="22679" title="mystery play" label="mystery play"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23392" end="23414" title="Rule of Saint Benedict#Secular significance" label="Rule of Saint Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q31755" start="23627" end="23630" title="Leo III the Isaurian" label="Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="23784" end="23794" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="23926" end="23940" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="24004" end="24026" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Byzantine Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="24064" end="24083" title="Cyril and Methodius" label="Cyril and Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="24161" end="24180" title="Glagolitic alphabet" label="Glagolitic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="24264" end="24279" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554020" start="24495" end="24507" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Stele" label="Sianfu stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q914898" start="24544" end="24550" title="Kingdom of Khotan" label="Khotan"/>
<link wikidata="Q868527" start="24552" end="24558" title="Turpan" label="Turfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134485" start="24573" end="24585" title="Lake Balkhash" label="Lake Balkash"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="24602" end="24612" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="24681" end="24687" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="25057" end="25066" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="25247" end="25256" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="25370" end="25381" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q132086" start="25408" end="25420" title="Pope Leo III" label="Pope Leo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q157123" start="25501" end="25524" title="Carolingian Renaissance" label="Carolingian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998465" start="25802" end="25811" title="Exarchate" label="Exarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14974" start="26109" end="26125" title="Vladimir of Kiev" label="Vladimir of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="26188" end="26204" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="26464" end="26470" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351" start="26833" end="26862" title="William IX, Duke of Aquitaine" label="William IX, Duke of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="27143" end="27163" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="27172" end="27190" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="27910" end="27919" title="Purgatory" label="Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q183959" start="27958" end="27968" title="Confession (religion)" label="confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="27998" end="28004" title="rosary" label="rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="28037" end="28058" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary, mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q326484" start="28166" end="28196" title="Cluniac Reforms" label="a Cluniac model of self-reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="28208" end="28231" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q924774" start="28380" end="28394" title="secular clergy" label="secular clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238718" start="28493" end="28509" title="cathedral school" label="cathedral school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143413" start="28550" end="28562" title="Medieval university" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="28958" end="28977" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q44091" start="29218" end="29231" title="Saint Dominic" label="Saint Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="29249" end="29264" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="29270" end="29289" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercian movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180036" start="29377" end="29421" title="Medieval technology" label="technological advancement in medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="29446" end="29456" title="Reconquista" label="reconquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="29709" end="29718" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8747" start="29720" end="29726" title="Euclid" label="Euclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q755709" start="29816" end="29850" title="Renaissance of the twelfth century" label="Renaissance of the twelfth century"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="29946" end="29959" title="scholasticism" label="scholasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="29988" end="30002" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="30156" end="30177" title="scientific revolution" label="scientific revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140335" start="30266" end="30282" title="Gregorian Reform" label="Gregorian Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="30289" end="30305" title="Pope Gregory VII" label="Pope Gregory VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="30748" end="30760" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q154764" start="31135" end="31158" title="Investiture Controversy" label="Investiture Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="31166" end="31183" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q60094" start="31227" end="31235" title="Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081988" start="31458" end="31471" title="pastoral care" label="pastoral care"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="31666" end="31683" title="European nobility" label="European nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210856" start="31870" end="31884" title="Excommunication (Catholic Church)" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738483" start="31909" end="31918" title="Saxon revolt of 1077–1088" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="32109" end="32126" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41600" start="32708" end="32726" title="Alexios I Komnenos" label="Alexios I Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q30578" start="32739" end="32752" title="Pope Urban II" label="Pope Urban II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="32771" end="32783" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuk Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="32976" end="32989" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q105628259" start="33051" end="33060" title="crusading" label="crusading"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="33281" end="33289" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="33415" end="33431" title="Chivalry" label="cult of chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44777" start="33596" end="33606" title="indulgence" label="indulgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q273603" start="33871" end="33877" title="dhimma" label="dhimma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965826" start="34115" end="34146" title="Christianization of Scandinavia" label="Christianization of Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="34568" end="34588" title="Inquisition" label="inquisitorial courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553591" start="34841" end="34861" title="Medieval Inquisition" label="Medieval Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q719992" start="35291" end="35313" title="Fourth Lateran Council" label="Fourth Lateran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="35703" end="35709" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q647782" start="35714" end="35746" title="Disputation of Paris" label="put &amp;quot;on trial&amp;quot; in 1239"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="35750" end="35765" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="36070" end="36081" title="blood libel" label="blood libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="36175" end="36186" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="36371" end="36390" title="usury" label="loans with interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q651871" start="36492" end="36511" title="Emicho" label="Emicho of Leiningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279185" start="36581" end="36602" title="Josce of York" label="York massacre of 1190"/>
<link wikidata="Q51657" start="36695" end="36714" title="Albigensian Crusade" label="A military campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="36769" end="36778" title="Catharism" label="Catharism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="36925" end="36930" title="Balts" label="Balts"/>
<link wikidata="Q51662" start="37092" end="37109" title="Northern Crusades" label="Northern Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="37443" end="37449" title="Bubonic plague" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988505" start="37451" end="37457" title="Great Famine of 1315–1317" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938047" start="37469" end="37482" title="Popular revolts in late medieval Europe" label="social unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q193151" start="37522" end="37542" title="Armageddon" label="the end of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="37916" end="37930" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="37980" end="37987" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="38013" end="38027" title="Avignon Papacy" label="Avignon Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169594" start="38120" end="38135" title="Pope Gregory XI" label="Pope Gregory XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q186431" start="38213" end="38227" title="papal conclave" label="papal conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q171626" start="38236" end="38244" title="Urban VI" label="Urban VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q320371" start="38310" end="38326" title="Robert of Geneva" label="Robert of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="38351" end="38365" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349804" start="38423" end="38438" title="Council of Pisa" label="Council of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q169612" start="38580" end="38593" title="Pope Martin V" label="Pope Martin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q173893" start="38740" end="38753" title="John Wycliffe" label="John Wycliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43977" start="39117" end="39124" title="Jan Hus" label="Jan Hus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18003199" start="39287" end="39307" title="Bohemian Reformation" label="Bohemian Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q478301" start="39323" end="39335" title="Hussite Wars" label="Hussite Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q756170" start="39398" end="39413" title="Devotio Moderna" label="Devotio Moderna"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="39507" end="39537" title="Erasmus" label="Desiderius Erasmus Roterodamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="39735" end="39757" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="Fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="39765" end="39779" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="40248" end="40272" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q440558" start="40403" end="40433" title="Cyril Lucaris" label="Cyril I Loukaris (1572 – 1638)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639386" start="40720" end="40758" title="Greek scholars in the Renaissance" label="Eastern Christians from Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133779" start="40923" end="40926" title="Renaissance art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349760" start="40931" end="40943" title="Medieval architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="41010" end="41022" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="41024" end="41036" title="Brunelleschi" label="Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793" start="41038" end="41046" title="Bramante" label="Bramante"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="41048" end="41055" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664" start="41057" end="41069" title="Fra Angelico" label="Fra Angelico"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562" start="41071" end="41080" title="Donatello" label="Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="41086" end="41103" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q276442" start="41184" end="41202" title="Renaissance Papacy" label="Renaissance Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="41234" end="41259" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q171185" start="41490" end="41508" title="Ivan III of Russia" label="Ivan III of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q965258" start="41683" end="41694" title="Jeremias II" label="Jeremias II"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="41780" end="41811" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Patriarchate of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378280" start="41837" end="41887" title="History of the Catholic Church in Japan" label="sixteenth-century success of Christianity in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="41994" end="42005" title="Colonialism" label="Colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="42543" end="42550" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="42552" end="42562" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="42568" end="42574" title="First French Empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="43340" end="43348" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q350735" start="43998" end="44019" title="Reductions" label="Reductionist villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028597" start="44945" end="44969" title="Women in the Middle Ages" label="Women in the Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q70991" start="45180" end="45199" title="Hildegard of Bingen" label="Hildegard of Bingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q435658" start="45211" end="45231" title="Elisabeth of Schönau" label="Elisabeth of Schönau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895010" start="45250" end="45270" title="Marie d&amp;#x27;Oignies" label="Marie d&amp;#x27;Oignies"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="45331" end="45338" title="witches" label="witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="45536" end="45550" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q878794" start="46013" end="46042" title="Expulsions and exoduses of Jews" label="evicted Jews from their lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q163514" start="46231" end="46245" title="Pope Sixtus IV" label="Pope Sixtus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="46259" end="46278" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q766543" start="46373" end="46386" title="Hispanic Monarchy (political entity)" label="the new state"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="46580" end="46602" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Portuguese Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="46762" end="46790" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese colonies in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903110" start="46830" end="46845" title="Goa Inquisition" label="Goa Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286938" start="46881" end="46898" title="Roman Inquisition" label="Roman Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="46935" end="46942" title="Galileo" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="47020" end="47042" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="47102" end="47115" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q157506" start="47133" end="47151" title="Ninety-five Theses" label="Ninety-five Theses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837" start="47180" end="47190" title="Wittenberg" label="Wittenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="47408" end="47416" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="47422" end="47430" title="Reformed tradition" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="47440" end="47448" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="47528" end="47539" title="Anabaptists" label="Anabaptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110919" start="47560" end="47584" title="Theistic rationalism" label="Evangelical Rationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786655" start="47596" end="47615" title="Radical Reformation" label="Radical Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q536822" start="47660" end="47673" title="Diet of Worms" label="Diet of Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="47735" end="47754" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="47817" end="47833" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="47976" end="47992" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="48245" end="48261" title="French Wars of Religion" label="a series of wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="48313" end="48335" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q847198" start="48413" end="48421" title="just war" label="just war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="48652" end="48674" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="politically absolutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="48925" end="48945" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="49317" end="49335" title="Biblical criticism" label="Biblical criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="49470" end="49477" title="Pietism" label="Pietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="49509" end="49526" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344888" start="49551" end="49572" title="First Great Awakening" label="First Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="49607" end="49620" title="Presbyterians" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q25108476" start="49649" end="49672" title="Evangelicalism in the United States" label="American Evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633792" start="49677" end="49695" title="Wesleyan theology" label="Wesleyan Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="49769" end="49788" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="49868" end="49898" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="49981" end="49994" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16024056" start="50025" end="50041" title="Protestant work ethic" label="a new work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="50117" end="50127" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="50157" end="50169" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="50174" end="50191" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="50399" end="50416" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344444" start="50479" end="50501" title="Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution" label="de-Christianize France"/>
<link wikidata="Q285667" start="50673" end="50695" title="Second Great Awakening" label="Second Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="50723" end="50748" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q585110" start="50754" end="50774" title="Restoration Movement" label="Restoration Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050725" start="50783" end="50800" title="Holiness movement" label="Holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="50828" end="50847" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="50849" end="50859" title="Temperance movement" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="50874" end="50898" title="Abolitionism" label="the abolition of slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="51069" end="51095" title="trans-Atlantic slave trade" label="trans-Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="51216" end="51223" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="51225" end="51235" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="51255" end="51263" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q463369" start="51447" end="51469" title="American Anti-Slavery Society" label="anti-slavery societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005432" start="51610" end="51631" title="Third Great Awakening" label="Third Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="51724" end="51739" title="Restorationists" label="Restorationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q215168" start="51823" end="51832" title="Adventism" label="Adventism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="51842" end="51866" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="52066" end="52073" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="52077" end="52084" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23622" start="52113" end="52123" title="dictionary" label="dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200776" start="52235" end="52249" title="indigenization" label="indigenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481881" start="52274" end="52286" title="Lamin Sanneh" label="Lamin Sanneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="52434" end="52452" title="Liberal Christians" label="Liberal Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="52581" end="52608" title="Fundamentalist Christianity" label="Fundamentalist Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="52655" end="52673" title="Modernist Christianity" label="modern rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="52883" end="52897" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="53227" end="53239" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="53254" end="53261" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202401" start="53517" end="53542" title="German Evangelical Church" label="German Evangelical Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="53558" end="53568" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q161362" start="53649" end="53666" title="Confessing Church" label="Confessing Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056517" start="53796" end="53833" title="Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland" label="Polish priests and nuns were executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975342" start="53876" end="53900" title="Church reform of Peter I" label="Church reform of Peter I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="53981" end="53985" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="54034" end="54047" title="russification" label="russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="54087" end="54112" title="Bolsheviks" label="communist revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="54133" end="54145" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q741775" start="54167" end="54186" title="enemy of the people" label="enemy of the people"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="54268" end="54291" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q619552" start="54335" end="54362" title="League of Militant Atheists" label="League of Militant Atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343051" start="54587" end="54603" title="Gregory of Sinai" label="Gregory of Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q629589" start="54640" end="54658" title="Hesychasm" label="Athonite hesychasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="55048" end="55062" title="decolonization" label="decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="58182" end="58221" title="Ecumenism" label="Unity between Protestants and Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="58276" end="58291" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="58303" end="58325" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q276183" start="59018" end="59026" title="theodicy" label="theodicy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352447" start="59097" end="59115" title="Christian pacifism" label="Christian pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206898" start="59327" end="59346" title="Liberation theology" label="Liberation theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369934" start="59365" end="59378" title="social gospel" label="social gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="59391" end="59405" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943023" start="59591" end="59605" title="black theology" label="black theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330520" start="59610" end="59627" title="Feminist theology" label="Feminist theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030773" start="60108" end="60125" title="womanist theology" label="womanist theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678278" start="60157" end="60187" title="Ada Maria Isasi-Diaz" label="&amp;quot;mujerista&amp;quot; theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135569" start="60211" end="60234" title="Asian feminist theology" label="Asian feminist theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417567" start="60263" end="60284" title="postcolonial theology" label="postcolonial theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="60566" end="60576" title="NGO&amp;#x27;s" label="NGO&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q51629" start="60785" end="60804" title="Chronology of Jesus" label="Chronology of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564223" start="60807" end="60849" title="Historical background of the New Testament" label="Historical background of the New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q51666" start="60852" end="60868" title="Historical Jesus" label="Historical Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="60871" end="60892" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus in Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012407" start="60895" end="60908" title="Life of Jesus" label="Life of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q715601" start="60911" end="60948" title="Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church" label="Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14121" wikidata="Q39369" url="?curid=14121" title="Hertz">
<text>The hertz (symbol: Hz) is the unit of frequency in the International System of Units (SI), often described as being equivalent to one event (or cycle) per second. The hertz is an SI derived unit whose formal expression in terms of SI base units is s−1, meaning that one hertz is one per second or the reciprocal of one second. It is used only in the case of periodic events. It is named after Heinrich Rudolf Hertz (1857–1894), the first person to provide conclusive proof of the existence of electromagnetic waves. For high frequencies, the unit is commonly expressed in multiples: kilohertz (kHz), megahertz (MHz), gigahertz (GHz), terahertz (THz).

Some of the unit&#x27;s most common uses are in the description of periodic waveforms and musical tones, particularly those used in radio- and audio-related applications. It is also used to describe the clock speeds at which computers and other electronics are driven. The units are sometimes also used as a representation of the energy of a photon, via the Planck relation &quot;E&quot; = &quot;hν&quot;, where &quot;E&quot; is the photon&#x27;s energy, &quot;ν&quot; is its frequency, and &quot;h&quot; is the Planck constant.

== Definition ==
The hertz is defined as one per second for periodic events. The International Committee for Weights and Measures defined the second as &quot;the duration of periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium-133 atom&quot; and then adds: &quot;It follows that the hyperfine splitting in the ground state of the caesium 133 atom is exactly , .&quot; The dimension of the unit hertz is 1/time (T−1). Expressed in base SI units, the unit is the reciprocal second (1/s).

In English, &quot;hertz&quot; is also used as the plural form. As an SI unit, Hz can be prefixed; commonly used multiples are kHz (kilohertz, ), MHz (megahertz, ), GHz (gigahertz, ) and THz (terahertz, ). One hertz (i.e. one per second) simply means &quot;one periodic event occurs per second&quot; (where the event being counted may be a complete cycle); means &quot;one hundred periodic events occur per second&quot;, and so on. The unit may be applied to any periodic event—for example, a clock might be said to tick at , or a human heart might be said to beat at .

The occurrence rate of aperiodic or stochastic events is expressed in &quot;reciprocal second&quot; or &quot;inverse second&quot; (1/s or s−1) in general or, in the specific case of radioactivity, in becquerels. Whereas (one per second) specifically refers to one cycle (or periodic event) per second, (also one per second) specifically refers to one radionuclide event per second on average.

Even though frequency, angular velocity, angular frequency and radioactivity all have the dimension T−1, of these only frequency is expressed using the unit hertz. Thus a disc rotating at 60 revolutions per minute (rpm) is said to have an angular velocity of 2 rad/s and a frequency of rotation of . The correspondence between a frequency &quot;f&quot; with the unit hertz and an angular velocity &quot;ω&quot; with the unit radians per second is
:formula_1 and formula_2


==History==
The hertz is named after the German physicist Heinrich Hertz (1857–1894), who made important scientific contributions to the study of electromagnetism. The name was established by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) in 1935. It was adopted by the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) (&quot;Conférence générale des poids et mesures&quot;) in 1960, replacing the previous name for the unit, &quot;cycles per second&quot; (cps), along with its related multiples, primarily &quot;kilocycles per second&quot; (kc/s) and &quot;megacycles per second&quot; (Mc/s), and occasionally &quot;kilomegacycles per second&quot; (kMc/s). The term &quot;cycles per second&quot; was largely replaced by &quot;hertz&quot; by the 1970s.

In some usage, the &quot;per second&quot; was omitted, so that &quot;megacycles&quot; (Mc) was used as an abbreviation of &quot;megacycles per second&quot; (that is, megahertz (MHz)).

==Applications==

===Sound and vibration===
Sound is a traveling longitudinal wave, which is an oscillation of pressure. Humans perceive the frequency of a sound as its pitch. Each musical note corresponds to a particular frequency. An infant&#x27;s ear is able to perceive frequencies ranging from to ; the average adult human can hear sounds between and . The range of ultrasound, infrasound and other physical vibrations such as molecular and atomic vibrations extends from a few femtohertz into the terahertz range and beyond.

=== Electromagnetic radiation===
Electromagnetic radiation is often described by its frequency—the number of oscillations of the perpendicular electric and magnetic fields per second—expressed in hertz.

Radio frequency radiation is usually measured in kilohertz (kHz), megahertz (MHz), or gigahertz (GHz). with the latter known as microwaves. Light is electromagnetic radiation that is even higher in frequency, and has frequencies in the range of tens of terahertz (THz, infrared) to a few petahertz (PHz, ultraviolet), with the visible spectrum being 400–790 THz. Electromagnetic radiation with frequencies in the low terahertz range (intermediate between those of the highest normally usable radio frequencies and long-wave infrared light) is often called terahertz radiation. Even higher frequencies exist, such as that of X-rays and gamma rays, which can be measured in exahertz (EHz).

For historical reasons, the frequencies of light and higher frequency electromagnetic radiation are more commonly specified in terms of their wavelengths or photon energies: for a more detailed treatment of this and the above frequency ranges, see &quot;Electromagnetic spectrum&quot;.

===Gravitational waves===
Gravitational waves are also described in Hertz. Current observations are conducted in the 30–7000 Hz range by laser interferometers like LIGO, and the nanohertz (1–1000 nHz) range by pulsar timing arrays. Future space-based detectors are planned to fill in the gap, with LISA operating from 0.1–10 mHz (with some sensitivity from 10 μHz to 100 mHz), and DECIGO in the 0.1–10 Hz range.

===Computers===

In computers, most central processing units (CPU) are labeled in terms of their clock rate expressed in megahertz () or gigahertz (). This specification refers to the frequency of the CPU&#x27;s master clock signal. This signal is nominally a square wave, which is an electrical voltage that switches between low and high logic levels at regular intervals. As the hertz has become the primary unit of measurement accepted by the general populace to determine the performance of a CPU, many experts have criticized this approach, which they claim is an easily manipulable benchmark. Some processors use multiple clock cycles to perform a single operation, while others can perform multiple operations in a single cycle. For personal computers, CPU clock speeds have ranged from approximately in the late 1970s (Atari, Commodore, Apple computers) to up to in IBM Power microprocessors.

Various computer buses, such as the front-side bus connecting the CPU and northbridge, also operate at various frequencies in the megahertz range.

== SI multiples ==


Higher frequencies than the International System of Units provides prefixes for are believed to occur naturally in the frequencies of the quantum-mechanical vibrations of massive particles, although these are not directly observable and must be inferred through other phenomena. By convention, these are typically not expressed in hertz, but in terms of the equivalent energy, which is proportional to the frequency by the factor of the Planck constant.

== Unicode==

The CJK Compatibility block in Unicode contains characters for common SI units for frequency. These are intended for compatibility with East Asian character encodings, and not for use in new documents (which would be expected to use Latin letters, e.g. &quot;MHz&quot;).
* (Hz)
* (kHz)
* (MHz)
* (GHz)
* (THz)

== See also ==
* Alternating current
* Bandwidth (signal processing)
* Electronic tuner
* FLOPS
* Frequency changer
* Normalized frequency (signal processing)
* Orders of magnitude (frequency)
* Orders of magnitude (rotational speed)
* Periodic function
* Radian per second
* Rate
* Sampling rate

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* SI Brochure: Unit of time (second)
* National Research Council of Canada: &quot;Cesium fountain clock&quot; 
* National Research Council of Canada: &quot;Optical frequency standard based on a single trapped ion&quot; (archived 23 December 2013)
* National Research Council of Canada: &quot;Optical frequency comb&quot; (archived 27 June 2013)
* National Physical Laboratory: &quot;Time and frequency Optical atomic clocks&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="4" end="9" title="Hertz" label="hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="19" end="21" title="Hertz" label="Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="38" end="47" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="55" end="84" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198171" start="144" end="149" title="Cycle per second" label="cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11574" start="155" end="161" title="second" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q208469" start="179" end="194" title="SI derived unit" label="SI derived unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q223662" start="231" end="243" title="SI base unit" label="SI base unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137407" start="301" end="325" title="Inverse second" label="reciprocal of one second"/>
<link wikidata="Q41257" start="393" end="414" title="Heinrich Hertz" label="Heinrich Rudolf Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="493" end="513" title="electromagnetic wave" label="electromagnetic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="572" end="581" title="metric prefix" label="multiples"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="719" end="736" title="periodic waveform" label="periodic waveform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717062" start="742" end="754" title="musical tone" label="musical tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="784" end="789" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q911691" start="855" end="866" title="clock speed" label="clock speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303639" start="982" end="1000" title="photon energy" label="energy of a photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388892" start="1010" end="1025" title="Planck relation" label="Planck relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="1164" end="1179" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q215650" start="1263" end="1311" title="International Committee for Weights and Measures" label="International Committee for Weights and Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="1473" end="1480" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="1829" end="1837" title="Metric prefix" label="prefixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="2300" end="2304" title="heart rate" label="beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="2326" end="2343" title="aperiodic frequency" label="rate of aperiodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071239" start="2347" end="2357" title="stochastic" label="stochastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137407" start="2387" end="2404" title="reciprocal second" label="reciprocal second"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="2493" end="2506" title="radioactivity" label="radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q102573" start="2511" end="2520" title="becquerel" label="becquerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q161635" start="2728" end="2744" title="angular velocity" label="angular velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q834020" start="2746" end="2763" title="angular frequency" label="angular frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256787" start="2978" end="2999" title="rotational frequency" label="frequency of rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="3130" end="3137" title="radians" label="radians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41257" start="3237" end="3251" title="Heinrich Hertz" label="Heinrich Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="3325" end="3341" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="3375" end="3416" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="International Electrotechnical Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q215650" start="3454" end="3496" title="General Conference on Weights and Measures" label="General Conference on Weights and Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="4167" end="4172" title="Sound" label="Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q626707" start="4188" end="4205" title="longitudinal wave" label="longitudinal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="4219" end="4230" title="oscillation" label="oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="4234" end="4242" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="4292" end="4297" title="Pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q263478" start="4304" end="4316" title="musical note" label="musical note"/>
<link wikidata="Q80994" start="4439" end="4450" title="Adult" label="adult human"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="4494" end="4504" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q212082" start="4506" end="4516" title="infrasound" label="infrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q900121" start="4555" end="4564" title="molecular vibration" label="molecular"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="4569" end="4586" title="atom vibrations" label="atomic vibrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="4606" end="4611" title="femto" label="femto"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="4626" end="4630" title="tera-" label="tera"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="4688" end="4713" title="Electromagnetic radiation" label="Electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="4987" end="4996" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="4999" end="5004" title="Light" label="Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="5128" end="5136" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="5163" end="5174" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="5186" end="5202" title="visible spectrum" label="visible spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q647887" start="5415" end="5434" title="terahertz radiation" label="terahertz radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="5483" end="5488" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="5494" end="5503" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="5690" end="5700" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303639" start="5705" end="5720" title="Photon energy" label="photon energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="5802" end="5826" title="Electromagnetic spectrum" label="Electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="5861" end="5880" title="Gravitational waves" label="Gravitational waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="5978" end="5992" title="interferometer" label="interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="5999" end="6003" title="LIGO" label="LIGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259618" start="6045" end="6064" title="pulsar timing array" label="pulsar timing array"/>
<link wikidata="Q841982" start="6133" end="6137" title="Laser Interferometer Space Antenna" label="LISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249140" start="6216" end="6222" title="Deci-hertz Interferometer Gravitational wave Observatory" label="DECIGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="6284" end="6307" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q911691" start="6345" end="6355" title="clock rate" label="clock rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q426882" start="6467" end="6479" title="clock signal" label="clock signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136640" start="6508" end="6519" title="square wave" label="square wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495304" start="6817" end="6845" title="Megahertz myth" label="easily manipulable benchmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="7075" end="7080" title="Atari" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q208305" start="7082" end="7091" title="Commodore International" label="Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="7093" end="7108" title="Apple computers" label="Apple computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q211063" start="7122" end="7147" title="IBM Power microprocessors" label="IBM Power microprocessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="7158" end="7172" title="Bus (computing)" label="computer buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="7186" end="7200" title="front-side bus" label="front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q830445" start="7224" end="7235" title="Northbridge (computing)" label="northbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="7347" end="7376" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="7756" end="7771" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493853" start="7792" end="7809" title="CJK Compatibility" label="CJK Compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="7819" end="7826" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="8116" end="8135" title="Alternating current" label="Alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="8138" end="8167" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="Bandwidth (signal processing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298056" start="8170" end="8186" title="Electronic tuner" label="Electronic tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q188768" start="8189" end="8194" title="FLOPS" label="FLOPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q943941" start="8197" end="8214" title="Frequency changer" label="Frequency changer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051857" start="8217" end="8257" title="Normalized frequency (signal processing)" label="Normalized frequency (signal processing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q365174" start="8260" end="8291" title="Orders of magnitude (frequency)" label="Orders of magnitude (frequency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="8294" end="8332" title="Orders of magnitude (rotational speed)" label="Orders of magnitude (rotational speed)"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="8335" end="8352" title="Periodic function" label="Periodic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063756" start="8355" end="8372" title="Radian per second" label="Radian per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144560" start="8375" end="8379" title="Rate (mathematics)" label="Rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="8382" end="8395" title="Sampling rate" label="Sampling rate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14123" wikidata="Q2714966" url="?curid=14123" title="Heroic couplet">
<text>A heroic couplet is a traditional form for English poetry, commonly used in epic and narrative poetry, and consisting of a rhyming pair of lines in iambic pentameter. Use of the heroic couplet was pioneered by Geoffrey Chaucer in the &quot;Legend of Good Women&quot; and the &quot;Canterbury Tales&quot;, and generally considered to have been perfected by John Dryden and Alexander Pope in the Restoration Age and early 18th century respectively. 

==Example==
A frequently-cited example illustrating the use of heroic couplets is this passage from &quot;Cooper&#x27;s Hill&quot; by John Denham, part of his description of the Thames:

==History==
The term &quot;heroic couplet&quot; is sometimes reserved for couplets that are largely &quot;closed&quot; and self-contained, as opposed to the enjambed couplets of poets like John Donne. The heroic couplet is often identified with the English Baroque works of John Dryden and Alexander Pope, who used the form for their translations of the epics of Virgil and Homer, respectively. Major poems in the closed couplet, apart from the works of Dryden and Pope, are Samuel Johnson&#x27;s &quot;The Vanity of Human Wishes&quot;, Oliver Goldsmith&#x27;s &quot;The Deserted Village&quot;, and John Keats&#x27;s &quot;Lamia&quot;. The form was immensely popular in the 18th century. The looser type of couplet, with occasional enjambment, was one of the standard verse forms in medieval narrative poetry, largely because of the influence of the Canterbury Tales.

==Variations==
English heroic couplets, especially in Dryden and his followers, are sometimes varied by the use of the occasional alexandrine, or hexameter line, and triplet. Often these two variations are used together to heighten a climax. The breaking of the regular pattern of rhyming pentameter pairs brings about a sense of poetic closure. Here are two examples from Book IV of Dryden&#x27;s translation of the &quot;Aeneid&quot;.
===&quot;Alexandrine&quot;===
===&quot;Alexandrine and Triplet&quot;===
==Modern use==
Twentieth-century authors have occasionally made use of the heroic couplet, often as an allusion to the works of poets of previous centuries. An example of this is Vladimir Nabokov&#x27;s novel &quot;Pale Fire&quot;, the second section of which is a 999-line, 4-canto poem largely written in loose heroic couplets with frequent enjambment. Here is an example from the first canto:

The use of heroic couplets in translations of Greco-Roman epics has also inspired translations of non-Western works into English. In 2021, Vietnamese translator Nguyen Binh published a translation of the Vietnamese epic poem &quot;Tale of Kiều&quot;, in which the &quot;lục bát&quot; couplets of the original were rendered into heroic couplets. Binh named John Dryden and Alexander Pope as major influences on their work, which also mimicked the spelling of Dryden and Pope&#x27;s translations to evoke the medieval air of the Vietnamese original. An example of the heroic couplet translation can be found below:


==See also==
* Metre (poetry)
* Iambic pentameter
* Foot (prosody)
* Heroic verse

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2714966" start="2" end="16" title="Heroic couplet" label="heroic couplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="43" end="50" title="English literature" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="51" end="57" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="76" end="80" title="epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q474090" start="85" end="101" title="narrative poetry" label="narrative poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481042" start="148" end="165" title="iambic pentameter" label="iambic pentameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="210" end="226" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125810" start="240" end="260" title="Legend of Good Women" label="Legend of Good Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="281" end="297" title="Canterbury Tales" label="Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="356" end="367" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="372" end="386" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248337" start="583" end="594" title="John Denham (poet)" label="John Denham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="627" end="633" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q203402" start="793" end="801" title="enjambment" label="enjambed"/>
<link wikidata="Q140412" start="825" end="835" title="John Donne" label="John Donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574110" start="885" end="900" title="English Baroque" label="English Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="910" end="921" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="926" end="940" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="999" end="1005" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1010" end="1015" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="1111" end="1125" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824747" start="1139" end="1165" title="The Vanity of Human Wishes" label="The Vanity of Human Wishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q236236" start="1173" end="1189" title="Oliver Goldsmith" label="Oliver Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385462" start="1203" end="1223" title="The Deserted Village" label="The Deserted Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="1235" end="1245" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481831" start="1259" end="1264" title="Lamia and Other Poems" label="Lamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="1486" end="1502" title="Canterbury Tales" label="Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q211689" start="1635" end="1646" title="alexandrine" label="alexandrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548" start="1651" end="1660" title="hexameter" label="hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353779" start="1671" end="1678" title="tercet" label="triplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245103" start="1835" end="1849" title="poetic closure" label="poetic closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="1928" end="1934" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="2193" end="2209" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229792" start="2229" end="2238" title="Pale Fire" label="Pale Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q203402" start="2357" end="2367" title="enjambment" label="enjambment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367434" start="2457" end="2474" title="Greco-Roman mythology" label="Greco-Roman epics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216151" start="2550" end="2560" title="Vietnamese people" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759908" start="2615" end="2635" title="Vietnamese literature" label="Vietnamese epic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301168" start="2642" end="2654" title="The Tale of Kieu" label="Tale of Kiều"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755587" start="2681" end="2688" title="lục bát" label="lục bát"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="2767" end="2778" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="2783" end="2797" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="2938" end="2948" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q192624" start="3041" end="3055" title="Metre (poetry)" label="Metre (poetry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481042" start="3058" end="3075" title="Iambic pentameter" label="Iambic pentameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651051" start="3078" end="3092" title="Foot (prosody)" label="Foot (prosody)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023295" start="3095" end="3107" title="Heroic verse" label="Heroic verse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14127" wikidata="Q204900" url="?curid=14127" title="Höðr">
<text>Höðr ( , Latin Hotherus; often anglicized as Hod, Hoder, or Hodur) is a god in Norse mythology. The blind son of Odin, he is tricked and guided by Loki into shooting a mistletoe arrow which was to slay the otherwise invulnerable Baldr.

According to the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; and the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;, the goddess Frigg, Baldr&#x27;s mother, made everything in existence swear never to harm Baldr, except for the mistletoe, which she found too unimportant to ask (alternatively, which she found too young to demand an oath from). The gods amused themselves by trying weapons on Baldr and seeing them fail to do any harm. Loki, the mischief-maker, upon finding out about Baldr&#x27;s one weakness, made a spear from mistletoe, and helped Höðr shoot it at Baldr. In reaction to this, Odin and Rindr gave birth to Váli, who grew to adulthood within a day and slew Höðr.

The Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus recorded an alternative version of this myth in his &quot;Gesta Danorum&quot;. In this version, the mortal hero Høtherus and the demi-god &quot;Balderus&quot; compete for the hand of Nanna. Ultimately, Høtherus slays Balderus.

== Name ==
According to scholar Andy Orchard, the theonym &quot;Hǫðr&quot; can be translated as &#x27;warrior&#x27;. Jan de Vries and Vladimir Orel write that is comparable with Old Norse &quot;hǫð&quot; (&#x27;war, slaughter&#x27;), and related to Old English &quot;heaðu-deór&quot; (&#x27;brave, stout in war&#x27;), from Proto-Germanic &quot;*haþuz&quot; (&#x27;battle&#x27;; cf. Old High German &quot;hadu&quot;-, Old Saxon &quot;hathu&quot;-&quot;,&quot; Old Frisian &quot;-had&quot;, Burgundian *&quot;haþus&quot;).

==Attestations==
===The &quot;Prose Edda&quot;===
In the &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; part of Snorri Sturluson&#x27;s Prose Edda Höðr is introduced in an ominous way.

Höðr is not mentioned again until the prelude to Baldr&#x27;s death is described. All things except the mistletoe (believed to be harmless) have sworn an oath not to harm Baldr, so the Æsir throw missiles at him for sport.

The &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; does not say what happens to Höðr after this. In fact it specifically states that Baldr cannot be avenged, at least not immediately.

It does seem, however, that Höðr ends up in Hel one way or another for the last mention of him in &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; is in the description of the post-Ragnarök world.

Snorri&#x27;s source of this knowledge is clearly &quot;Völuspá&quot; as quoted below.

In the &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; section of the Prose Edda several kennings for Höðr are related.

None of those kennings, however, are actually found in surviving skaldic poetry. Neither are Snorri&#x27;s kennings for Váli, which are also of interest in this context.

It is clear from this that Snorri was familiar with the role of Váli as Höðr&#x27;s slayer, even though he does not relate that myth in the &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; prose. Some scholars have speculated that he found it distasteful, since Höðr is essentially innocent in his version of the story.

===The &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;===

Höðr is referred to several times in the Poetic Edda, always in the context of Baldr&#x27;s death. The following strophes are from &quot;Völuspá&quot;.

This account seems to fit well with the information in the Prose Edda, but here the role of Baldr&#x27;s avenging brother is emphasized.

Baldr and Höðr are also mentioned in &quot;Völuspá&quot;&#x27;s description of the world after Ragnarök.

The poem &quot;Vafþrúðnismál&quot; informs us that the gods who survive Ragnarök are Viðarr, Váli, Móði and Magni with no mention of Höðr and Baldr.

The myth of Baldr&#x27;s death is also referred to in another Eddic poem, &quot;Baldrs draumar&quot;.

Höðr is not mentioned again by name in the Eddas. He is, however, referred to in &quot;Völuspá in skamma&quot;.

===Skaldic poetry===

Höðr appears in both the Poetic Edda and Prose Edda. The name of Höðr occurs several times in skaldic poetry as a part of warrior-kennings. Thus &quot;Höðr brynju&quot;, &quot;Höðr of byrnie&quot;, is a warrior and so is &quot;Höðr víga&quot;, &quot;Höðr of battle&quot;. Some scholars have found the fact that the poets should want to compare warriors with Höðr to be incongruous with Snorri&#x27;s description of him as a blind god, unable to harm anyone without assistance. It is possible that this indicates that some of the poets were familiar with other myths about Höðr than the one related in &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; – perhaps some where Höðr has a more active role. On the other hand, the names of many gods occur in kennings and the poets might not have been particular in using any god name as a part of a kenning.

===&quot;Gesta Danorum&quot;===
In &quot;Gesta Danorum&quot; by Saxo Grammaticus, Hotherus is a human hero of the Danish and Swedish royal lines. He is the son of Hothbrodd (or Hodbrodd) and brother of Athisl, both Kings of Sweden before him. Hotherus himself became ruler of both Sweden and Denmark after the death of the usurper Hiartuar, but most of the story about him as related in &quot;Gesta Danorum&quot; relates to his early life before becoming king.

Hotherus is gifted in swimming, archery, fighting and music and Nanna, daughter of King Gevarus falls in love with him. But at the same time Balderus, son of Othinus, has caught sight of Nanna bathing and fallen violently in love with her. He resolves to slay Hotherus, his rival. Out hunting, Hotherus is led astray by a mist and meets wood-maidens who control the fortunes of war. They warn him that Balderus has designs on Nanna but also tell him that he shouldn&#x27;t attack him in battle since he is a demigod. Hotherus goes to consult with King Gevarus and asks him for his daughter. The king replies that he would gladly favour him but that Balderus has already made a like request and he does not want to incur his wrath. Gevarus tells Hotherus that Balderus is invincible but that he knows of one weapon which can defeat him, a sword kept by Mimingus, the satyr of the woods. Mimingus also has another magical artifact, a bracelet that increases the wealth of its owner. Riding through a region of extraordinary cold in a carriage drawn by reindeer, Hotherus captures the satyr with a clever ruse and forces him to yield his artifacts.

Hearing about Hotherus&#x27;s artifacts, Gelderus, king of Saxony, equips a fleet to attack him. Gevarus warns Hotherus of this and tells him where to meet Gelderus in battle. When the battle is joined, Hotherus and his men save their missiles while defending themselves against those of the enemy with a testudo formation. With his missiles exhausted, Gelderus is forced to sue for peace. He is treated mercifully by Hotherus and becomes his ally. Hotherus then gains another ally with his eloquent oratory by helping King Helgo of Hålogaland win a bride. Meanwhile, Balderus enters the country of King Gevarus armed and sues for Nanna. Gevarus tells him to learn Nanna&#x27;s own mind. Balderus addresses her with cajoling words but is refused. Nanna tells him that because of the great difference in their nature and stature, since he is a demigod, they are not suitable for marriage.

As news of Balderus&#x27;s efforts reaches Hotherus, he and his allies resolve to attack Balderus. A great naval battle ensues where the gods fight on the side of Balderus. Thoro in particular shatters all opposition with his mighty club. When the battle seems lost, Hotherus manages to hew Thoro&#x27;s club off at the haft and the gods are forced to retreat. Gelderus perishes in the battle and Hotherus arranges a funeral pyre of vessels for him. After this battle Hotherus finally marries Nanna. Balderus is not completely defeated and shortly afterwards returns to defeat Hotherus in the field. But Balderus&#x27;s victory is without fruit for he is still without Nanna. Lovesick, he is harassed by phantoms in Nanna&#x27;s likeness and his health deteriorates so that he cannot walk but has himself drawn around in a cart.

Hotherus learned of the death of King Rolf Kraki, whose father had slain Hotherus&#x27; father Hodbrodd. He took a fleet to Denmark and was appointed king. Shortly afterwards, he also heard of the death of his brother Athisl, and also became king of Sweden.

After a while Hotherus and Balderus have their third battle and again Hotherus is forced to retreat. Weary of life because of his misfortunes, he plans to retire and wanders into the wilderness. In a cave he comes upon the same maidens he had met at the start of his career. Now they tell him that he can defeat Balderus if he gets a taste of some extraordinary food which had been devised to increase the strength of Balderus. Encouraged by this, Hotherus returns from exile and once again meets Balderus in the field. After a day of inconclusive fighting, he goes out during the night to spy on the enemy. He finds where Balderus&#x27;s magical food is prepared and plays the lyre for the maidens preparing it. While they don&#x27;t want to give him the food, they bestow on him a belt and a girdle which secure victory. Heading back to his camp, Hotherus meets Balderus and plunges his sword into his side. Despite realising that it was a mortal wound, Balderus insists on being carried back into battle on a litter. After three days, Balderus dies from his wound.

Many years later, Bous, the son of Othinus and Rinda, returns to avenge his brother by killing Hotherus. Hotherus foresees that he will die in the battle and asks the assembly of elders to pass the kingship to his son Rorik, which they do. Hotherus faces Bous in battle and is killed, but Bous also dies the next day from his wounds.

===&quot;Gesta Danorum på danskæ&quot;===
&quot;Gesta Danorum på danskæ&quot; is an Old Danish work based, in part on Saxo&#x27;s &quot;Gesta Danorum&quot; and another Latin chronicle called the &quot;Chronicon Lethrense&quot;. It contains a second, briefer euhemerized account of Höðr&#x27;s slaying of Balder, as follows:

After this, Hother&#x27;s son Rorik Slengeborre, aka Rake, became king.

===&quot;Hversu Noregr byggðist&quot;===
Höðr appears in the genealogies of &quot;Hversu Noregr byggðist&quot; (&quot;How Norway was inhabited&quot;). In this, he is the ruler of Haðaland and the father of Höddbroddr (instead of being Höddbroddr&#x27;s son, as in the &quot;Gesta Danorum&quot;). Höddbroddr&#x27;s descendants are described for a further six generations, and include Hromund Gripsson.

Höðr&#x27;s parentage is not explicitly given in this text, but he may be the same as Haukr, the second legitimate son of Raum the Old by his wife Hilda, daughter of Gudrod the Old. This is because Raum the Old had four sons by Hilda and this statement is followed by four lineages springing from four men, who are otherwise the four sons of Raum and Hilda in the same order except that Höðr takes the place of Haukr.

==Rydberg&#x27;s theories==
According to the Swedish mythologist and romantic poet Viktor Rydberg, the story of Baldr&#x27;s death was taken from &quot;Húsdrápa&quot;, a poem composed by Ulfr Uggason around 990 AD at a feast thrown by the Icelandic Chief Óláfr Höskuldsson to celebrate the finished construction of his new home, Hjarðarholt, the walls of which were filled with symbolic representations of the Baldr myth among others. Rydberg suggested that Höðr was depicted with eyes closed and Loki guiding his aim to indicate that Loki was the true cause of Baldr&#x27;s death and Höðr was only his &quot;blind tool.&quot; Rydberg theorized that the author of the &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; then mistook the description of the symbolic artwork in the Húsdrápa as the actual tale of Baldr&#x27;s death.

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

* Bellows, Henry Adams (trans.) (1936). &quot;The Poetic Edda&quot;. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Available online 
* Brodeur, Arthur Gilchrist (transl.) (1916). &quot;The Prose Edda by Snorri Sturluson&quot;. New York: The American-Scandinavian Foundation. Available online in parallel text 
* Dronke, Ursula (ed. and trans.) (1997) &quot;The Poetic Edda: Mythological Poems&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. .
* Eysteinn Björnsson (2001). &quot;Lexicon of Kennings : The Domain of Battle&quot;. Published online: https://web.archive.org/web/20090328200122/http://www3.hi.is/~eybjorn/ugm/kennings/kennings.html
* Eysteinn Björnsson (ed.). &quot;Snorra-Edda: Formáli &amp; Gylfaginning : Textar fjögurra meginhandrita&quot;. 2005. Published online: https://web.archive.org/web/20080611212105/http://www.hi.is/~eybjorn/gg/
* Eysteinn Björnsson (ed.). &quot;Völuspá&quot;. Published online: https://web.archive.org/web/20090413124631/http://www3.hi.is/~eybjorn/ugm/vsp3.html
* Guðni Jónsson (ed.) (1949). &quot;Eddukvæði : Sæmundar Edda&quot;. Reykjavík: Íslendingasagnaútgáfan. Available online
* 
* Thorpe, Benjamin (transl.) (1866). &quot;Edda Sæmundar Hinns Froða : The Edda Of Sæmund The Learned&quot;. (2 vols.) London: Trübner &amp; Co. Available online at Google Books


==External links==

*MyNDIR (My Norse Digital Image Repository) Illustrations of Höðr from manuscripts and early print books.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204900" start="0" end="4" title="Höðr" label="Höðr"/>
<link wikidata="Q204900" start="15" end="23" title="Höðr" label="Hotherus"/>
<link wikidata="Q204900" start="45" end="48" title="Höðr" label="Hod"/>
<link wikidata="Q204900" start="50" end="55" title="Höðr" label="Hoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q204900" start="60" end="65" title="Höðr" label="Hodur"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="72" end="75" title="Æsir" label="god"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="79" end="94" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="100" end="105" title="blindness" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="113" end="117" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="147" end="151" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885646" start="168" end="177" title="mistletoe" label="mistletoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131658" start="229" end="234" title="Baldr" label="Baldr"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="260" end="270" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="291" end="302" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q131654" start="322" end="327" title="Frigg" label="Frigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="629" end="633" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324396" start="799" end="804" title="Rindr" label="Rindr"/>
<link wikidata="Q846981" start="819" end="823" title="Váli" label="Váli"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="887" end="896" title="history" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106837" start="897" end="913" title="Saxo Grammaticus" label="Saxo Grammaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q939074" start="972" end="985" title="Gesta Danorum" label="Gesta Danorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q204900" start="1026" end="1034" title="Höðr" label="Høtherus"/>
<link wikidata="Q500390" start="1097" end="1102" title="Nanna (Norse deity)" label="Nanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990207" start="1174" end="1186" title="Andy Orchard" label="Andy Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q568483" start="1259" end="1271" title="Jan de Vries (philologist)" label="Jan de Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938535" start="1276" end="1289" title="Vladimir Orel" label="Vladimir Orel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1320" end="1329" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1391" end="1402" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="1466" end="1480" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="1525" end="1540" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35219" start="1560" end="1569" title="Old Saxon" label="Old Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35133" start="1602" end="1613" title="Old Frisian" label="Old Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150412" start="1632" end="1642" title="Burgundian language (Germanic)" label="Burgundian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134288" start="1728" end="1740" title="Gylfaginning" label="Gylfaginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="1755" end="1771" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="1779" end="1789" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q644341" start="2260" end="2263" title="Hel (realm)" label="Hel"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="2373" end="2381" title="Ragnarök" label="Ragnarök"/>
<link wikidata="Q940563" start="2446" end="2453" title="Völuspá" label="Völuspá"/>
<link wikidata="Q178075" start="2491" end="2505" title="Skáldskaparmál" label="Skáldskaparmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q952912" start="2546" end="2553" title="kenning" label="kenning"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="2643" end="2657" title="skaldic poetry" label="skaldic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q846981" start="2698" end="2702" title="Váli (son of Odin)" label="Váli"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="3122" end="3133" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q940563" start="3218" end="3225" title="Völuspá" label="Völuspá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546735" start="3493" end="3506" title="Vafþrúðnismál" label="Vafþrúðnismál"/>
<link wikidata="Q372614" start="3563" end="3569" title="Viðarr" label="Viðarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q846981" start="3571" end="3575" title="Váli (son of Odin)" label="Váli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208272" start="3577" end="3591" title="Móði and Magni" label="Móði and Magni"/>
<link wikidata="Q804775" start="3708" end="3722" title="Baldrs draumar" label="Baldrs draumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287695" start="3818" end="3835" title="Völuspá in skamma" label="Völuspá in skamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="3960" end="3974" title="skaldic poetry" label="skaldic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q952912" start="3996" end="4003" title="kenning" label="kenning"/>
<link wikidata="Q939074" start="4735" end="4748" title="Gesta Danorum" label="Gesta Danorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q106837" start="4758" end="4774" title="Saxo Grammaticus" label="Saxo Grammaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786971" start="4857" end="4866" title="Hothbrodd" label="Hothbrodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608009" start="4896" end="4902" title="Eadgils" label="Athisl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785031" start="5025" end="5033" title="Heoroweard" label="Hiartuar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5244" end="5251" title="Gevarus" label="Gevarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q336496" start="6008" end="6016" title="Mimingus" label="Mimingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q530023" start="6608" end="6625" title="testudo formation" label="testudo formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262887" start="6836" end="6846" title="Hålogaland" label="Hålogaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="7365" end="7369" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q662533" start="8055" end="8070" title="Hrólfr Kraki" label="King Rolf Kraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608009" start="8240" end="8246" title="Eadgils" label="Athisl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667377" start="9568" end="9573" title="Hrœrekr Ringslinger" label="Rorik"/>
<link wikidata="Q131320460" start="9733" end="9756" title="Gesta Danorum på danskæ" label="Gesta Danorum på danskæ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775830" start="9769" end="9779" title="Old Danish" label="Old Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715163" start="9886" end="9905" title="Chronicon Lethrense" label="Chronicon Lethrense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513013" start="9943" end="9954" title="euhemerism" label="euhemerized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667377" start="10040" end="10057" title="Hrœrekr Ringslinger" label="Rorik Slengeborre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163659" start="10165" end="10187" title="Hversu Noregr byggðist" label="Hversu Noregr byggðist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050626" start="10262" end="10270" title="Hadeland" label="Haðaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786971" start="10289" end="10299" title="Hothbrodd" label="Höddbroddr"/>
<link wikidata="Q327173" start="10466" end="10482" title="Hrómundar saga Gripssonar" label="Hromund Gripsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296207" start="10607" end="10619" title="Raum the Old" label="Raum the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q432129" start="10987" end="11001" title="Viktor Rydberg" label="Viktor Rydberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665360" start="11056" end="11064" title="Húsdrápa" label="Húsdrápa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626718" start="11091" end="11103" title="Ulfr Uggason" label="Ulfr Uggason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481137" start="11159" end="11176" title="Olaf the Peacock" label="Óláfr Höskuldsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336703" start="11749" end="11769" title="Henry Adams Bellows (businessman)" label="Bellows, Henry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798817" start="11875" end="11900" title="Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur" label="Brodeur, Arthur Gilchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q253324" start="12052" end="12066" title="Ursula Dronke" label="Dronke, Ursula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382004" start="12862" end="12878" title="Benjamin Thorpe" label="Thorpe, Benjamin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14128" wikidata="Q45313" url="?curid=14128" title="Herat">
<text>Herāt (; Farsi/Pashto: هرات) is an oasis city and the third-largest city in Afghanistan. In 2020, it had an estimated population of 574,276, and serves as the capital of Herat Province, situated south of the Paropamisus Mountains (&quot;Selseleh-ye Safēd Kōh&quot;) in the fertile valley of the Hari River in the western part of the country. An ancient civilization on the Silk Road between West Asia, Central Asia, and South Asia, it serves as a regional hub in the country&#x27;s west.

Herat dates back to Avestan times and was traditionally known for its wine. The city has a number of historic sites, including the Herat Citadel and the Musalla Complex. During the Middle Ages, Herat became one of the important cities of Khorasan, as it was known as the &quot;Pearl of Khorasan&quot;. After its conquest by Tamerlane, the city became an important center of intellectual and artistic life in the Islamic world. Under the rule of Shah Rukh, the city served as the focal point of the Timurid Renaissance, whose glory is thought to have matched Florence of the Italian Renaissance as the center of a cultural rebirth. After the fall of the Timurid Empire, Herat has been governed by various Afghan rulers since the early 18th century. In 1716, the Abdali Afghans inhabiting the city revolted and formed their own Sultanate, the Sadozai Sultanate of Herat. They were conquered by the Afsharid Persia in 1732.

After Nader Shah&#x27;s death and Ahmad Shah Durrani&#x27;s rise to power in 1747, Herat separated from Persia became part of Afghanistan. It became an independent city-state in the first half of the 19th century, facing several Qajar Iranian invasions until being incorporated into Afghanistan in 1863. The roads from Herat to Iran (through the border town of Islam Qala) and Turkmenistan (through the border town of Torghundi) are still strategically important. As the gateway to Iran, it collects high amount of customs revenue for Afghanistan. It also has an international airport. Following the 2001 war, the city had been relatively safe from Taliban insurgent attacks. In 2021, it was announced that Herat would be listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. On 12 August 2021, the city was seized by Taliban fighters as part of the Taliban&#x27;s summer offensive.

The area of Herat, along with areas like Piranshahr, Damghan and Aleppo, are noted to be sites for archaeological interests and exploration.

==History==

Ancient

Herat is first recorded in ancient times, but its precise date of foundation is unknown. Under the Persian Achaemenid Empire (550–330 BC), the surrounding district was known by the Old Persian name of &quot;Haraiva&quot; (𐏃𐎼𐎡𐎺), and in classical sources, the region was correspondingly known as Areia (Aria). In the Zoroastrian collection of Avesta, the district is referred as &quot;Haroiva&quot;. The name of the district and its principal town is a derivative from that of the local river, the Herey River (from Old Iranian &quot;Harayu&quot;, meaning &quot;with velocity&quot;), which goes through the district and ends south of Herat. Herey is mentioned in Sanskrit as a yellow or golden color equivalent to Persian &quot;Zard&quot; meaning Gold (yellow). The naming of a region and its principal town after the main river is a common feature in this part of the world— compare the adjoining districts/rivers/towns of Arachosia and Bactria.

The district &quot;Aria&quot; of the Achaemenid Empire is mentioned in the provincial lists that are included in various royal inscriptions, for instance, in the Behistun inscription of Darius I (ca. 520 BC). Representatives from the district are depicted in reliefs, e.g., at the royal Achaemenid tombs of Naqsh-e Rustam and Persepolis. They are wearing Scythian-style dress (with a tunic and trousers tucked into high boots) and a twisted Bashlyk that covers their head, chin and neck.

Hamdallah Mustawfi, composer of the 14th-century geographical work &quot;Nuzhat al-Qulub&quot; writes that:

Herodotus described Herat as &quot;the bread-basket of Central Asia&quot;. At the time of Alexander the Great in 330 BC, Aria was obviously an important district. It was administered by a satrap called Satibarzanes, who was one of the three main Persian officials in the East of the Empire, together with the satrap Bessus of Bactria and Barsaentes of Arachosia. In late 330 BC, Alexander captured the Arian capital that was called Artacoana. The town was rebuilt and the citadel was constructed. Afghanistan became part of the Seleucid Empire.
However, most sources suggest that Herat was predominantly Zoroastrian. It became part of the Parthian Empire in 167 BC. In the Sasanian period (226–652), 𐭧𐭥𐭩𐭥 &quot;Harēv&quot; is listed in an inscription on the Ka&#x27;ba-i Zartosht at Naqsh-e Rustam; and &quot;Hariy&quot; is mentioned in the Pahlavi catalogue of the provincial capitals of the empire. Around 430, the town is also listed as having a Christian community, with a bishop from the Church of the East.

In the last two centuries of Sasanian rule, Aria (Herat) was of great strategic importance in the endless wars between the Sasanians, the Chionites, and the Hephthalites, who had been settled in the northern section of Afghanistan since the late 4th century.

===Conversion to Islam===
At the time of the Arab invasion in the middle of the 7th century, the Sasanian central power seemed already largely nominal in the province in contrast with the role of the Hephthalites tribal lords, who were settled in the Herat region and in the neighboring districts, mainly in pastoral Bādghis and in Qohestān. It must be underlined, however, that Herat remained one of the three Sasanian mint centers in the east, the other two beings Balkh and Marv. The Hephthalites from Herat and some unidentified Turks opposed the Arab forces in a battle of Qohestān in 651-52 AD, trying to block their advance on Nishāpur, but they were defeated.

When the Arab armies appeared in Khorāsān in the 650s, Herāt was counted among the twelve capital towns of the Sasanian Empire. The Arab army under the general command of Ahnaf ibn Qais in its conquest of Khorāsān in 652 seems to have avoided Herāt. The city eventually submitted to the Arabs, since shortly afterward, an Arab governor is mentioned there. A treaty was drawn in which the regions of Bādghis and Bushanj were included. Like many other places in Khorāsān, Herāt rebelled and had to be re-conquered several times.

Another power that was active in the area in the 650s was Tang dynasty China which had embarked on a campaign that culminated in the Conquest of the Western Turks. By 659–661, the Tang claimed a tenuous suzerainty over Herat, the westernmost point of Chinese power in its long history. This hold however would be ephemeral with local Turkish tribes rising in rebellion in 665 and driving out the Tang.

In 702, Yazid ibn al-Muhallab defeated certain Arab rebels, followers of Ibn al-Ash&#x27;ath, and forced them out of Herat. The city was the scene of conflicts between different groups of Muslims and Arab tribes in the disorders leading to the establishment of the Abbasid Caliphate. Herat was also a center of the followers of Ustadh Sis.

In 870, Ya&#x27;qub ibn al-Layth al-Saffar, the founder of the Saffarid dynasty, conquered Herat and the rest of the nearby regions in the name of Islam.

===Pearl of Khorasan===

The region of Herāt was under the rule of King Nuh II, the seventh of the Samanid line—at the time of Sebük Tigin and his older son, Mahmud of Ghazni. The governor of Herāt was a noble by the name of &quot;Faik&quot;, who was appointed by Nuh III. It is said that Faik was a powerful but insubordinate governor of Nuh III and had been punished by Nuh III. Faik made overtures to Bogra Khan and Ughar Khan of Khorasan. Bogra Khan answered Faik&#x27;s call, came to Herāt, and became its ruler. The Samanids fled, betrayed at the hands of Faik to whom the defense of Herāt had been entrusted by Nuh III. In 994, Nuh III invited Alptegin to come to his aid. Alptegin, along with Mahmud of Ghazni, defeated Faik and annexed Herāt, Nishapur and Tous.


Herat was a great trading center strategically located on trade routes from the Mediterranean to India or China. The city was noted for its textiles during the Abbasid Caliphate, according to many references by geographers. Herāt also had many learned sons such as Ansārī. The city is described by Estakhri and Ibn Hawqal in the 10th century as a prosperous town surrounded by strong walls with plenty of water sources, extensive suburbs, an inner citadel, a congregational mosque, and four gates, each gate opening to a thriving market place. The government building was outside the city at a distance of about a mile in a place called Khorāsānābād. A church was still visible in the countryside northeast of the town on the road to Balkh, and farther away on a hilltop stood a flourishing fire temple, called Sereshk, or Arshak according to Mustawfi.

Herat was a part of the Taherid dominion in Khorāsān until the rise of the Saffarids in Sistān under Ya&#x27;qub-i Laith in 861, who, in 862, started launching raids on Herat before besieging and capturing it on 16 August 867, and again in 872. The Saffarids succeeded in expelling the Taherids from Khorasan in 873.

The Sāmānid dynasty was established in Transoxiana by three brothers, Nuh, Yahyā, and Ahmad. Ahmad Sāmāni opened the way for the Samanid dynasty to the conquest of Khorāsān, including Herāt, which they were to rule for one century. The centralized Samanid administration served as a model for later dynasties. The Samanid power was destroyed in 999 by the Qarakhanids, who were advancing on Transoxiana from the northeast, and by the Ghaznavids, former Samanid retainers, attacking from the southeast.

Ghaznavid Era

Sultan Maḥmud of Ghazni officially took control of Khorāsān in 998. Herat was one of the six Ghaznavid mints in the region. In 1040, Herat was captured by the Seljuk Empire. During this change of power in Herat, there was supposedly a power vacuum which was filled by Abdullah Awn, who established a city-state and made an alliance with Mahmud of Ghazni. Yet, in 1175, it was captured by the Ghurids of Ghor and then came under the Khawarazm Empire in 1214. According to the account of Mustawfi, Herat flourished especially under the Ghurid dynasty in the 12th century. Mustawfi reported that there were &quot;359 colleges in Herat, 12,000 shops all fully occupied, 6,000 bath-houses; besides caravanserais and mills, also a darwish convent and a fire temple&quot;. There were about 444,000 houses occupied by a settled population. The men were described as &quot;warlike and carry arms&quot;, and they were Sunni Muslims. The great mosque of Herāt was built by Ghiyasuddin Ghori in 1201. In this period Herāt became an important center for producing metal goods, especially in bronze, often decorated with elaborate inlays in precious metals.

Mongols

The Mongol Empire laid siege to Herat twice. The first siege resulted in the surrender of the city, the slaughter of the local sultan&#x27;s army of 12,000, and the appointment of two governors, one Mongol and one Muslim. The second, prompted by a rebellion against Mongol rule, lasted seven months and ended in June 1222 with, according to one account, the beheading of the entire population of 1,600,000 people by the victorious Mongols, such that &quot;no head was left on a body, nor body with a head.&quot;

The city remained in ruins from 1222 to about 1236. In 1244, a local prince Shams al-Din Kart was named ruler of Herāt by the Mongol governor of Khorāsān and in 1255 he was confirmed in his rule by the founder of the Il-Khan dynasty Hulagu. Shamsuddin Kart founded a new dynasty and his successors, especially Fakhruddin Kart and Ghiyasuddin Kart, built many mosques and other buildings. The members of this dynasty were great patrons of literature and the arts. By this time Herāt became known as the &quot;pearl of Khorasan&quot;.

Timur took Herat in 1380 and he brought the Kartid dynasty to an end a few years later. The city reached its greatest glory under the Timurid princes, especially Sultan Husayn Bayqara who ruled Herat from 1469 until 4 May 1506. His chief minister, the poet and author in Persian and Turkish, Mir Ali-Shir Nava&#x27;i was a great builder and patron of the arts. Under the Timurids, Herat assumed the role of the main capital of an empire that extended in the West as far as central Persia. As the capital of the Timurid empire, it boasted many fine religious buildings and was famous for its sumptuous court life and musical performance and its tradition of miniature paintings. On the whole, the period was one of relative stability, prosperity, and development of economy and cultural activities. It began with the nomination of Shahrokh, the youngest son of Timur, as governor of Herat in 1397. The reign of Shahrokh in Herat was marked by intense royal patronage, building activities, and the promotion of manufacturing and trade, especially through the restoration and enlargement of the Herat&#x27;s bāzār. The present Musallah Complex, and many buildings such as the madrasa of Gawhar Shad, Ali Shir mahāl, many gardens, and others, date from this time. The village of Gazar Gah, over two km northeast of Herat, contained a shrine that was enlarged and embellished under the Timurids. The tomb of the poet and mystic Khwājah Abdullāh Ansārī (d. 1088), was first rebuilt by Shahrokh about 1425, and other famous men were buried in the shrine area.

In the summer of 1458, the Qara Qoyunlu under Jahan Shah advanced as far as Herat, but had to turn back soon because of a revolt by his son Hasan Ali and also because Abu Said&#x27;s march on Tabriz.

In 1507, Herat was occupied by the Uzbeks but after much fighting the city was taken by Shah Isma&#x27;il, the founder of the Safavid dynasty, in 1510 and the Shamlu Qizilbash assumed the governorship of the area. Under the Safavids, Herat was again relegated to the position of a provincial capital, albeit one of particular importance. At the death of Shah Isma&#x27;il the Uzbeks again took Herat and held it until Shah Tahmasp retook it in 1528. The Persian king, Shah Abbas the Great was born in Herat, and in Safavid texts, Herat is referred to as &quot;a&#x27;zam-i bilād-i īrān&quot;, meaning &quot;the greatest of the cities of Iran&quot;. In the 16th century, all future Safavid Persian rulers, from Tahmasp I to Abbas I, were governors of Herat in their youth.

===Modern history (1500-2023)===
By the early 18th century Herat was governed by the Abdali Afghans. After Nader Shah&#x27;s death in 1747, Ahmad Shah Durrani took possession of the city and became part of the Durrani Empire.
In 1793, Herat became independent for several years when Afghanistan underwent a civil war between different sons of Timur Shah. The Iranians had multiple wars with Herat between 1801 and 1837 (1804, 1807, 1811, 1814, 1817, 1818, 1821, 1822, 1825, 1833). The Iranians besieged the city in 1837, but the British helped the Heratis in repelling them. In 1856, they invaded again, and briefly managed to take the city on 25 October; it led directly to the Anglo-Persian War. In 1857 hostilities between the Iranians and the British ended after the Treaty of Paris was signed, and the Persian troops withdrew from Herat in September 1857. Afghanistan conquered Herat on 26 May 1863, under Dost Muhammad Khan, two weeks before his death.
The famous Musalla of Gawhar Shah of Herat, a large Islamic religious complex consisting of five minarets, several mausoleums along with mosques and madrasas was dynamited during the Panjdeh incident to prevent their usage by the advancing Russian forces. Some emergency preservation work was carried out at the site in 2001 which included building protective walls around the Gawhar Shad Mausoleum and Sultan Husain Madrasa, repairing the remaining minaret of Gawhar Shad&#x27;s Madrasa, and replanting the mausoleum garden.

In the aftermath of the Afghan Civil War (1928–1929), Herat was the last stronghold of Saqqawist resistance, holding out until 1931 when it was retaken by forces loyal to Mohammad Nadir Shah.

In the 1960s, engineers from the United States built Herat Airport, which was used by the Soviet forces during the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan in the 1980s. Even before the Soviet invasion at the end of 1979, there was a substantial presence of Soviet advisors in the city with their families.

Between 10–20 March 1979, the Afghan Army in Herat under the control of commander Ismail Khan mutinied. Thousands of protesters took to the streets against the Khalq communist regime&#x27;s oppression led by Nur Mohammad Taraki. The new rebels led by Khan managed to oust the communists and take control of the city for 3 days, with some protesters murdering any Soviet advisers and targeting women without headscarves, dubbed &quot;sārluchi&quot;. This shocked the government, who blamed the new administration of Iran following the Iranian Revolution for influencing the uprising. Reprisals by the government followed, and between 3,000 and 24,000 people (according to different sources) were killed, in what is called the 1979 Herat uprising, or in Persian as the &quot;Qiam-e Herat&quot;. The city itself was recaptured with by the Afghan Army’s 4th and 15th Armoured Brigades, detachments of the Afghan Commando Forces and the Afghan Air Force but at the cost of thousands of civilians killed. This rebellion was the first of its kind since the Third Anglo-Afghan War in 1919, and was the bloodiest event preceding the Soviet–Afghan War.
Herat received damage during the Soviet–Afghan War, especially its western side. The province as a whole was one of the worst-hit. In April 1983, a series of Soviet bombings damaged half of the city and killed around 3,000 civilians, described as &quot;extremely heavy, brutal and prolonged&quot;. Ismail Khan was the leading mujahideen commander in Herat fighting against the Soviet-backed government.

After the communist government&#x27;s collapse in 1992, Khan joined the new government and he became governor of Herat Province. The city was relatively safe and it was recovering and rebuilding from the damage caused in the Soviet–Afghan War. However, on 5 September 1995, the city was captured by the Taliban without much resistance, forcing Khan to flee. Herat became the first Persian-speaking city to be captured by the Taliban. The Taliban&#x27;s strict enforcement of laws confining women at home and closing girls&#x27; schools alienated Heratis who are traditionally more liberal and educated, like the Kabulis, than other urban populations in the country. Two days of anti-Taliban protests occurred in December 1996 which was violently dispersed and led to the imposition of a curfew. In May 1999, a rebellion in Herat was crushed by the Taliban, who blamed Iran for causing it.

After the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan, on 12 November 2001, it was captured from the Taliban by forces loyal to the Northern Alliance and Ismail Khan returned to power (see Battle of Herat). The state of the city was reportedly much better than that of Kabul. In 2004, Mirwais Sadiq, Aviation Minister of Afghanistan and the son of Ismail Khan, was ambushed and killed in Herāt by a local rival group. More than 200 people were arrested under suspicion of involvement.

In 2005, the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) began establishing bases in and around the city. Its main mission was to train the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) and help with the rebuilding process of the country. Regional Command West, led by Italy, assisted the Afghan National Army (ANA) 207th Corps. Herat was one of the first seven areas that transitioned security responsibility from NATO to Afghanistan. In July 2011, the Afghan security forces assumed security responsibility from NATO.

Due to their close relations, Iran began investing in the development of Herat&#x27;s power, economy and education sectors. In the meantime, the United States built a consulate in Herat to help further strengthen its relations with Afghanistan. In addition to the usual services, the consulate works with the local officials on development projects and with security issues in the region.

On 12 August 2021, the city was captured by the Taliban during the 2021 Taliban offensive.

== Geography ==

=== Climate ===
Herat has a cold semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;BSk&quot;). Precipitation is very low, and mostly falls in winter. Although Herāt is approximately lower than Kandahar, the summer climate is more temperate, and the climate throughout the year is far from disagreeable, although winter temperatures are comparably lower. From May to September, the wind blows from the northwest with great force. The winter is tolerably mild; snow melts rather quickly, and even on the mountains does not lie long. The eastern reaches of the Hari River, including the rapids, are frozen hard in the winter, and people travel on it as on a road.

===Places of interest===
*Foreign consulates
India, Iran and Pakistan operate their consulate here for trade, military and political links.

*Neighborhoods
**Shahr-e Naw (Downtown)
**Welayat (Office of the governor)
**Qol-Ordue (Army&#x27;s HQ)
**Farqa (Army&#x27;s HQ)
**Darwaze Khosh
**Chaharsu
**Pul-e Rangine
**Sufi-abad
**New-abad
**Pul-e malaan
**Thakhte Safar
**Howz-e-Karbas
**Baramaan
**Darwaze-ye Qandahar
**Darwaze-ye Iraq
**Darwaze Az Kordestan


*Parks
**Park-e Taraki
**Park-e Millat
**Khane-ye Jihad Park
*Monuments
**Herat Citadel (Qala Ikhtyaruddin or Arg)
**Musallah Complex
**Musalla Minarets of Herat
Of the more than dozen minarets that once stood in Herāt, many have been toppled from war and neglect over the past century. Recently, however, everyday traffic threatens many of the remaining unique towers by shaking the very foundations they stand on. Cars and trucks that drive on a road encircling the ancient city rumble the ground every time they pass these historic structures. UNESCO personnel and Afghan authorities have been working to stabilize the Fifth Minaret.

*Museums
**Herat Museum, located inside the Herat Citadel
**Jihad Museum
*Mausoleums and tombs
**Gawhar Shad Mausoleum
**Mausoleum of Khwajah Abdullah Ansari
**Tomb of Jami
**Tomb of khaje Qaltan
**Mausoleum of Mirwais Sadiq
**Jewish cemetery – there once existed an ancient Jewish community in the city. Its remnants are a cemetery and a ruined shrine.
*Mosques
**Jumu&#x27;ah Mosque (Friday Mosque of Herat)
**Gazargah Sharif
**Khalghe Sharif
**Shah Zahdahe
*Stadiums
**Herat Stadium
*Universities
**Herat University

==Demography==
The population of Herat numbered approximately 592,902 in 2021. The city houses a multi-ethnic society and speakers of the Persian language are in the majority. There is no current data on the precise ethnic composition of the city&#x27;s population, but according to a 2003 map found in the National Geographic Magazine, Persian-speaking Tajik and Farsiwan peoples form the majority of the city, comprising around 85% of the population. The remaining population comprises Pashtuns (10%), Hazaras (2%), Uzbeks (2%) and Turkmens (1%).

Persian is the native language of Herat and the local dialect – known by natives as &quot;Herātī&quot; – belongs to the &quot;Khorāsānī&quot; cluster within Persian. It is akin to the Persian dialects of eastern Iran, notably those of Mashhad and Khorasan Province, which borders Herat. This Persian dialect serves as the lingua franca of the city. The second language that is understood by many is Pashto, which is the native language of the Pashtuns. The local Pashto dialect spoken in Herat is a variant of western Pashto, which is also spoken in Kandahar and southern and western Afghanistan. Religiously, Sunni Islam is practiced by the majority, while Shias make up the minority.

The city has high residential density clustered around the core of the city. However, vacant plots account for a higher percentage of the city (21%) than residential land use (18%) and agricultural is the largest percentage of total land use (36%).

The city once had a Jewish community. About 280 families lived in Herat as of 1948, but most of them moved to Israel that year, and the community disappeared by 1992. There are four former synagogues in the city&#x27;s old quarter, which were neglected for decades and fell into disrepair. In the late 2000s, the buildings of the synagogues were renovated by the Aga Khan Trust for culture, and at this time, three of them were turned into schools and nurseries, the Jewish community having vanished. In 2022, the Taliban government approved conservation work on the Yu Aw Synagogue, located in Herat&#x27;s old city. The Jewish cemetery is being taken care of by Jalil Ahmed Abdelaziz.

== Sports ==
;Professional sports teams from Herat
* Stadiums
** Herat Cricket Ground
** Herat Stadium

==Notable people from Herat==

=== Rulers and emperors ===

* Tahir ibn Husayn 9th century Abbasid Caliphate army general, and the founder of Tahirid dynasty
* Ghiyasuddin Muhammad, was the emperor of the Ghurid dynasty from 1163 to 1202.
* Mīrzā Shāhrūkh bin Tīmur Barlas, Emperor of the Timurid dynasty of Herāt
* Abu Sa&#x27;id Mirza, ruler of the Timurid Empire during the mid-fifteenth century
* Mīrzā Husseyn Bāyqarāh, Emperor of the Timurid dynasty of Herāt
* Shāh Abbās &quot;The Great&quot;, Emperor of Safavid Persia
* Ahmad Shah Durrani, founder of the Durrani Empire 
* Emir Dost Mohammad Khan, founder of the Barakzai dynasty, buried in the city
* Sultan Jan, ruler of Herat in the 19th century

=== Politicians ===

* Ahmad Maymandi 11th century Persian vizier of the Ghaznavid empire
* Ismail Khan, former governor of Herat Province and Minister of Water and Energy
* Amena Afzali, politician
* Faramarz Tamanna, politician

=== Poets ===

* Asjadi, 10th-11th century royal Persian poet at the court of the Ghaznavids
* Khwājah Abdullāh al-Herawi al-Ansārī, a Persian poet of the 11th century
*Pur-Baha Jami, 13th century Iranian poet, Pun master, satirist, and often scathing social commentator, born in Jam, spent his youth in Herat
* Nūr ud-Dīn Jāmī, a Persian Sufi poet of the 15th century
* Nizām ud-Din ʿAlī Shīr Herawi, famous poet and scientist of the Timurid era
* Hatefi, a Persian poet of the 16th century and nephew of Nūr ud-Dīn Jāmī
* Latif Nazemi, Persian poet
* Nadia Anjuman (1981–2005) poet writing in Dari

=== Scientists ===

* Abu Mansur Muvaffak Harawi, 10th-century Persian physician
* Abolfadl Harawi, 10th-century astronomer under the patroange of the Buyids in Rey, originally from Herat
*Ahmad ibn Farrokh, 12th-century Persian physician
* Taftazani, a Muslim polymath of the 14th century
* Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi 15th century Persian physician
* Nimat Allah al-Harawi 17th century Persian chronicler at the court of the Mughal Emperor Jahangir

=== Religious figures ===

* Abu Dharr al-Harawi, a Muhaddith from the 10th century
* Abu Uthman al-Sabuni, from the 11th-century, leading Sunni scholar and hadith expert, jurist in the Shafi&#x27;i school, respected Qur&#x27;anic exegete and theologian, regarded as Shaykh al-Islām, a title that was uniquely his among the Sunnis of his time
* Fakhr ad-Din al-Razi, polymath and Islamic scholar of the 12th-century
* Hussain Kashefi, a 15th-century Persian prose-stylist and Islamic scholar and scientist
* Mir Zahid Harawi, from the 17th century, religious scholar and historian, whose father was from Herat
* Ali al-Hirawi al-Qari, from 17th century, considered to be one of the masters of hadith and Imams of fiqh
* Maulana Azad, from 20th-century, Indian independence activist, whose forefathers came from Herat
* Mujib Rahman Ansari (1982–2022), mullah and pro-Taliban cleric

=== Artists ===

* Ali ibn Abi Bakr al-Harawi 12th and 13th century Persian traveller and first known graffiti artist in the Muslim world, originally from Herat
* Ustād Kamāl ud-Dīn Behzād, the greatest of the medieval Persian painters
* Mir Ali Heravi, prominent Persian calligrapher and calligraphy teacher of Nastaʿlīq script in the 16th century
* Alka Sadat, Film producer was born here
* Sonita Alizadeh, rapper and activist

=== Sports ===

* Nadia Nadim, Afghan-Danish football player, most influential and greatest Afghan female football player of all time, won the French league title in the 2020-21 season with Paris Saint-Germain
* Hamidullah Karimi, Afghan footballer, plays as a forward for Indian club Delhi United FC
*Mohammad Rafi Barekzay, Afghan footballer, plays as a midfielder for Toofaan Harirod F.C

=== Others ===

* Gowhar Shad, wife of Shāh Rūkh Mīrzā
* Zablon Simintov, last remaining Jew who is believed to lived in Afghanistan

== Economy and infrastructure ==

===Transport===

====Air====
Herat International Airport was built by engineers from the United States in the 1960s and was used by the Soviet Armed Forces during the Soviet–Afghan War in the 1980s. It was bombed in late 2001 during Operation Enduring Freedom but had been rebuilt within the next decade. The runway of the airport has been extended and upgraded and as of August 2014 there were regularly scheduled direct flights to Delhi, Dubai, Mashad, and various airports in Afghanistan. At least five airlines operated regularly scheduled direct flights to Kabul.

====Rail====

Rail connections to and from Herat were proposed many times, during &quot;The Great Game&quot; of the 19th century and again in the 1970s and 1980s, but nothing came to life. In February 2002, Iran and the Asian Development Bank announced funding for a railway connecting Torbat-e Heydarieh in Iran to Herat. This was later changed to begin in Khaf in Iran, a railway for both cargo and passengers, with work on the Iranian side of the border starting in 2006. Construction is underway in the Afghan side and it was estimated to be completed by March 2018. There is also the prospect of an extension across Afghanistan to Sher Khan Bandar.

====Road====
The AH76 highway connects Herat to Maymana and the north. The AH77 connects it east towards Chaghcharan and north towards Mary in Turkmenistan. Highway 1 (part of Asian highway AH1) links it to Mashhad in Iran to the northwest, and south via the Kandahar–Herat Highway to Delaram.

==Gallery==
==Herat in fiction==
*The beginning of Khaled Hosseini&#x27;s 2007 novel &quot;A Thousand Splendid Suns&quot; is set in and around Herāt.
*Salman Rushdie&#x27;s novel &quot;The Enchantress of Florence&quot; makes frequent reference to events in Herāt in the Middle Ages.

==Sister cities==
* Council Bluffs, Iowa, United States (since 2016)

==See also==

*Aria (satrapy)
*Geography of Afghanistan
*Greater Khorasan
*Herāt Province
*History of Afghanistan
==References==
== Sources ==
* 

==Attribution==

==External links==
*
*
*
*Detailed map of Herāt city
*Map of Herāt and surroundings in 1942, Perry–Castañeda Library Map Collection, University of Texas at Austin
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="0" end="5" title="Herat" label="Herāt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="9" end="14" title="Farsi" label="Farsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="15" end="21" title="Pashto" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="35" end="40" title="oasis" label="oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108549" start="54" end="72" title="List of cities in Afghanistan" label="third-largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="76" end="87" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182844" start="170" end="184" title="Herat Province" label="Herat Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q21484455" start="208" end="229" title="Paropamisus Mountains" label="Paropamisus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8505" start="295" end="305" title="Hari (Afghanistan)" label="Hari River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="373" end="382" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="391" end="400" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="402" end="414" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="420" end="430" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="447" end="455" title="Region" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q117743452" start="509" end="522" title="Avestan period" label="Avestan times"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="559" end="563" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859317" start="620" end="633" title="Herat Citadel" label="Herat Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925987" start="642" end="657" title="Musalla Complex" label="Musalla Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="670" end="681" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="727" end="735" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="813" end="822" title="Tamerlane" label="Tamerlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q553204" start="934" end="943" title="Shah Rukh" label="Shah Rukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424763" start="987" end="1006" title="Timurid Renaissance" label="Timurid Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1047" end="1055" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="1063" end="1082" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q484195" start="1142" end="1156" title="Timurid Empire" label="Timurid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q108695612" start="1330" end="1356" title="Sadozai Sultanate of Herat" label="Sadozai Sultanate of Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q63149558" start="1385" end="1400" title="Afsharid Iran" label="Afsharid Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="1417" end="1427" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="1445" end="1463" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426160" start="1515" end="1521" title="Name of Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="1537" end="1548" title="Durrani Empire" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662997" start="1560" end="1585" title="Herat (1793–1863)" label="an independent city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="1646" end="1653" title="Qajar Iran" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335260" start="1694" end="1705" title="Emirate of Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115284" start="1772" end="1782" title="Islam Qala" label="Islam Qala"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="1788" end="1800" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198313" start="1829" end="1838" title="Torghundi" label="Torghundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431482" start="1974" end="1995" title="Herat International Airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="2011" end="2019" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="2001 war"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="2145" end="2171" title="World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="2215" end="2222" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q107461898" start="2262" end="2278" title="2021 Taliban offensive" label="summer offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q182844" start="2293" end="2299" title="Herat Province" label="Herat,"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015863" start="2322" end="2332" title="Piranshahr" label="Piranshahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q720053" start="2334" end="2341" title="Damghan" label="Damghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="2346" end="2352" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="2552" end="2569" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35225" start="2626" end="2637" title="Old Persian" label="Old Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q654243" start="2747" end="2751" title="Aria (satrapy)" label="Aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="2761" end="2772" title="Zoroastrian" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83426" start="2787" end="2793" title="Avesta" label="Avesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8505" start="2942" end="2953" title="Hari River, Afghanistan" label="Herey River"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="2960" end="2971" title="Old Iranian" label="Old Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q624638" start="3368" end="3377" title="Arachosia" label="Arachosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="3382" end="3389" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q180012" start="3554" end="3574" title="Behistun inscription" label="Behistun inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="3578" end="3586" title="Darius I" label="Darius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q648705" start="3699" end="3713" title="Naqsh-e Rustam" label="Naqsh-e Rustam"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="3718" end="3728" title="Persepolis" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="3747" end="3755" title="Scythians" label="Scythian"/>
<link wikidata="Q201714" start="3776" end="3781" title="tunic" label="tunic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39908" start="3786" end="3794" title="trousers" label="trousers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190868" start="3812" end="3816" title="boot" label="boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q809807" start="3833" end="3840" title="Bashlyk" label="Bashlyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q738649" start="3881" end="3899" title="Hamdallah Mustawfi" label="Hamdallah Mustawfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943500" start="3954" end="3969" title="Nuzhat al-Qulub" label="Nuzhat al-Qulub"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="3990" end="3999" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="4178" end="4184" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q541172" start="4192" end="4204" title="Satibarzanes" label="Satibarzanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q296434" start="4306" end="4312" title="Bessus" label="Bessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="4316" end="4323" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q458113" start="4328" end="4338" title="Barsaentes" label="Barsaentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555745" start="4422" end="4431" title="Artacoana" label="Artacoana"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="4518" end="4533" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="4594" end="4605" title="Zoroastrian" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="4629" end="4644" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="4663" end="4671" title="Sasanian" label="Sasanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363092" start="4748" end="4769" title="Ka&amp;#x27;ba-i Zartosht" label="Ka&amp;#x27;ba-i Zartosht"/>
<link wikidata="Q648705" start="4773" end="4787" title="Naqsh-e Rustam" label="Naqsh-e Rustam"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="4831" end="4838" title="Middle Persian" label="Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="4983" end="5001" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q26264" start="5142" end="5151" title="Chionites" label="Chionites"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="5161" end="5173" title="Hephthalites" label="Hephthalites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509966" start="5309" end="5322" title="Islamic conquest of Afghanistan" label="Arab invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="5361" end="5369" title="Sasanian" label="Sasanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="5464" end="5476" title="Hephthalites" label="Hephthalites"/>
<link wikidata="Q172052" start="5581" end="5588" title="Badghis Province" label="Bādghis"/>
<link wikidata="Q266641" start="5596" end="5604" title="Quhistan" label="Qohestān"/>
<link wikidata="Q121104" start="5731" end="5736" title="Balkh Province" label="Balkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q193325" start="5741" end="5745" title="Merv" label="Marv"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="5797" end="5802" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q131350" start="5898" end="5906" title="Nishapur" label="Nishāpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="5966" end="5974" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Khorāsān"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780240" start="6104" end="6118" title="Ahnaf ibn Qais" label="Ahnaf ibn Qais"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="6519" end="6531" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922831" start="6594" end="6623" title="Conquest of the Western Turks" label="Conquest of the Western Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749762" start="6872" end="6893" title="Yazid ibn al-Muhallab" label="Yazid ibn al-Muhallab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820911" start="6937" end="6956" title="Ibn al-Ash&amp;#x27;ath" label="Ibn al-Ash&amp;#x27;ath"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="7129" end="7146" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902169" start="7192" end="7202" title="Ustadh Sis" label="Ustadh Sis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45261" start="7213" end="7247" title="Ya&amp;#x27;qub ibn al-Layth al-Saffar" label="Ya&amp;#x27;qub ibn al-Layth al-Saffar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45310" start="7268" end="7284" title="Saffarids" label="Saffarid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103401" start="7432" end="7438" title="Nuh II" label="Nuh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q486181" start="7459" end="7466" title="Samanids" label="Samanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q32853" start="7487" end="7498" title="Sebük Tigin" label="Sebük Tigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="7518" end="7534" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937774" start="7764" end="7774" title="Bogra Khan" label="Bogra Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="7793" end="7801" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131350" start="8112" end="8120" title="Nishapur" label="Nishapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q681427" start="8125" end="8129" title="Tous, Iran" label="Tous"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="8293" end="8310" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q558205" start="8398" end="8404" title="Khwajah Abdullah Ansari" label="Ansārī"/>
<link wikidata="Q287479" start="8431" end="8439" title="Estakhri" label="Estakhri"/>
<link wikidata="Q367330" start="8444" end="8454" title="Ibn Hawqal" label="Ibn Hawqal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182159" start="8867" end="8872" title="Balkh" label="Balkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q115278" start="8924" end="8935" title="fire temple" label="fire temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q738649" start="8976" end="8984" title="Hamdallah Mustawfi" label="Mustawfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q373981" start="9011" end="9018" title="Tahirid dynasty" label="Taherid"/>
<link wikidata="Q45310" start="9062" end="9071" title="Saffarid dynasty" label="Saffarids"/>
<link wikidata="Q757169" start="9075" end="9081" title="Sistan" label="Sistān"/>
<link wikidata="Q45261" start="9088" end="9107" title="Ya&amp;#x27;qub-i Laith Saffari" label="Ya&amp;#x27;qub-i Laith"/>
<link wikidata="Q486181" start="9309" end="9324" title="Samanids" label="Sāmānid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q183324" start="9344" end="9355" title="Transoxiana" label="Transoxiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717238" start="9375" end="9378" title="Nuh I" label="Nuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q860218" start="9380" end="9385" title="Yahya ibn Asad" label="Yahyā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136589" start="9391" end="9396" title="Ahmad Samani" label="Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="9661" end="9672" title="Qarakhanids" label="Qarakhanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q183324" start="9696" end="9707" title="Transoxiana" label="Transoxiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="9739" end="9749" title="Ghaznavids" label="Ghaznavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="9823" end="9846" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Sultan Maḥmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="9982" end="9995" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuk Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829787" start="10091" end="10103" title="Qutb Shah" label="Abdullah Awn"/>
<link wikidata="Q199443" start="10215" end="10222" title="Ghurid dynasty" label="Ghurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q186392" start="10226" end="10230" title="Ghor" label="Ghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q486918" start="10255" end="10271" title="Khwarazmian dynasty" label="Khawarazm Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q199443" start="10357" end="10371" title="Ghurid dynasty" label="Ghurid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q21507888" start="10548" end="10555" title="darwish" label="darwish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="10556" end="10563" title="convent" label="convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="10731" end="10736" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="10737" end="10743" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291612" start="10750" end="10771" title="Friday Mosque of Herat" label="great mosque of Herāt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918363" start="10785" end="10802" title="Ghiyasuddin Ghori" label="Ghiyasuddin Ghori"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="10901" end="10907" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="10981" end="10994" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934729" start="11566" end="11583" title="Shams-uddin Muhammad Kurt I" label="Shams al-Din Kart"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="11707" end="11722" title="Ilkhanate" label="Il-Khan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q177320" start="11723" end="11729" title="Hulagu Khan" label="Hulagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="12024" end="12029" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734616" start="12068" end="12082" title="Kartids" label="Kartid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737645" start="12158" end="12173" title="Timurid dynasty" label="Timurid princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q537570" start="12186" end="12207" title="Husayn Bayqarah" label="Sultan Husayn Bayqara"/>
<link wikidata="Q503340" start="12316" end="12340" title="Ali-Shir Nava&amp;#x27;i" label="Mir Ali-Shir Nava&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="12505" end="12511" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q553204" start="12854" end="12862" title="Shah Rukh (Timurid dynasty)" label="Shahrokh"/>
<link wikidata="Q464986" start="13208" end="13219" title="Gawhar Shad" label="Gawhar Shad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403410" start="13299" end="13308" title="Gazar Gah" label="Gazar Gah"/>
<link wikidata="Q558205" start="13447" end="13470" title="Khwajah Abdullah Ansari" label="Khwājah Abdullāh Ansārī"/>
<link wikidata="Q324470" start="13605" end="13617" title="Qara Qoyunlu" label="Qara Qoyunlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q561219" start="13624" end="13634" title="Jahan Shah" label="Jahan Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q611383" start="13718" end="13727" title="Hasan Ali (Qara Qoyunlu)" label="Hasan Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192519" start="13745" end="13753" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Mirza" label="Abu Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q856361" start="13814" end="13820" title="Shaybanid Dynasty" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q214559" start="13867" end="13884" title="Ismail I" label="Shah Isma&amp;#x27;il"/>
<link wikidata="Q161205" start="13905" end="13920" title="Safavid dynasty" label="Safavid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q60269" start="13945" end="13954" title="Qizilbash" label="Qizilbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q298410" start="14197" end="14209" title="Tahmasp I" label="Shah Tahmasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q171349" start="14247" end="14267" title="Abbas I of Persia" label="Shah Abbas the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q108695612" start="14637" end="14651" title="Sadozai Sultanate of Herat" label="Abdali Afghans"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="14659" end="14669" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="14692" end="14710" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="14762" end="14776" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662997" start="14787" end="14811" title="Herat (1793-1863)" label="Herat became independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="14835" end="14846" title="Durrani Empire" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="14895" end="14905" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="14911" end="14919" title="Qajar Iran" label="Iranians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510082" start="15046" end="15071" title="Siege of Herat (1838)" label="besieged the city in 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q617772" start="15231" end="15248" title="Anglo-Persian War" label="Anglo-Persian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q950481" start="15323" end="15338" title="Treaty of Paris (1857)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q32027" start="15463" end="15481" title="Dost Muhammad Khan" label="Dost Muhammad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925987" start="15522" end="15544" title="Musalla Complex" label="Musalla of Gawhar Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="15648" end="15654" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="15660" end="15667" title="madrasa" label="madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993585" start="15694" end="15710" title="Panjdeh incident" label="Panjdeh incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="15751" end="15765" title="Russian Armed Forces" label="Russian forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762853" start="15888" end="15909" title="Gawhar Shad Mausoleum" label="Gawhar Shad Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952572" start="16062" end="16090" title="Afghan Civil War (1928–1929)" label="Afghan Civil War (1928–1929)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63255391" start="16125" end="16134" title="Saqqawist" label="Saqqawist"/>
<link wikidata="Q355610" start="16209" end="16228" title="Mohammad Nadir Shah" label="Mohammad Nadir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431482" start="16284" end="16297" title="Herat International Airport" label="Herat Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="16321" end="16327" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="16346" end="16380" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="16411" end="16426" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689084" start="16563" end="16574" title="Afghan National Army" label="Afghan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q283648" start="16615" end="16626" title="Ismail Khan" label="Ismail Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="16693" end="16698" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="16741" end="16760" title="Nur Mohammad Taraki" label="Nur Mohammad Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q172317" start="16940" end="16951" title="Hijab" label="headscarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="17048" end="17052" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="17067" end="17085" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578716" start="17258" end="17277" title="1979 Herat uprising" label="1979 Herat uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124966" start="17369" end="17380" title="Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Afghan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q125981523" start="17434" end="17456" title="Afghan Commando Forces" label="Afghan Commando Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q120211630" start="17465" end="17481" title="Afghan Air Force (1978–1992)" label="Afghan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259237" start="17583" end="17605" title="Third Anglo-Afghan War" label="Third Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="17657" end="17674" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="17709" end="17726" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="18002" end="18012" title="mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415585" start="18152" end="18166" title="Islamic State of Afghanistan" label="new government"/>
<link wikidata="Q182844" start="18193" end="18207" title="Herat Province" label="Herat Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="18383" end="18390" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="18980" end="19008" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="U.S. invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q309368" start="19087" end="19104" title="Northern Alliance" label="Northern Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152953" start="19144" end="19159" title="Battle of Herat" label="Battle of Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q325317" start="19240" end="19253" title="Mirwais Sadiq" label="Mirwais Sadiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="19454" end="19493" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="International Security Assistance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689084" start="19584" end="19615" title="Afghan National Security Forces" label="Afghan National Security Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309026" start="19676" end="19697" title="Train Advise Assist Command – West" label="Regional Command West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689084" start="19726" end="19746" title="Afghan National Army" label="Afghan National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823582" start="19753" end="19764" title="207th Corps (Afghanistan)" label="207th Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="20125" end="20134" title="consul (representative)" label="consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689214" start="20175" end="20201" title="Afghanistan – United States relations" label="relations with Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108198072" start="20380" end="20388" title="Fall of Herat" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="20396" end="20403" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q107461898" start="20415" end="20437" title="2021 Taliban offensive" label="2021 Taliban offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="20485" end="20507" title="cold semi-arid climate" label="cold semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="20509" end="20538" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="20655" end="20663" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8505" start="21020" end="21030" title="Hari (Afghanistan)" label="Hari River"/>
<link wikidata="Q19576" start="21307" end="21314" title="Welayat" label="Welayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859317" start="21657" end="21670" title="Herat Citadel" label="Herat Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925987" start="21700" end="21716" title="Musalla Complex" label="Musallah Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925987" start="21719" end="21744" title="Musalla Minarets of Herat" label="Musalla Minarets of Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="22130" end="22136" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192458" start="22281" end="22293" title="Jihad Museum" label="Jihad Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762853" start="22318" end="22339" title="Gawhar Shad Mausoleum" label="Gawhar Shad Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403410" start="22342" end="22378" title="Khwaja &amp;#x27;Abd Allah Ansari shrine" label="Mausoleum of Khwajah Abdullah Ansari"/>
<link wikidata="Q312458" start="22389" end="22393" title="Jami" label="Jami"/>
<link wikidata="Q325317" start="22432" end="22445" title="Mirwais Sadiq" label="Mirwais Sadiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q924037" start="22586" end="22598" title="Jumu&amp;#x27;ah" label="Jumu&amp;#x27;ah"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="22599" end="22605" title="Mosque" label="Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291612" start="22607" end="22629" title="Friday Mosque of Herat" label="Friday Mosque of Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620139" start="22723" end="22739" title="Herat University" label="Herat University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="23048" end="23076" title="National Geographic (magazine)" label="National Geographic Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="23078" end="23094" title="Persian language" label="Persian-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="23095" end="23100" title="Tajik people" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481326" start="23105" end="23113" title="Farsiwan" label="Farsiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="23229" end="23237" title="Pashtun people" label="Pashtuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="23245" end="23252" title="Hazara people" label="Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="23259" end="23265" title="Uzbek people" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="23275" end="23283" title="Turkmen people" label="Turkmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="23291" end="23298" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="23526" end="23533" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178890" start="23538" end="23555" title="Khorasan Province" label="Khorasan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="23613" end="23626" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="23690" end="23696" title="Pashto language" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16112855" start="23801" end="23815" title="Southern Pashto" label="western Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="23841" end="23849" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084127" start="23901" end="23912" title="Islam in Afghanistan" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495950" start="23949" end="23954" title="Shia Islam in Afghanistan" label="Shias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710901" start="24248" end="24254" title="History of the Jews in Afghanistan" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="24338" end="24344" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="24417" end="24426" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24591" end="24617" title="Aga Khan Trust for culture" label="Aga Khan Trust for culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809497" start="24795" end="24810" title="Yu Aw Synagogue" label="Yu Aw Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814900" start="25082" end="25098" title="Tahir ibn Husayn" label="Tahir ibn Husayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="25111" end="25128" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q373981" start="25162" end="25177" title="Tahirid dynasty" label="Tahirid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918363" start="25180" end="25200" title="Ghiyath al-Din Muhammad" label="Ghiyasuddin Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q553204" start="25261" end="25292" title="Shah Rukh (Timurid dynasty)" label="Mīrzā Shāhrūkh bin Tīmur Barlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737645" start="25309" end="25324" title="Timurid dynasty" label="Timurid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192519" start="25336" end="25356" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Mirza" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Mirza"/>
<link wikidata="Q484195" start="25371" end="25385" title="Timurid Empire" label="Timurid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q537570" start="25421" end="25443" title="Husayn Bayqarah" label="Mīrzā Husseyn Bāyqarāh"/>
<link wikidata="Q171349" start="25487" end="25519" title="Abbas I of Persia" label="Shāh Abbās &amp;quot;The Great&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="25532" end="25546" title="Safavids" label="Safavid Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="25549" end="25567" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="25584" end="25598" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32027" start="25602" end="25625" title="Dost Mohammad Khan" label="Emir Dost Mohammad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q807249" start="25642" end="25658" title="Barakzai dynasty" label="Barakzai dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695890" start="25681" end="25691" title="Sultan Jan" label="Sultan Jan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11904466" start="25752" end="25766" title="Ahmad Maymandi" label="Ahmad Maymandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="25780" end="25787" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="25788" end="25794" title="vizier" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="25802" end="25818" title="Ghaznavids" label="Ghaznavid empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q283648" start="25821" end="25832" title="Ismail Khan" label="Ismail Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621815" start="25841" end="25867" title="List of governors of Herat" label="governor of Herat Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867648" start="25872" end="25900" title="Ministry of Water and Energy (Afghanistan)" label="Minister of Water and Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633537" start="25903" end="25915" title="Amina Afzali" label="Amena Afzali"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354758" start="25930" end="25946" title="Faramarz Tamanna" label="Faramarz Tamanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807055" start="25977" end="25983" title="Asjadi" label="Asjadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="26009" end="26016" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="26042" end="26052" title="Ghaznavids" label="Ghaznavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q558205" start="26055" end="26091" title="Khwaja Abdullah Ansari" label="Khwājah Abdullāh al-Herawi al-Ansārī"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="26095" end="26102" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394800" start="26129" end="26142" title="Pur-Baha Jami" label="Pur-Baha Jami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="26157" end="26164" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="26171" end="26174" title="Pun" label="Pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697780" start="26212" end="26230" title="social commentator" label="social commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q192981" start="26240" end="26243" title="Minaret of Jam" label="Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q312458" start="26272" end="26287" title="Jami" label="Nūr ud-Dīn Jāmī"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="26291" end="26298" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="26299" end="26303" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q503340" start="26331" end="26360" title="Mir Ali Shir Nava&amp;#x27;i" label="Nizām ud-Din ʿAlī Shīr Herawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737645" start="26395" end="26402" title="Timurid dynasty" label="Timurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820926" start="26409" end="26415" title="Hatefi" label="Hatefi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="26419" end="26426" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q312458" start="26466" end="26481" title="Jami" label="Nūr ud-Dīn Jāmī"/>
<link wikidata="Q835704" start="26484" end="26496" title="Latif Nazemi" label="Latif Nazemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="26498" end="26505" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q469319" start="26513" end="26526" title="Nadia Anjuman" label="Nadia Anjuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="26555" end="26559" title="Dari" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q923759" start="26583" end="26609" title="Muvaffak" label="Abu Mansur Muvaffak Harawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="26624" end="26631" title="Persian people" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="26632" end="26641" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668243" start="26644" end="26659" title="Abolfadl Harawi" label="Abolfadl Harawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="26674" end="26684" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273874" start="26712" end="26718" title="Buyid dynasty" label="Buyids"/>
<link wikidata="Q636188" start="26722" end="26725" title="Ray, Iran" label="Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695519" start="26750" end="26767" title="Ahmad ibn Farrokh" label="Ahmad ibn Farrokh"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="26790" end="26799" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q764947" start="26802" end="26811" title="Taftazani" label="Taftazani"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="26822" end="26830" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116947" start="26853" end="26881" title="Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi" label="Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="26895" end="26902" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="26903" end="26912" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012484" start="26915" end="26936" title="Nimat Allah al-Harawi" label="Nimat Allah al-Harawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="26950" end="26957" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="26989" end="27003" title="Mughal Emperor" label="Mughal Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83653" start="27004" end="27012" title="Jahangir" label="Jahangir"/>
<link wikidata="Q20384048" start="27043" end="27062" title="Abu Dharr al-Harawi" label="Abu Dharr al-Harawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172458" start="27066" end="27075" title="Muhaddith" label="Muhaddith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16118272" start="27100" end="27120" title="Abu Uthman al-Sabuni" label="Abu Uthman al-Sabuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="27153" end="27158" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="27200" end="27212" title="Shafi&amp;#x27;i school" label="Shafi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410729" start="27281" end="27296" title="Shaykh al-Islām" label="Shaykh al-Islām"/>
<link wikidata="Q333703" start="27359" end="27379" title="Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi" label="Fakhr ad-Din al-Razi"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="27381" end="27389" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="27394" end="27409" title="Islamic scholar" label="Islamic scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502475" start="27432" end="27447" title="Hussain Kashefi" label="Hussain Kashefi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="27490" end="27505" title="Islamic scholar" label="Islamic scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q59205154" start="27522" end="27538" title="Mir Zahid Harawi" label="Mir Zahid Harawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836379" start="27626" end="27647" title="Ali al-Qari" label="Ali al-Hirawi al-Qari"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="27707" end="27713" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="27727" end="27731" title="fiqh" label="fiqh"/>
<link wikidata="Q196617" start="27734" end="27746" title="Maulana Azad" label="Maulana Azad"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548545" start="27833" end="27852" title="Mujib Rahman Ansari" label="Mujib Rahman Ansari"/>
<link wikidata="Q188942" start="27866" end="27872" title="mullah" label="mullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="27881" end="27888" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725322" start="27916" end="27942" title="Ali ibn Abi Bakr al-Harawi" label="Ali ibn Abi Bakr al-Harawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="27965" end="27972" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="27999" end="28007" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="28022" end="28028" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q334875" start="28060" end="28085" title="Kamāl ud-Dīn Behzād" label="Ustād Kamāl ud-Dīn Behzād"/>
<link wikidata="Q678664" start="28116" end="28132" title="Persian miniature" label="Persian painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959839" start="28135" end="28149" title="Mir Ali Heravi" label="Mir Ali Heravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="28161" end="28168" title="Persian people" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="28186" end="28197" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133121" start="28209" end="28218" title="Nastaʿlīq" label="Nastaʿlīq"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525377" start="28248" end="28258" title="Alka Sadat" label="Alka Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q20110468" start="28290" end="28305" title="Sonita Alizadeh" label="Sonita Alizadeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="28307" end="28313" title="rapper" label="rapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q531727" start="28346" end="28357" title="Nadia Nadim" label="Nadia Nadim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="28373" end="28388" title="Association football" label="football player"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007968" start="28420" end="28426" title="Afghans" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q94698304" start="28498" end="28505" title="2020–21 Division 1 Féminine" label="2020-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365295" start="28518" end="28537" title="Paris Saint-Germain Féminine" label="Paris Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573404" start="28540" end="28557" title="Hamidullah Karimi" label="Hamidullah Karimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007968" start="28559" end="28565" title="Afghans" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253829" start="28613" end="28628" title="Delhi United FC" label="Delhi United FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15841587" start="28630" end="28652" title="Mohammad Rafi Barekzay" label="Mohammad Rafi Barekzay"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="28654" end="28660" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="28684" end="28694" title="midfielder" label="midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277543" start="28699" end="28718" title="Toofaan Harirod F.C." label="Toofaan Harirod F.C"/>
<link wikidata="Q464986" start="28738" end="28749" title="Gowhar Shad" label="Gowhar Shad"/>
<link wikidata="Q553204" start="28759" end="28774" title="Shah Rukh" label="Shāh Rūkh Mīrzā"/>
<link wikidata="Q169544" start="28777" end="28792" title="Zablon Simintov" label="Zablon Simintov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="28809" end="28812" title="Jews" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431482" start="28917" end="28944" title="Herat International Airport" label="Herat International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915590" start="29024" end="29043" title="Soviet Armed Forces" label="Soviet Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="29055" end="29072" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="29121" end="29147" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="Operation Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q821275" start="29321" end="29326" title="Indira Gandhi International Airport" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193439" start="29328" end="29333" title="Dubai International Airport" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152024" start="29335" end="29341" title="Mashhad International Airport" label="Mashad"/>
<link wikidata="Q744802" start="29450" end="29455" title="Kabul International Airport" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="29472" end="29476" title="Rail transport" label="Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="29546" end="29560" title="The Great Game" label="The Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="29678" end="29700" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q765528" start="29744" end="29762" title="Torbat-e Heydarieh" label="Torbat-e Heydarieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421210" start="29816" end="29820" title="Khaf, Iran" label="Khaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498194" start="30094" end="30110" title="Sher Khan Bandar" label="Sher Khan Bandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649609" start="30130" end="30134" title="AH76" label="AH76"/>
<link wikidata="Q309345" start="30161" end="30168" title="Maymana" label="Maymana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15972957" start="30188" end="30192" title="AH77" label="AH77"/>
<link wikidata="Q958621" start="30218" end="30229" title="Chaghcharan" label="Chaghcharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713" start="30248" end="30252" title="Mary, Turkmenistan" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872831" start="30270" end="30279" title="Highway 1" label="Highway 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q494205" start="30303" end="30306" title="AH1" label="AH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="30320" end="30327" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6361216" start="30372" end="30394" title="Kandahar–Herat Highway" label="Kandahar–Herat Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12056114" start="30398" end="30405" title="Delaram" label="Delaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q193116" start="30459" end="30474" title="Khaled Hosseini" label="Khaled Hosseini"/>
<link wikidata="Q860633" start="30499" end="30523" title="A Thousand Splendid Suns" label="A Thousand Splendid Suns"/>
<link wikidata="Q44306" start="30559" end="30573" title="Salman Rushdie" label="Salman Rushdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500842" start="30593" end="30620" title="The Enchantress of Florence" label="The Enchantress of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q695565" start="30712" end="30732" title="Council Bluffs, Iowa" label="Council Bluffs, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q654243" start="30777" end="30791" title="Aria (satrapy)" label="Aria (satrapy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637198" start="30793" end="30817" title="Geography of Afghanistan" label="Geography of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="30819" end="30835" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Greater Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182844" start="30837" end="30851" title="Herāt Province" label="Herāt Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q188872" start="30853" end="30875" title="History of Afghanistan" label="History of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169704" start="31019" end="31057" title="Perry–Castañeda Library Map Collection" label="Perry–Castañeda Library Map Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="31059" end="31088" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14130" wikidata="Q165414" url="?curid=14130" title="Hedeby">
<text>Hedeby (, Old Norse: &quot;Heiðabýr&quot;, German: &quot;Haithabu&quot;) was an important Danish Viking Age (8th to the 11th centuries) trading settlement near the southern end of the Jutland Peninsula, now in the Schleswig-Flensburg district of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany. Around 965, chronicler Abraham ben Jacob visited Hedeby and described it as, &quot;a very large city at the very end of the world&#x27;s ocean.&quot;

The settlement developed as a trading centre at the head of a narrow, navigable inlet known as the Schlei, which connects to the Baltic Sea. The location was favorable because there is a short portage of less than 15 km to the Treene River, which flows into the Eider with its North Sea estuary, making it a convenient place where goods and ships could be pulled on a corduroy road overland for an almost uninterrupted seaway between the Baltic and the North Sea and avoid a dangerous and time-consuming circumnavigation of Jutland, providing Hedeby with a role similar to later Lübeck. Hedeby was the second largest Nordic town during the Viking Age, after Uppåkra in present-day southern Sweden. The city of Schleswig was later founded on the other side of the Schlei. Hedeby was abandoned after its destruction in 1066.

Hedeby was rediscovered in the late 19th century and excavations began in 1900. The Hedeby Viking Museum was opened next to the site in 1985. Because of its historical importance during the Viking Age and exceptional preservation, Hedeby and the nearby defensive earthworks of the Danevirke were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 2018.

Hedeby is mentioned in Hans Christian Andersen&#x27;s fairy tale &quot;The Marsh King&#x27;s Daughter&quot;.

==Name==


The Old Norse name &quot;Heiða-býr&quot; simply translates to &quot;heath-settlement&quot; (&quot;heiðr&quot; &quot;heath&quot; and &quot;býr&quot; = &quot;yard; settlement, village, town&quot;). The name is recorded in numerous spelling variants.

* &quot;Heiðabýr&quot; is the reconstructed name in standard Old Norse, also anglicized as &quot;Heithabyr&quot;.
* The Stone of Eric, a 10th-century Danish runestone with an inscription mentioning ᚼᛅᛁᚦᛅ᛭ᛒᚢ (&quot;haiþa bu&quot;), found in 1796.
* Old English &quot;æt Hæðum&quot;, from Ohtere&#x27;s and Wulfstan&#x27;s accounts of their travels to Alfred the Great in the Old English Orosius.
* &quot;Hedeby&quot;, the modern Danish spelling, also most commonly used in English.
* &quot;Haddeby&quot; is the Low German form, also the name of the administrative district formed in 1949 and named for the site; in 1985, the district introduced a coat of arms featuring a bell with a runic inscription reading ᚼᛁᚦᛅ᛬ᛒᚢ (&quot;hiþa:bu&quot;).
* &quot;Haithabu&quot; is the modern German spelling used when referring to the historical settlement; this spelling represents the transliteration of the name as found in the Stone of Eric inscription; it was introduced among other variants in antiquarian literature in the 19th century and has since become the standard German name of the settlement.

Sources from the 9th and 10th century AD also attest to the names &quot;Sliesthorp&quot; and &quot;Sliaswich&quot; (cf. &quot;-thorp&quot; vs. &quot;-wich&quot;), and the town of Schleswig still exists 3 km north of Hedeby. However, Æthelweard claimed in his Latin translation of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle that the Saxons used &quot;Slesuuic&quot; and the Danes &quot;Haithaby&quot; to refer to the same town.

==History==

===Origins===
Hedeby is first mentioned in the Frankish chronicles of Einhard (804), who was in the service of Charlemagne, as a place Charlemagne stayed in the summer of 804, at the end of the Saxon Wars. In 808 the Danish king Godfred (Lat. Godofredus) destroyed a competing Slav trade centre named Reric, and it is recorded in the Frankish chronicles that he resettled the merchants from there to Hedeby. This may have provided the initial impetus for the town to further develop.

The same sources record that Godfred strengthened the Danevirke, an earthen wall that stretched across the south of the Jutland peninsula. The Danevirke joined the defensive walls of Hedeby to form an east–west barrier across the peninsula, from the marshes in the west to the Schlei inlet leading into the Baltic in the east.

The town itself was surrounded on its three landward sides (north, west, and south) by earthworks. At the end of the 9th century the northern and southern parts of the town were abandoned for the central section. Later a 9-metre (29-ft) high semi-circular wall was erected to guard the western approaches to the town. On the eastern side, the town was bordered by the innermost part of the Schlei inlet and the bay of Haddebyer Noor.

===Timeline===
===Rise===
Hedeby became a principal marketplace because of its geographical location on the major trade routes between the Frankish Empire and Scandinavia (north-south), and between the Baltic and the North Sea (east-west). Between 800 and 1000 the growing economic power of the Vikings led to its dramatic expansion as a major trading centre. Along with Birka and Schleswig, Hedeby&#x27;s prominence as a major international trading hub served as a foundation of the Hanseatic League that would emerge by the 12th century.

Hedeby played an important role in the international Viking slave trade between Europe and the Muslim world. People taken captive during the Viking raids in Western Europe, such as Ireland, could be sold to Moorish Spain via the Dublin slave trade or transported to Hedeby or Brännö in Scandinavia and from there via the Volga trade route to Russia, where slaves and furs were sold to Muslim merchants in exchange for Arab silver &quot;dirham&quot; and silk, which have been found in Birka, Wollin and Dublin; initially this trade route between Europe and the Abbasid Caliphate passed via the Khazar Kaghanate, but from the early 10th-century onward it went via Volga Bulgaria and from there by caravan to Khwarazm, to the Samanid slave market in Central Asia and finally via Iran to the Abbasid Caliphate.

The following indicates the importance achieved by the town:
* The town was described by visitors from England (Wulfstan - 9th century) and the Mediterranean (Al-Tartushi - 10th century).
* Hedeby became the seat of a bishop (948) and belonged to the Archbishopric of Hamburg and Bremen.
* The town minted its own coins (from 825).
* Adam of Bremen (11th century) reports that ships were sent from this &quot;portus maritimus&quot; to Slavic lands, to Sweden, Samland (&quot;Semlant&quot;) and even Greece.

A Swedish dynasty founded by Olof the Brash is said to have ruled Hedeby during the last decades of the 9th century and the first part of the 10th century. This was told to Adam of Bremen by the Danish king Sweyn Estridsson, and it is supported by three runestones found in Denmark. Two of them were raised by the mother of Olof&#x27;s grandson Sigtrygg Gnupasson. The third runestone, discovered in 1796, is from Hedeby, the &quot;Stone of Eric&quot; (). It is inscribed with Norwegian-Swedish runes. It is, however, possible that Danes also occasionally wrote with this version of the younger futhark.

===Lifestyle===
Life was short and crowded in Hedeby. The small houses were clustered tightly together in a grid, with the east–west streets leading down to jetties in the harbour.

While Hedeby primarily served as a trade emporium, archaeological evidence demonstrates that it had produced many goods locally. Discovery and analysis of excavated artifacts reveal that tools such as spindle whorls, spindle rods, loom weights, and bone needles were standardized products. The distribution of these various tools demonstrates that there was a wide range of textiles produced at Hedeby, ranging from coarse fabric for sailcloth and outer-garments, to fine worsted wool fabric for higher quality clothes. More than 340,000 pieces related to comb making, tools for working leather, remains of ironworking and goldsmithing, and mercury from fire gilding were also found. There was also evidence found for the presence of a glass furnace active in the site from the period of 850 to 900. A total of 7,700 decorative beads have been unearthed in Hedeby, although it is likely that a small percentage of those were produced in situ. The presence of these artifacts at the site indicate that Hedeby had a robust local economy that produced a wide variety of goods, likely for domestic use and for trade at the sites markets.

Analysis of some of Hedeby’s burial sites provide evidence for the existence of an aristocracy. Graves that are lavishly furnished with jewelry, commodities, weapons and armor set apart from more humble inhumation sites indicate an established degree of stratification among Hedeby’s society.

The trade and production of beads was tied to a robust fashion within Hedeby. Beads made of varying materials such as carnelian, rock crystal, amber, jet, silver, brass, bronze, and mosaic glass have been found in the harbor excavation sites, burials, and throughout the settlement. Dating of these finds reveals that there was a change in style roughly every 10-35 years within the settlement.

Al-Tartushi, a late 10th-century traveller from al-Andalus, provides one of the most colourful and often quoted descriptions of life in Hedeby. Al-Tartushi was from Cordoba in Spain, which had a significantly more wealthy and comfortable lifestyle than Hedeby. While Hedeby may have been significant by Scandinavian standards, Al-Tartushi was unimpressed:
:&quot;Slesvig (Hedeby) is a very large town at the extreme end of the world ocean... The inhabitants worship Sirius, except for a minority of Christians who have a church of their own there... He who slaughters a sacrificial animal puts up poles at the door to his courtyard and impales the animal on them, be it a piece of cattle, a ram, billy goat or a pig so that his neighbours will be aware that he is making a sacrifice in honour of his god. The town is poor in goods and riches. People eat mainly fish which exist in abundance. Babies are thrown into the sea for reasons of economy. The right to divorce belongs to the women... Artificial eye make-up is another peculiarity; when they wear it their beauty never disappears, indeed it is enhanced in both men and women. Further: Never did I hear singing fouler than that of these people, it is a rumbling emanating from their throats, similar to that of a dog but even more bestial.&quot;

===Destruction===
The town was sacked in 1050 by King Harald Hardrada of Norway during a conflict with King Sweyn II of Denmark. He set the town on fire by sending several burning ships into the harbour, the charred remains of which were found at the bottom of the Schlei during recent excavations. A Norwegian &quot;skald&quot;, quoted by Snorri Sturluson, describes the sack as follows:
:&quot;Burnt in anger from end to end was Hedeby[..]&quot;
:&quot;High rose the flames from the houses when, before dawn, I stood upon the stronghold&#x27;s arm&quot;

In 1066 the town was sacked and burned by West Slavs. Following the destruction, Hedeby was slowly abandoned. People moved across the Schlei inlet, which separates the two peninsulas of Angeln and Schwansen, to the growing town of Schleswig. Hedeby’s royal tolls and levies were transferred to the town by the monarchy.

==Archaeology==

=== 20th-century archaeology ===

After the settlement was abandoned, rising waters contributed to the complete disappearance of all visible structures on the site. It was even forgotten where the settlement had been. This proved to be fortunate for later archaeological work at the site.

The exact location of the site was rediscovered by Sophus Muller in 1897. Archaeological work began at the site in 1900 after the rediscovery of the settlement with small-scale excavations by Johanna Mestorf. Excavations were conducted for the next 15 years, and additionally in 1921. These early efforts would result in over 350 small trenches being dug, and the discovery of a burial site within the rampart dating from earlier in the site&#x27;s history, they were led by Wilhelm Splieth and Friedrich Norr.

Further excavations were carried out between 1930 and 1939 by Nazi Germany’s Ahenerbe, the pseudoscientific organization within the SS under Herbert Jankuhn. The results of Jankuhn’s discoveries were never published in detail. What has been published shows that this period saw the digging of several trial trenches, discovering a group of ten chamber burials, a cremation burial site, and two inhumation graves.

Excavation in 1956 found more inhumation and cremation burials south of the rampart, which prompted many large-scale excavations. Klaus Raddatz, Heiko Steuer, and Konrad Weidemann investigated much of the cemetery site at that time, but their findings have not been published in detail.

In 1963, Torsten Capelle and Kurt Schietzel conducted further work on the site, they were the source of the youngest find at the site, with an excavated well dated to 1020 A.D. by dendrochronology.

Archaeological work on the site was productive for two main reasons: that the site had never been built on since its destruction some 840 years earlier, and that the permanently waterlogged ground had preserved wood and other perishable materials. The embankments surrounding the settlement were excavated, and the harbour was partially dredged, during which the wreck of multiple Viking ships were discovered, including the Hedeby 1. Despite all this work, only 5% of the settlement (and only 1% of the harbour) has as yet been investigated.

The most important finds resulting from the excavations are now on display in the adjoining Hedeby Viking Museum.

===21st-century archaeology===

Work has continued on the site since the earlier projects.

In 2002 a large scale geophysical project was started by teams from Marburg, Munich and Vienna. Over the course of three weeks, a total of ca 29 ha in and around the semi-circular rampart were analysed using Fluxgate, Caesium magnetometer and ground-penetrating radar.

Further work continued in 2003 when the &quot;Archäolgisches Landesmuseum&quot; began a metal detector survey with the help of the &quot;Bornholmske Amatørarkaologer&quot; and a group from Schleswig-Holstein. Throughout their work, 11,500 metal finds were collected and catalogued with a D-GPS system.

In 2005 an ambitious archaeological reconstruction program was initiated on the original site. Based on the results of archaeological analyses, exact copies of some of the original Viking houses have been built.

==See also==
* Hedeby stones
* Rurik
* Jelling
* Ribe

==Notes==
==Bibliography and media==
* A number of short archaeological films relating to Hedeby and produced by researchers during the 1980s are available on DVD from the &quot;University of Kiel&#x27;s Archaeological Film Project.&quot;
* Most publications on Hedeby are in German. See &quot;Wikipedia&#x27;s German-language article on Hedeby.&quot;

==External links==

* Website of the Haithabu Viking Museum
* Pictures from the Haithabu Viking Museum 
* Flickr Photo Gallery: Viking houses and museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q165414" start="0" end="6" title="Hedeby" label="Hedeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="10" end="19" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="43" end="49" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="90" end="96" title="Danes" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="97" end="107" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="184" end="201" title="Jutland Peninsula" label="Jutland Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941" start="214" end="233" title="Schleswig-Flensburg" label="Schleswig-Flensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="246" end="264" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="266" end="273" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q504531" start="298" end="315" title="Ibrahim ibn Yaqub" label="Abraham ben Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="399" end="417" title="world ocean" label="world&amp;#x27;s ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q312433" start="525" end="531" title="Schlei" label="Schlei"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="555" end="565" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q20777" start="653" end="665" title="Treene River" label="Treene River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314" start="688" end="693" title="Eider River" label="Eider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="703" end="712" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240054" start="794" end="807" title="corduroy road" label="corduroy road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="1005" end="1011" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760482" start="1084" end="1091" title="Uppåkra" label="Uppåkra"/>
<link wikidata="Q501661" start="1136" end="1145" title="Schleswig, Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q314723" start="1334" end="1354" title="Hedeby Viking Museum" label="Hedeby Viking Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q689454" start="1531" end="1540" title="Danevirke" label="Danevirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1563" end="1569" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1570" end="1589" title="World Heritage List" label="World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="1623" end="1646" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="1837" end="1842" title="Heath (habitat)" label="heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2031" end="2040" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021873" start="2090" end="2103" title="Stone of Eric" label="Stone of Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q815241" start="2127" end="2136" title="runestone" label="runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q366509" start="2257" end="2263" title="Ohthere of Hålogaland" label="Ohtere"/>
<link wikidata="Q715733" start="2275" end="2283" title="Wulfstan of Hedeby" label="Wulfstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="2320" end="2336" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q311456" start="2356" end="2363" title="Orosius" label="Orosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q457404" start="2459" end="2466" title="Haddeby" label="Haddeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="2480" end="2490" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306379" start="2653" end="2658" title="Younger Futhark" label="runic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021873" start="2886" end="2899" title="Stone of Eric" label="Stone of Eric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3190" end="3196" title=":wikt:þorp" label="-thorp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3213" end="3218" title=":wikt:-wich" label="-wich"/>
<link wikidata="Q501661" start="3243" end="3252" title="Schleswig (city)" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q272297" start="3297" end="3307" title="Æthelweard (historian)" label="Æthelweard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="3348" end="3369" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q154526" start="3558" end="3565" title="Einhard" label="Einhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="3599" end="3610" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q499909" start="3682" end="3692" title="Saxon Wars" label="Saxon Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q461614" start="3717" end="3724" title="Gudfred" label="Godfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="3765" end="3769" title="Early Slavs" label="Slav"/>
<link wikidata="Q569174" start="3789" end="3794" title="Reric" label="Reric"/>
<link wikidata="Q689454" start="4027" end="4036" title="Danevirke" label="Danevirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q896799" start="4719" end="4733" title="Haddebyer Noor" label="Haddebyer Noor"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="4875" end="4890" title="Frankish Empire" label="Frankish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="4895" end="4906" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="4938" end="4944" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="4953" end="4962" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="5031" end="5038" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="5107" end="5112" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="5117" end="5126" title="Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="5220" end="5236" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q125119209" start="5484" end="5497" title="Slavery in al-Andalus" label="Moorish Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130250" start="5506" end="5524" title="Dublin slave trade" label="Dublin slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353949" start="5553" end="5559" title="Brännö" label="Brännö"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661187" start="5598" end="5615" title="Volga trade route" label="Volga trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q572664" start="5713" end="5719" title="dirham" label="dirham"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="5761" end="5766" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q148505" start="5768" end="5774" title="Wolin" label="Wollin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="5779" end="5785" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q125310638" start="5862" end="5886" title="Khazar slave trade" label="via the Khazar Kaghanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q125427743" start="5935" end="5953" title="Volga Bulgarian slave trade" label="via Volga Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182647" start="5983" end="5991" title="Khwarazm" label="Khwarazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q124733224" start="6000" end="6020" title="Samanid slave trade" label="Samanid slave market"/>
<link wikidata="Q125130233" start="6061" end="6082" title="slavery in the Abbasid Caliphate" label="the Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q715733" start="6197" end="6205" title="Wulfstan of Hedeby" label="Wulfstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q504531" start="6244" end="6255" title="Ibrahim ibn Yaqub al-Tartushi" label="Al-Tartushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="6353" end="6360" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q837128" start="6365" end="6371" title="Archdiocese of Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q109244" start="6419" end="6433" title="Adam of Bremen" label="Adam of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="6537" end="6543" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q329676" start="6545" end="6552" title="Sambia Peninsula" label="Samland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="6584" end="6590" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q33764" start="6622" end="6636" title="Olof the Brash" label="Olof the Brash"/>
<link wikidata="Q109244" start="6766" end="6780" title="Adam of Bremen" label="Adam of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q246812" start="6800" end="6816" title="Sweyn Estridsson" label="Sweyn Estridsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q815241" start="6847" end="6856" title="runestone" label="runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543621" start="6938" end="6956" title="Sigtrygg Gnupasson" label="Sigtrygg Gnupasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021873" start="7025" end="7038" title="Stone of Eric" label="Stone of Eric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7070" end="7093" title="Runic alphabet#Younger Fuþark" label="Norwegian-Swedish runes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7180" end="7195" title="Runic alphabet#Younger Fuþark" label="younger futhark"/>
<link wikidata="Q504531" start="9205" end="9216" title="Ibrahim ibn Yaqub al-Tartushi" label="Al-Tartushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="9253" end="9263" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="9370" end="9377" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="9381" end="9386" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="9671" end="9677" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q203647" start="10562" end="10577" title="Harald Hardrada" label="Harald Hardrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q246812" start="10616" end="10635" title="Sweyn II of Denmark" label="Sweyn II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="10825" end="10830" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="10848" end="10864" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="11086" end="11092" title="Looting" label="sacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="11107" end="11117" title="West Slavs" label="West Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312433" start="11199" end="11205" title="Schlei" label="Schlei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981078" start="11206" end="11211" title="Förde" label="inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q506043" start="11251" end="11257" title="Angeln" label="Angeln"/>
<link wikidata="Q639956" start="11262" end="11271" title="Schwansen" label="Schwansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q501661" start="11296" end="11305" title="Schleswig, Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992359" start="11744" end="11757" title="Sophus Müller" label="Sophus Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q74395" start="11885" end="11900" title="Johanna Mestorf" label="Johanna Mestorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q160394" start="12282" end="12290" title="Ahnenerbe" label="Ahenerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q72564" start="12346" end="12361" title="Herbert Jankuhn" label="Herbert Jankuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507961" start="12764" end="12776" title="Heiko Steuer" label="Heiko Steuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q211969" start="13487" end="13499" title="Viking ships" label="Viking ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q18412197" start="13531" end="13539" title="Hedeby 1" label="Hedeby 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q314723" start="13742" end="13762" title="Hedeby Viking Museum" label="Hedeby Viking Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="14065" end="14073" title="Magnetometer" label="Fluxgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="14075" end="14095" title="Magnetometer" label="Caesium magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q873042" start="14658" end="14671" title="Hedeby stones" label="Hedeby stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990" start="14674" end="14679" title="Rurik" label="Rurik"/>
<link wikidata="Q835708" start="14682" end="14689" title="Jelling" label="Jelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q322361" start="14692" end="14696" title="Ribe" label="Ribe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14992" end="15043" title=":de:Haithabu" label="Wikipedia&amp;#x27;s German-language article on Hedeby."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14131" wikidata="Q115473" url="?curid=14131" title="Hazaras">
<text>The Hazaras (; ) are an ethnic group and a principal component of Afghanistan’s population. They are one of the largest ethnic groups in Afghanistan, primarily residing in the Hazaristan (Hazarajat) region in central Afghanistan. Hazaras also form significant minority communities in Pakistan, mainly in Quetta, and in Iran, primarily in Mashhad. They speak the Dari and Hazaragi dialects of Persian. Dari, also known as Dari Persian, is one of the two official languages of Afghanistan.

The Hazaras are one of the most persecuted groups in Afghanistan. More than half of the Hazara population was massacred by the Emirate of Afghanistan between 1888 and 1893, and they have faced persecution at various times over the past decades. Widespread ethnic discrimination, religious persecution, organized attacks by terrorist groups, harassment, and arbitrary arrest for various reasons have affected Hazaras. There have been numerous cases of torture of Hazara women, land and home seizures, deliberate economic restrictions, economic marginalization of the Hazara region and appropriation of Hazara agricultural fields and pastures leading to their forced displacement from Afghanistan.

== Etymology ==
The etymology of the word &quot;Hazara&quot; is disputed, with differing opinions on its origin.

Nasir Khusraw Balkhi, the 11th-century Persian-language poet and scholar, mentions the word &quot;Hazara&quot; ( ) in his poetry:
One of the mention of the Hazaras appears in &quot;Baburnama&quot;, written by the founder of the Mughal Empire, Babur, in the early 16th century and particularly referring some prominent Hazara tribes such as the Sultan Masudi and Turkoman Hazaras.

*Historian Abdul Hai Habibi considers the word &quot;Hazara&quot; ( ) is very old, derived from &quot;Hazala&quot; ( ), which evolved into &quot;Hazara&quot; over time and originally meant &quot;good-hearted.&quot;

*Some believe that in ancient times, the Hazara people were called &quot;Hazara&quot; ( ) due to their large population. The name &quot;Hazara&quot; is thought to derive from the Persian word &quot;Hazar&quot; ( ), meaning &quot;thousand,&quot; as a metaphor for a population numbering over a thousand.

*The name &quot;Hazara&quot; ( ) is thought to derive from the Persian word &quot;Hazar&quot; ( ), meaning &quot;thousand.&quot; It may be a translation of the Mongolic word , which referred to a military unit of 1,000 soldiers during the time of Genghis Khan. The term might have been used as a substitute for the Mongolic word to represent the group of people, while this is highly questionable and unacceptable, no first-hand documents or authentic evidences so far discovered confirm that either Genghis or his commanders ordered their militaries to settle down in what is now the Hazarajat. 

The Hazaras in their native language, refer to themselves as &quot;Azra&quot; ( ) or ( ).

==Origin==

Despite being one of the principal population groups in Afghanistan, the origins of the Hazara people have not been fully reconstructed. Genetic and linguistic analyses describe Hazaras as an ethnically mixed group, with varying degrees of ancestry linked to contemporary Turkic, Mongolic, and Iranic populations. The physical characteristics of some Hazaras and Char Aimaks are Mongolian, likely a legacy of the Mongol invasion. Additionally, Hazaras share a common racial structure and physical appearance and resemblance with the Turkic people of Central Asia. Babur, the founder of the Mughal Empire in the early 16th century, mentioned the Hazaras in the &quot;Baburnama,&quot; referring to some as &quot;Turkoman Hazaras.&quot;

Over the centuries, various Mongol (Turco-Mongol) and Turkic groups, notably the Qara&#x27;unas, Chagatai Turco-Mongols, Ilkhanate, and Timurids, merged with local indigenous Turkic and Iranian populations. Scholars agree that the Hazaras are ultimately the result of a blend of several Turkic, Mongolic, and Iranian tribes.

Although the Hazaras are a mix of multiple distinct ethnicities, many researchers focus on their Mongolic component. Some authors, including Elizabeth Emaline Bacon, Barbara A. West, Yuri Averyanov, and Elbrus Sattsayev, refer to them as &quot;Hazara Mongols&quot;, while no document has as yet been found that makes any mention of &quot;Hazara Mongols&quot;, nor has any scholar come across Mongol-speaking Hazaras. According to historian Lutfi Temirkhanov, Mongolian detachments left in Afghanistan by Genghis Khan or his successors became the foundational layer of Hazara ethnogenesis, but this is highly doubtful and unacceptable, no first-hand documents or credible evidence has ever been discovered that Genghis or his commanders ordered their troops and detachments to settle in the area of ​​present-day Hazarajat. In the Ghilji neighborhood, Hazaras are called Moghol. In turn, the Hazaras have also been called Qarluq, Khalaj, and Turkoman. Evidence for the Mongol influence in Hazara ethnogenesis includes linguistic data, historical sources, toponymy, and population genetics studies, while there is much evidence to the contrary. Scholars such as Vasily Bartold, Ármin Vámbéry, Vadim Masson, Vadim Romodin, Ilya Petrushevsky, Allah Rakha, Fatima, Min-Sheng Peng, Atif Adan, Rui Bi, Memona Yasmin, and Yong-Gang Yao have written about the historical use of the Mongolian language by the Hazaras. Historically no one has yet managed to find Mongol-speaking Hazaras.

Some historians argue that the existence of the Bamiyan Buddha statues, which were built around the 5th and 6th centuries and bear a strong resemblance to the Hazaras in terms of appearance and facial features, indicates their historical roots in the central regions of Afghanistan.

== History ==
A mention of the Hazaras appears in Babur&#x27;s &quot;Baburnama&quot; in the early 16th century, particularly referring to tribes such as the Sultan Masaudi Hazaras, Turkoman Hazaras, and Kedi Hazaras. Later, the Hazaras were referenced by the court historians of Shah Abbas of the Safavid dynasty.

It is reported that the Hazaras embraced Shia Islam between the end of the 16th century and the beginning of the 17th century, during the Safavid period. Hazara men, along with those from other ethnic groups, were recruited into the army of Ahmad Shah Durrani in the 18th century.

=== 19th century ===
During the second reign of Dost Mohammad Khan in the 19th century, Hazaras from Hazarajat were taxed for the first time. However, for the most part, they managed to maintain their regional autonomy until the 1892 Battle of Uruzgan and the subsequent subjugation by Abdur Rahman, which began in the late 19th century.

When the Treaty of Gandomak was signed and the Second Anglo-Afghan War ended in 1880, Abdur Rahman set a goal to bring Hazaristan, Turkistan, and Kafiristan under his control. He launched several campaigns in Hazaristan in response to resistance from the Hazaras, during which his forces committed atrocities. The southern part of Hazaristan was spared, as its inhabitants accepted his rule, while other regions rejected Abdur Rahman and supported his uncle, Sher Ali Khan. In response, Abdur Rahman waged war against the tribal leaders who opposed his policies and rule. This conflict is known as the Hazara Uprisings.

These campaigns had a catastrophic impact on the demographics of the Hazaras, resulting in the massacre of over sixty percent of the total Hazara population, with many being displaced and exiled from their own lands. The Hazara lands were distributed among loyalist villagers from nearby non-Hazara communities. The repression following the uprising has been characterized as genocide or ethnic cleansing in the history of modern Afghanistan.

After these massacres, Abdul Rahman forced many Hazara families from the Hazara areas of Uruzgan and other parts of Hazaristan to leave their hometowns and ancestral lands, prompting many Hazaras to flee to neighboring countries such as Central Asia, Iran, British India, Iraq, and Syria. Those Hazaras living in the northern Hindu Kush migrated to Tsarist Russia, primarily settling in the southern cities, while some moved to Iran. Over time, many Hazaras living in Tsarist Russian regions lost their language, culture, and ethnic identity due to the similarities in racial background and physical appearance of the local population, leading them to assimilate. The fleeing Hazaras settled in former Tsarist Russia regions, including Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, and Dagestan. Meanwhile, the Hazaras from northwestern Afghanistan migrated to Iran, settling in neighborhoods in and around Mashhad, where they later became known as Khawari or Barbari. Another group of Hazaras from the southeastern regions of Afghanistan moved to British India, where they reside in Quetta (present-day Pakistan) and parts of present-day India. Additionally, some Hazaras settled in Syria and Iraq. Unlike those who migrated to Tsarist Russia, the Hazaras in Pakistan, India, Iran, Syria, and Iraq were unable to integrate fully due to differences in physical appearance, allowing them to retain their language, culture, and ethnic identity.

=== 20th and 21st century ===
In 1901, Habibullah Khan, Abdur Rahman&#x27;s eldest son and successor, granted amnesty to the Hazaras and invited those exiled by his predecessor to return. However, few returned, settling instead in Turkistan and Balkh province, as they had lost their previous lands. The Hazaras continued to face social, economic, and political discrimination throughout most of the 20th century. In 1933, Muhammad Nadir Shah, the King of Afghanistan, was assassinated by Abdul Khaliq Hazara, a school student. The Afghan government later captured and executed him, along with several of his family members.

Mistrust of the central government among the Hazaras and local uprisings persisted. In particular, from 1945 to 1946, during Zahir Shah&#x27;s rule, a revolt led by Ibrahim Khan, known as &quot;Ibrahim Gawsawar,&quot; erupted in response to new taxes that were imposed exclusively on the Hazaras. Meanwhile, the Kuchis were not only exempted from these taxes but also received allowances from the Afghan government. The angry rebels began capturing and killing government officials. In response, the central government sent a force to subdue the region and subsequently removed the taxes.

The repressive policies of the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) after the Saur Revolution in 1978 led to uprisings throughout the country. Fearing Iranian influence, the Hazaras were particularly persecuted. In October 1979, President Hafizullah Amin published a list of 12,000 victims of the Taraki government, among whom were 7,000 Hazaras who had been shot in the notorious Pul-e-Charkhi prison.

During the Soviet-Afghan War, the Hazarajat region did not experience as much heavy fighting as other parts of Afghanistan. Most of the Hazara mujahideen engaged in combat against the Soviets in regions on the periphery of Hazarajat. There was a division between the Tanzeem Nasle Nau Hazara, a party based in Quetta comprising Hazara nationalists and secular intellectuals, and the Islamist parties in Hazarajat. By 1979, the Hazara Islamist groups had already liberated Hazarajat from the central Soviet-backed Afghan government and subsequently took full control of the region away from the secularists. By 1984, the Islamist dominance in Hazarajat was complete. As the Soviets withdrew in 1989, the Islamist groups recognized the need to broaden their political appeal and shifted their focus toward Hazara nationalism. This shift led to the establishment of Hizbe-Wahdat, an alliance of all Hazara resistance groups, except for Harakat-e Islami. 

In 1992, with the fall of Kabul, Harakat-e Islami sided with Burhanuddin Rabbani&#x27;s government, while Hizb-e Wahdat aligned with the opposition. Hizb-e Wahdat was eventually forced out of Kabul in 1995 when the Taliban captured the city and killed their leader, Abdul Ali Mazari. Following the Taliban&#x27;s capture of Kabul in 1996, all Hazara groups united with the Northern Alliance against this common enemy. However, despite fierce resistance, Hazarajat fell to the Taliban in 1998. The Taliban isolated Hazarajat from the rest of the world, even preventing the United Nations from delivering food to the provinces of Bamyan, Ghor, Maidan Wardak, and Daykundi.

In 1997, a revolt broke out among the Hazaras in Mazar-e Sharif when they refused to be disarmed by the Taliban, resulting in the deaths of 600 Taliban fighters in the subsequent fighting. In retaliation, the Taliban adopted the genocidal policies reminiscent of Abdur Rahman Khan&#x27;s era. In 1998, six thousand Hazaras were killed in the north, with the intent of carrying out ethnic cleansing against the Hazara population. In March 2001, the two giant Buddhas of Bamiyan were destroyed, despite widespread international condemnation.


Hazaras have also played a significant role in the creation of Pakistan. One notable Hazara was Qazi Muhammad Isa of the Sheikh Ali tribe, who was a close friend of Muhammad Ali Jinnah; they met for the first time while studying in London. Qazi Muhammad Isa was the first person from his native province of Balochistan to obtain a Bar-at-Law degree and played a key role in establishing the All-India Muslim League in Balochistan.

Though Hazaras played a role in the anti-Soviet movement, some Hazaras also participated in the new communist government, which actively courted Afghan minorities. Sultan Ali Kishtmand, a Hazara, served as the Prime Minister of Afghanistan from 1981 to 1990, with a brief interruption in 1988. The Ismaili Hazaras of Baghlan Province likewise supported the communists, and their &quot;pir&quot; (religious leader), Jaffar Naderi, led a pro-Communist militia in the region.

During the following years, the Hazaras suffered severe oppression, and numerous ethnic massacres, genocides, and pogroms were carried out by the predominantly Pashtun Taliban. These events have been documented by organizations such as Human Rights Watch.

Following the September 11, 2001 attacks in the United States, American and Coalition forces invaded Afghanistan. After the fall of the Taliban, many Hazaras emerged as important figures in the country. Hazaras pursued higher education, enrolled in the army, and held various top government positions. Notable Hazaras in leadership roles included Vice Presidents, ministers, and governors, such as Karim Khalili, Sarwar Danish, Sima Samar, Muhammad Mohaqiq, Habiba Sarābi, Abdul Haq Shafaq, Sayed Anwar Rahmati, Qurban Ali Urozgani, Muhammad Arif Shah Jahan, Mahmoud Baligh, Mohammad Eqbal Munib, and Mohammad Asim Asim. Azra Jafari, the mayor of Nili, Daykundi, became the first female mayor in Afghanistan. Other notable Hazaras include Sultan Ali Keshtmand, Abdul Wahed Sarābi, Akram Yari, Ghulam Ali Wahdat, Sayed Mustafa Kazemi, Ghulam Husain Naseri, Abbas Noyan, Daoud Naji, Abbas Ibrahim Zada, Ramazan Bashardost, Ahmad Shah Ramazan, Ahmad Behzad, Nasrullah Sadiqi Zada Nili, Fahim Hashimy, Maryam Monsef, and others.

Although Afghanistan has historically been one of the poorest countries in the world, the Hazarajat region has remained underdeveloped due to past government neglect. Since the ousting of the Taliban in late 2001, billions of dollars have been invested in Afghanistan for reconstruction, and several large-scale projects began in August 2012. For instance, more than 5,000 kilometers of road pavement have been completed across the country, with little done in central Afghanistan (Hazarajat). Conversely, the Band-e Amir in Bamyan Province became the first national park in Afghanistan. A road from Kabul to Bamyan was also constructed, along with new police stations, government institutions, hospitals, and schools in Bamyan, Daykundi, and other provinces predominantly inhabited by Hazaras. Additionally, the first ski resort in Afghanistan was established in Bamyan Province.

Discrimination is evident in the treatment of Kuchis (Pashtun nomads who historically migrate from region to region depending on the season), who are allowed to use the pastures of Hazarajat during the summer months. It is believed that this practice began during the rule of Abdur Rahman Khan. Living in mountainous Hazarajat, where arable farmland is scarce, the Hazara people rely on these pasture lands for their livelihood during the long and harsh winters. In 2007, some Kuchi nomads entered parts of Hazarajat to graze their livestock. When the local Hazaras resisted, a clash ensued, resulting in several deaths on both sides from gunfire. Such events continue to occur, even after the central government, including President Hamid Karzai, was compelled to intervene. In late July 2012, a Hazara police commander in Uruzgan Province reportedly rounded up and killed nine Pashtun civilians in retaliation for the deaths of two local Hazaras. The Afghan government is currently investigating this matter.

President Hamid Karzai&#x27;s efforts after the Peace Jirga to negotiate a deal with Taliban leaders caused deep unease among Afghanistan&#x27;s minority communities, who had fought the Taliban the longest and suffered the most during their rule. Leaders of the Tajik, Uzbek, and Hazara communities vowed to resist any return of the Taliban to power, recalling the large-scale massacres of Hazara civilians during the Taliban&#x27;s previous rule. The 2021 Kabul school bombing targeted a girls&#x27; school in Dashte Barchi, a predominantly Hazara area in western Kabul. The Dashte Barchi district had frequently been attacked by the Islamic State – Khorasan Province.

Following the fall of Kabul to the Taliban in 2021, which marked the end of the war in Afghanistan, concerns were raised about whether the Taliban would reimpose the persecution of Hazaras as they did in the 1990s. An academic at Melbourne&#x27;s La Trobe University stated that &quot;The Hazaras are very fearful that the Taliban will likely reinstate the policies of the 1990s,&quot; despite Taliban reassurances that they would not revert to their previous oppressive practices. On 6 September 2022, Human Rights Watch reported that since the Taliban took over Afghanistan in August 2021, ISIS–K has claimed responsibility for 13 attacks against Hazaras and has been linked to at least three more, resulting in the deaths and injuries of at least 700 people. The Islamic State affiliate has repeatedly targeted Hazaras and other religious minorities at mosques, schools, and workplaces.

== Genetics ==

Genetically, the Hazaras have a mix of West Eurasian and East Eurasian components. Genetic data shows that Hazaras in Afghanistan cluster closely with the Uzbek population, while both groups are notably distinct from Afghanistan&#x27;s Tajik and Pashtun populations. There is evidence of both paternal and maternal connections to Turkic, Mongolic, and Iranian peoples.
The frequency of ancestral components among the Hazaras varies according to tribal affiliation. They show a high genetic affinity to present-day Turkic populations of Central Asia and East Asia, as well as to Mongolic populations. In terms of their overall genetic makeup, approximately 49% of the average gene pool of the Hazaras is derived from East Asian sources, around 48% from European sources, and approximately 0.17%, 0.47%, and 2.30% from African, Oceanian, and Amerindian sources, respectively. The genetic makeup of the Hazaras is similar to that of Uzbek, Uyghur, Kazakh, Kyrgyz, and Mongol populations.

Some analyses suggest that the Hazaras are more closely related to the Turkic populations of Central Asia than to Mongolians, East Asians, or Indo-Iranians. 

In another study, results from pairwise genetic distances, MDS, PCA, and phylogenetic relationship reconstruction demonstrate that present-day Hazaras are genetically closer to Turkic-speaking populations (such as Uyghur, Kazakh, and Kyrgyz) residing in northwest China than to other Central and South Asian populations or Mongolians. Outgroup and admixture analyses, including f3, f4, f4-ratio, qpWave, and qpAdm results, further show that Hazaras share more alleles with East Asians than with other Central Asians, carrying approximately 57.8% Mongolian-related ancestry. The Hazaras have undergone genetic admixture with local or neighboring populations, forming their current East-West Eurasian admixed genetic profile after their separation from the Mongolians.

=== Paternal haplogroups ===
The most common paternal DNA haplogroups among Hazaras from Afghanistan are the East Eurasian haplogroup C-M217 (33.33%) and the West Eurasian haplogroup R1a1a-M17 (6.67%), followed by the West Eurasian haplogroups J2-M172 and L-M20. Some Hazaras were also found to belong to the haplogroups E1b1b1-M35, L-M20, and H-M69, which they share with Tajiks, Pashtuns, and Indian populations. Additionally, one individual with the haplogroup B-M60, typically found in Eastern Africa, was identified.

Haplogroup C2 (previously known as the C3-Star cluster) is the most frequent haplogroup among Pakistani and Afghan Hazaras. Pakistani Hazaras have a high frequency of haplogroup C-M217 at approximately 40% (10/25) and haplogroup R1b at around 32% (8/25). A relatively high frequency of R1b has also been found among Eastern Russian Tatars and Bashkirs, and all three groups are thought to be associated with the Golden Horde. Haplogroup C-M217, or C2, is the most common haplogroup in Mongol and Kazakh populations. Studies indicate that Y-DNA haplogroup C2 among Hazaras is linked to the expansion of the Mongols and supports the Mongolian origin of the Hazaras.

=== Maternal haplogroups ===
The Hazaras share approximately 35% of their maternal haplogroups with contemporary East Asian populations, while about 65% are shared with West Eurasian populations. Overall, the Hazaras predominantly have West Eurasian mtDNA.
== Demographics ==
Some sources claim that Hazaras comprise about 20 to 30 percent of the total population of Afghanistan. They were, by far, the largest ethnic group in the past. During the 1888–1893 uprisings, over sixty percent of Hazaras were massacred, and many were displaced. Meanwhile, they lost a significant portion of their territory to non-Hazaras, which could have doubled their land size today.

== Geographic distribution ==

=== Afghanistan ===

The Hazaras are one of the largest ethnic groups in Afghanistan, primarily residing in the Hazaristan (Hazarajat) region in central Afghanistan, with a significant presence throughout the country.

Until the 1880s, the Hazaras were completely autonomous and in full control of all areas in Hazarajat. The central government in Kabul had not yet succeeded in bringing the Hazaras under its rule.

=== Central Asia ===

After the massacre and genocide of the Hazaras by Abdur Rahman from 1888 to 1893, many Hazaras migrated to Central Asian regions under Tsarist Russian occupation, including Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Kazakhstan, with a significant number settling in Samarkand and Bukhara. Over time, many Hazaras living in these regions lost their accent, language, and ethnic identity due to the similarities in racial structure and appearance with the local populations, leading to their assimilation.

=== Pakistan ===
During the period of British colonial rule in the Indian subcontinent in the 19th century, Hazaras worked in coal mines, road construction, and other working-class jobs during the winter months in various cities of what is now Pakistan. The earliest record of Hazaras in Pakistan dates back to Broadfoot&#x27;s Sappers Company, which was established in 1835 in Quetta and also participated in the First Anglo-Afghan War. Additionally, some Hazaras worked on agricultural farms in Sindh and contributed to the construction of the Sukkur Barrage. In 1962, the government of Pakistan officially recognized the Hazaras as one of the country&#x27;s ethnic groups.

Most Pakistani Hazaras are native to Balochistan. Localities in the city of Quetta with prominent Hazara populations include Hazara Town and Mariabad. The literacy level among the Hazara community in Pakistan is relatively high compared to that of Hazaras in Afghanistan, and they have integrated well into the local society&#x27;s social dynamics. Saira Batool, a Hazara woman, was one of the first female pilots in the Pakistan Air Force. Other notable Hazaras include Qazi Muhammad Isa, General Musa Khan, who served as the fourth Commander-in-Chief of the Pakistan Army from 1958 to 1968, Air Marshal Sharbat Ali Changezi, who served in the Pakistan Air Force from 1949 to 1987, Hussain Ali Yousafi, the slain chairman of the Hazara Democratic Party, and Sayed Nasir Ali Shah, a Member of the National Assembly from Quetta, along with his father Haji Sayed Hussain Hazara, who was a senator and member of the Pakistan Parliament during the Zia-ul-Haq era.

Despite this, Hazaras are often targeted by militant groups such as Lashkar-e-Jhangvi and others. Activists report that at least 800 to 1,000 Hazaras have been killed since 1999, and the pace is quickening. According to Human Rights Watch, more than one hundred have been murdered in and around Quetta since January. The political representation of the community is served by the Hazara Democratic Party, a secular liberal democratic party headed by Abdul Khaliq Hazara.

=== Iran ===

The Hazara people in Iran are also referred to as Khāwari () or Barbari (). Over many years, due to political unrest in Afghanistan, some Hazaras have migrated to Iran. The local Hazara population is estimated to be around 500,000, with at least one-third having spent more than half their lives in Iran. Before Iran was forced to relinquish the Herat region according to the Treaty of Paris in 1857 during the reign of Naser al-Din Shah, the country possessed a much larger part of Greater Khorasan. One of the tribes that roamed this area prior to the cession was the Hazaras. After the border between Iran and Afghanistan was drawn, the tribe settled on both sides of the border. The leadership of this tribe at the end of the Qajar period and during the Pahlavi period was held by Muhammad Yusuf Khan Hazara, known as &quot;Sulat al-Sultanah Hazara.&quot; He was a Sunni Hazara, a politician, and the first Sunni representative in the Iranian Parliament, as well as the only Sunni Iranian to represent Mashhad in the history of Iran&#x27;s legislatures.

=== India ===
The Attarwala claim to be Hazaras who mainly inhabit the state of Gujarat, India. They are descended from a group of Mughal soldiers who were initially settled in Agra during the rule of Mughal Emperor Jahangir. According to their recorded documents, they then migrated to Ahmedabad via Gwalior, Ratlam, and Godhra. This migration followed their participation in the community during the 1857 Indian War of Independence. Once settled in Gujarat, the community took up the occupation of manufacturing perfumes known as ittars. The term &quot;attarwala&quot; means &quot;manufacturer of perfumes.&quot; A second migration occurred in 1947 from Agra after the partition of India, with some members immigrating to Pakistan, while others joined their co-ethnics in Ahmedabad.

=== Diaspora ===

Alessandro Monsutti argues in his recent anthropological book that migration is a traditional way of life for the Hazara people, referring to the seasonal and historical migrations that have never ceased and do not seem to be dictated solely by emergencies such as war. Due to decades of conflict in Afghanistan and sectarian violence in Pakistan, many Hazaras have left their communities and settled in Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the United States, the United Kingdom, and particularly the Northern European countries such as Sweden and Denmark. Some migrate as exchange students, while others do so through human smuggling, which sometimes costs them their lives. Since 2001, about 1,000 people have died at sea while attempting to reach Australia by boat from Indonesia, many of whom were Hazaras. A notable case was the Tampa affair, in which a shipload of refugees, mostly Hazaras, was rescued by the Norwegian freighter MV &quot;Tampa&quot; and subsequently sent to Nauru.

== Culture and society ==

Hazara culture is a combination of customs, traditions, behaviors, beliefs, and norms that have developed over many years through interactions with and confrontations against surrounding phenomena. Today, it is displayed as a distinct cultural identity. The Hazara culture is rich in heritage, featuring many unique elements and sharing common influences with various cultures of Central Asia and South Asia. Outside of Hazarajat, the Hazaras have adopted aspects of the cultures of the cities where they reside, resembling the traditions of Afghan Tajiks and Pashtuns. Traditionally, the Hazaras are highland farmers. In Hazarajat, they have retained many of their own customs and traditions, which are more closely related to those of Central Asians than to those of Afghan Tajiks. Historically, Hazaras have lived in houses, but some groups, such as the Aimaq Hazara and a few others, are semi-nomadic and primarily reside in felt yurts rather than traditional homes.

=== Attire ===
Hazara clothing plays an important role in supporting the cultural, traditional, and social identity of the Hazara ethnicity. Hazara garments are produced both manually and by machine. In Afghanistan, these types of clothing are sewn in various parts of the country, especially in the central provinces.

==== Male clothing ====

Hazara men traditionally wear a barak, also called a barag, along with a hat. The barak is an important component of Hazara clothing. It is a soft, thick garment made from the first wool of special sheep raised in Hazarajat. In addition to being stylish and regal, the Hazara barak is also a warm winter garment that is resistant to moisture, allowing it to remain dry in snow and rain. Furthermore, the barak has unique properties; its softness helps reduce muscle pain and can provide relief for joint pain. Nowadays, the most common attire among Hazara men is the perahan o tunban, often paired with a hat or turban.

==== Female clothing ====
The traditional clothing of Hazara women includes a pleated skirt with a tunban or undergarment. The lower tunbans are made from fabrics such as flowered chits, while the upper skirts are crafted from finer materials like velvet, zari, or net, often adorned with a border or decoration at the bottom. The women&#x27;s shirt is calf-length, with a close collar and long sleeves, featuring slits on both sides that fit over the skirts, which are appreciated for their modesty in accordance with Islamic customs.

Hazara women&#x27;s clothing varies according to social, economic, and age factors. Young Hazara women typically wear outfits made from different fabrics in vibrant colors and cheerful designs, complemented by beautiful and colorful chadors. In contrast, older women prefer darker fabrics with simple black and white patterns. Hazara women&#x27;s chadors or head coverings are often embellished with ornaments, typically made of silver or gold, and sometimes paired with a hat. The adornments on their clothing include silver or gold necklace with colorful beads, buttons, bangles, and silver or gold bracelets.

==== Headgear ====

Hazaras traditionally wear headgear or hats, which differ for men and women. There are various types of Hazara hats and caps; some are made from animal skin, while others are crafted from barak. Additionally, some Hazara men wear the turban of Khorasan.

=== Cuisine ===
The Hazara cuisine is strongly influenced by Central Asian, South Asian, and Persian cuisines. However, there are unique foods, cooking methods, and styles that are specific to the Hazara people. They also have a hospitable dining etiquette, where it is customary to prepare special food for guests.

=== Language ===

The Hazaras speak Dari and the Hazaragi dialect of the Persian language.

According to the &quot;Encyclopaedia of Islam&quot;, Hazaragi is a dialect of Persian infused with many Turkic and some Mongolic words or loanwords. The &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; describes Hazaragi as an eastern variety of Persian containing numerous Mongolian and Turkic words. Similarly, &quot;Encyclopaedia Iranica&quot; notes that Hazaras speak a Persian dialect with many Turkic and some Mongolic words. Other sources describe the Hazara population as speaking Persian with some Mongolian words. An &quot;Iranica&quot; article on the language of Hazaras states that the dialect consists of three linguistic layers: (1) pre-Mongol Persian, with its own substratum; (2) Mongolian; and (3) modern Tajiki, preserving elements of both (1) and (2). The primary difference between Persian and Hazaragi lies in the accent. Despite these variations, Hazaragi remains mutually intelligible with Dari, the official language of Afghanistan.

According to Dr. Lutfi Temirkhanov, a Doctor of Sciences, the ancestors of the Hazaras were originally Mongol-speaking and only after resettling did they begin to mix with Persian-speaking and Turkic-speaking populations. Temirkhanov explains, &quot;Hordes of Mongol princes and feudal lords found themselves in a Persian-speaking environment; they mixed with them, were influenced by Persian-Tajik culture, and gradually adopted the Persian language.&quot; Some sources indicate that in the 16th century, during the time of Babur, some Hazaras still spoke a Mongolian language. According to the &quot;Great Russian Encyclopedia&quot; and other sources, some Hazaras continued to speak Mongolian until the 19th century. Temirkhanov notes that Mongolian elements make up about 10% of the Hazara vocabulary, while Turkic and Mongolic words together constitute approximately 20% of the vocabulary of the Hazaragi dialect.

=== Religion ===
Hazaras predominantly practice Islam, with most adhering to Shi&#x27;a Islam, a significant portion following Sunni Islam, and smaller groups practicing Isma&#x27;ili and Non-denominational Islam. The majority of Afghanistan&#x27;s population practices Sunni Islam, which may have contributed to the discrimination Hazaras face.

==== Shia Hazaras ====

There is no definitive theory regarding the acceptance of Shi&#x27;a Islam by the majority of Hazaras. It is possible that most Hazaras adopted Shi&#x27;a Islam in the early 16th century, during the initial years of the Safavid dynasty.

==== Sunni Hazaras ====

A significant portion of the Hazara population are Sunni Muslims. Sunni Hazaras have practiced Sunni Islam for a long time, predating Abdul Rahman&#x27;s occupation of Hazara lands. However, some were forcefully converted from Shi&#x27;a to Sunni Islam following Abdur Rahman’s occupation and the Hazara genocide. In Afghanistan, they primarily inhabit the provinces of Kabul, Baghlan, Badghis, Ghor, Kunduz, Panjshir, Bamyan, Badakhshan, and Parwan.

Sher Muhammad Khan Hazara, a Sunni Hazara and chieftain of the Hazaras of Qala-e-Naw, Badghis, was a warlord who participated in the Sunni coalition that defended Herat in 1837. He was also one of those who defeated British forces around Qandahar and in the Maiwand desert during the First Anglo-Afghan War (1838–1842).

During the 1996-2001 Afghan Civil War, the Taliban also forcefully converted Shia Hazaras into Sunni.

==== Isma&#x27;ili Hazaras ====
Isma&#x27;ili Hazaras primarily reside in the provinces of Kabul, Parwan, Baghlan, Bamyan, Maidan Wardak, Samangan, and Zabul. They have historically been separated from other Hazaras due to religious beliefs and political reasons.

=== Hazara tribes ===
The Hazara people are organized into various tribes. Some prominent Hazara tribes include Sheikh Ali, Jaghori, Jaghatu, Qara Baghi, Ghaznichi, Muhammad Khwaja, Behsudi, Dai Mirdad, Turkmani, Uruzgani, Daikundi, Daizangi, Daichopan, Daizinyat, Naiman, Qarlugh, Aimaq Hazara, and others. These tribes originate from Hazaristan (Hazara regions) such as Parwan, Bamyan, Ghazni, Ghor, Uruzgan, Daikundi, and Maidan Wardak. They are spread across Afghanistan, parts of Pakistan and Iran, as well as other Hazara-populated areas.

=== Art ===

==== Writers and poets ====
Some well-known Hazara writers and poets include Faiz Muhammad Kateb, Amir Khosrow Dehlavi, Ismael Balkhi, Hassan Poladi, Kazim Yazdani, Ali Mohaqiq Nasab, Kamran Mir Hazar, Basir Ahang, Sayed Askar Mousavi, Ali Baba Taj, Sayed Abutalib Mozaffari, Rahnaward Zaryab, and Aziz Royesh, among others.

==== Music ====

Many Hazara musicians are widely recognized for their skill in playing the dambura, a native lute instrument also found in other Central Asian countries such as Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan. Notable Hazara musicians and dambura players include Sarwar Sarkhosh, Dawood Sarkhosh, Safdar Tawakoli, and Sayed Anwar Azad, among others. Revolutionary hymns are particularly common in Hazara dambura music, with Sarwar Sarkhosh being the first singer to popularize them. His main message centered on the uprising of the younger generation and the fight against oppression. Additionally, the ghaychak, a traditional field instrument, is played similarly to a fiddle. Its resonance bowl is typically made from walnuts or berries, and its strings are metal, making it one of the stringed instruments in Hazara music.

Renowned Pakistani musician Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan is also a descendant of the Hazara from the Behsudi tribe.

==== Cinema ====

Hazara cinema artists do not have a long history, but some of their famous actors and actresses today include Hussain Sadiqi, Abid Ali Nazish, Shamila Shirzad, Nikbakht Noruz, and others.

=== Sports ===

Many Hazaras engage in various sports, including football, volleyball, wrestling, martial arts, boxing, karate, taekwondo, judo, wushu, Jujitsu, cricket, tennis, and more. Pahlawan Ebrahim Khedri, a 62 kg wrestler, was the national champion in Afghanistan for two decades. Another famous Hazara wrestler, Wakil Hussain Allahdad, was killed in the suicide bombing in Dashte Barchi, Kabul, on 22 April 2018.

Rohullah Nikpai, won a bronze medal in Taekwondo at the 2008 Beijing Olympics, defeating world champion Juan Antonio Ramos of Spain 4–1 in the playoff final. This achievement marked Afghanistan&#x27;s first-ever Olympic medal. He then won a second Olympic medal for Afghanistan at the London 2012 Games.

Another notable Hazara athlete, Sayed Abdul Jalil Waiz, was the first badminton player to represent Afghanistan in the Asian Junior Championships in 2005, where he secured the first win for his country against Iraq with scores of 15–13 and 15–1. He has participated in several international championships since 2005, achieving victories against competitors from Australia, the Philippines, and Mongolia. Hamid Rahimi is a Hazara boxer from Afghanistan who currently lives in Germany. Hussain Sadiqi is a Hazara Australian martial artist who won an award for the best fight scene in an Australian-made action movie.

Hazara football players include Zohib Islam Amiri, who currently plays for the Afghanistan national football team; Moshtaq Yaqoubi, an Afghan-Finnish footballer who plays for HIFK; Mustafa Amini, a Hazara Australian footballer who plays as a midfielder for Danish Superliga club AGF and the Australian national team; Rahmat Akbari, an Australian footballer who plays as a midfielder for Brisbane Roar. Other notable players include Rohullah Iqbalzada, Omran Haydary, Zelfy Nazary, Moshtaq Ahmadi, and Zahra Mahmoodi.

Some Hazaras from Pakistan have also excelled in sports and received numerous awards, particularly in boxing, football, and field hockey.

Pakistani Hazara Abrar Hussain, a former Olympic boxer, served as the deputy director-general of the Pakistan Sports Board. He represented Pakistan three times at the Olympics and won a gold medal at the 1990 Asian Games in Beijing. Another Hazara boxer from Pakistan is Haider Ali, a Commonwealth Games gold medalist and Olympian who is currently retired. 

Former captain of the Pakistan national football team, Qayyum Changezi, was the second Pakistani footballer to score a hat trick in an international game. New Hazara youngsters are emerging in football in Pakistan, mostly from Quetta, including Muhammad Ali and Rajab Ali Hazara.

Another notable figure is Kulsoom Hazara, a Pakistani female karate champion who has won several gold, silver, and bronze medals on national and international stages, including the Pride of Pakistan Award. Other notable Hazaras in karate include Nargis Hameedullah, who became the first Pakistani woman to win an individual medal (a bronze) at the Asian Games karate championship, and Shahida Abbasi.

=== Cultural sports ===
The cultural sports of the Hazara people are those that have been passed down through generations from their ancestors.

==== Buzkashi ====
Buzkashi is a Central Asian sport in which horse-mounted players attempt to place a goat or calf carcass into a goal. It is the national sport of Afghanistan and is one of the cultural sports of the Hazara people, who continue to practice this sport in Afghanistan.

==== Tirandāzi ====

Tirandāzi is a form of archery and an ancient cultural sport of the Hazaras.

==== Pahlawani ====

Pahlawani, or Kushti, is a traditional wrestling sport practiced by the Hazaras. It has a long history in Afghanistan and is particularly significant among the Hazara community. During holidays, Pahlawani fields are set up for competitions, which are held across different age groups. This cultural sport features its own unique techniques. Due to its ancient roots and familiarity, Pahlawani has been passed down from generation to generation among the Hazaras.

== Notable people ==
== Gallery ==


== See also ==

* Hazara nationalism
* Ethnic groups in Afghanistan
* Demographics of Central Asia
* Aimaq Hazara
* Moghols

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* Hazara tribal structure, Program for Culture and Conflict Studies, US Naval Postgraduate School
* Peril and Persecution in Afghanistan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="4" end="11" title="Hazaras" label="Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="24" end="36" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="66" end="77" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247674" start="120" end="148" title="ethnic groups in Afghanistan" label="ethnic groups in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178796" start="176" end="186" title="Hazaristan" label="Hazaristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="284" end="292" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="304" end="310" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="319" end="323" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="338" end="345" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="362" end="366" title="Dari" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33398" start="371" end="379" title="Hazaragi" label="Hazaragi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="392" end="399" title="Persian languages" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="421" end="433" title="Dari Persian" label="Dari Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473370" start="453" end="486" title="Languages of Afghanistan" label="official languages of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58813662" start="599" end="608" title="List of massacres against Hazaras" label="massacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335260" start="616" end="638" title="Emirate of Afghanistan" label="Emirate of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136178" start="639" end="660" title="Hazara genocide (19th century)" label="between 1888 and 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170062" start="682" end="693" title="Persecution of Hazaras" label="persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q301585" start="768" end="789" title="religious persecution" label="religious persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q328796" start="1300" end="1320" title="Nasir Khusraw" label="Nasir Khusraw Balkhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906014" start="1481" end="1490" title="Baburnama" label="Baburnama"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="1528" end="1541" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="1543" end="1548" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572970" start="1618" end="1631" title="Hazara tribes" label="Hazara tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131418348" start="1644" end="1657" title="Sultan Masudi" label="Sultan Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452598" start="1662" end="1678" title="First Campaign against Turkoman Hazaras" label="Turkoman Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365444" start="1692" end="1708" title="Abdul Hai Habibi" label="Abdul Hai Habibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="2076" end="2083" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="2361" end="2369" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="2448" end="2460" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33398" start="2820" end="2835" title="Hazaragi" label="native language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="3105" end="3116" title="Multiracial people" label="mixed group"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="3174" end="3180" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588098" start="3182" end="3190" title="Mongolic peoples" label="Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="3196" end="3202" title="Iranic peoples" label="Iranic"/>
<link wikidata="Q405435" start="3265" end="3276" title="Aimaq people" label="Char Aimaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092093" start="3315" end="3330" title="Mongol invasion" label="Mongol invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="3452" end="3464" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="3466" end="3471" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="3492" end="3505" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906014" start="3568" end="3577" title="Baburnama" label="Baburnama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452598" start="3612" end="3628" title="First Campaign against Turkoman Hazaras" label="Turkoman Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="3665" end="3671" title="Mongols" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q768212" start="3673" end="3685" title="Turco-Mongols" label="Turco-Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="3691" end="3697" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395823" start="3718" end="3732" title="Qara&amp;#x27;unas" label="Qara&amp;#x27;unas"/>
<link wikidata="Q487829" start="3734" end="3756" title="Chagatai Khanate" label="Chagatai Turco-Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="3758" end="3767" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737645" start="3773" end="3781" title="Timurid dynasty" label="Timurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="3801" end="3811" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="4467" end="4479" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205377" start="4793" end="4799" title="Ghilji" label="Ghilji"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="5017" end="5025" title="toponymy" label="toponymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q326005" start="5123" end="5137" title="Vasily Bartold" label="Vasily Bartold"/>
<link wikidata="Q557360" start="5139" end="5152" title="Ármin Vámbéry" label="Ármin Vámbéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4361716" start="5183" end="5200" title="Ilya Pavlovich Petrushevsky" label="Ilya Petrushevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q214495" start="5489" end="5496" title="Bamiyan" label="Bamiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484458" start="5497" end="5511" title="Buddhas of Bamiyan" label="Buddha statues"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="5775" end="5780" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906014" start="5794" end="5803" title="Baburnama" label="Baburnama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572970" start="5863" end="5869" title="List of Hazara tribes" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027766" start="5882" end="5904" title="Campaign against Sultan Masudi Hazaras" label="Sultan Masaudi Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452598" start="5906" end="5922" title="First Campaign against Turkoman Hazaras" label="Turkoman Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q171349" start="6004" end="6014" title="Abbas I of Persia" label="Shah Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q161205" start="6022" end="6037" title="Safavid dynasty" label="Safavid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="6081" end="6091" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="6281" end="6299" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q32027" start="6370" end="6388" title="Dost Mohammad Khan" label="Dost Mohammad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="6532" end="6540" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872633" start="6556" end="6573" title="Battle of Uruzgan" label="Battle of Uruzgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31649" start="6608" end="6620" title="Abdur Rahman Khan" label="Abdur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q259430" start="6670" end="6688" title="Treaty of Gandomak" label="Treaty of Gandomak"/>
<link wikidata="Q233507" start="6708" end="6731" title="Second Anglo-Afghan War" label="Second Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178796" start="6780" end="6790" title="Hazaristan" label="Hazaristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315785" start="6792" end="6801" title="Turkistan" label="Turkistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721082" start="6807" end="6817" title="Kafiristan" label="Kafiristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40427" start="7120" end="7133" title="Sher Ali Khan" label="Sher Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136178" start="7263" end="7279" title="Hazara Uprisings" label="Hazara Uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q56487989" start="7377" end="7385" title="List of genocides by death toll" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="7658" end="7666" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="7670" end="7686" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q183028" start="7815" end="7822" title="Uruzgan" label="Uruzgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="7977" end="7981" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="7983" end="7996" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="7998" end="8002" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="8008" end="8013" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="8052" end="8062" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057121" start="8075" end="8089" title="Tsarist" label="Tsarist Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33398" start="8229" end="8237" title="Hazaragi" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687594" start="8239" end="8246" title="Hazara culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="8252" end="8267" title="ethnic identity" label="ethnic identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503548" start="8295" end="8312" title="Heritability" label="racial background"/>
<link wikidata="Q780294" start="8317" end="8336" title="physical appearance" label="physical appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="8462" end="8472" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="8474" end="8484" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="8486" end="8498" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="8500" end="8510" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="8516" end="8524" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="8637" end="8644" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="8814" end="8820" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="8834" end="8842" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8869" end="8874" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q334869" start="9213" end="9228" title="Habibullah Khan" label="Habibullah Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431702" start="9405" end="9414" title="Afghan Turkestan" label="Turkistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q121104" start="9419" end="9433" title="Balkh province" label="Balkh province"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="9536" end="9550" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q355610" start="9597" end="9616" title="Muhammad Nadir Shah" label="Muhammad Nadir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186111" start="9622" end="9641" title="King of Afghanistan" label="King of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665492" start="9663" end="9682" title="Abdul Khaliq Hazara (assassin)" label="Abdul Khaliq Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="9686" end="9700" title="school student" label="school student"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978159" start="9706" end="9723" title="Afghan government" label="Afghan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q152265" start="9925" end="9935" title="Zahir Shah" label="Zahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850081" start="9951" end="9957" title="1945 Hazara Rebellion" label="revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q56357828" start="9965" end="9977" title="Muhammad Ibrahim Khan (Hazara leader)" label="Ibrahim Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244978" start="10112" end="10118" title="Kuchis" label="Kuchis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="10421" end="10466" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="10484" end="10499" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="10645" end="10660" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="10703" end="10720" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Taraki government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798487" start="10787" end="10807" title="Pul-e-Charkhi prison" label="Pul-e-Charkhi prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="10821" end="10838" title="Soviet-Afghan War" label="Soviet-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="10953" end="10963" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684187" start="11077" end="11101" title="Tanzeem Nasle Nau Hazara" label="Tanzeem Nasle Nau Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="11193" end="11201" title="Islamist" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="11309" end="11340" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Soviet-backed Afghan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593815" start="11614" end="11632" title="Hazara nationalism" label="Hazara nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135114" start="11673" end="11685" title="Hizbe-Wahdat" label="Hizbe-Wahdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083533" start="11743" end="11759" title="Harakat-e Islami" label="Harakat-e Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="11789" end="11794" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q188667" start="11824" end="11843" title="Burhanuddin Rabbani" label="Burhanuddin Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="11978" end="11985" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q138123" start="12029" end="12045" title="Abdul Ali Mazari" label="Abdul Ali Mazari"/>
<link wikidata="Q309368" start="12136" end="12153" title="United Islamic Front for the Salvation of Afghanistan" label="Northern Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="12335" end="12349" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q171382" start="12391" end="12397" title="Bamyan Province" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186392" start="12399" end="12403" title="Ghor Province" label="Ghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183056" start="12405" end="12418" title="Maidan Wardak Province" label="Maidan Wardak"/>
<link wikidata="Q181220" start="12424" end="12432" title="Daykundi Province" label="Daykundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q31649" start="12698" end="12715" title="Abdur Rahman Khan" label="Abdur Rahman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484458" start="12893" end="12911" title="Buddhas of Bamiyan" label="Buddhas of Bamiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="13040" end="13048" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267302" start="13073" end="13090" title="Qazi Muhammad Isa" label="Qazi Muhammad Isa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492895" start="13098" end="13114" title="Sheikh Ali (Hazara tribe)" label="Sheikh Ali tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q160554" start="13142" end="13161" title="Muhammad Ali Jinnah" label="Muhammad Ali Jinnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q163239" start="13284" end="13295" title="Balochistan, Pakistan" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223898" start="13368" end="13391" title="All-India Muslim League" label="All-India Muslim League"/>
<link wikidata="Q983034" start="13573" end="13593" title="Sultan Ali Kishtmand" label="Sultan Ali Kishtmand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429167" start="13824" end="13837" title="Jaffar Naderi" label="Jaffar Naderi"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="14119" end="14137" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="14154" end="14180" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14188" end="14201" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="14203" end="14252" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="American and Coalition forces invaded Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q427941" start="14264" end="14283" title="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (1996–2001)" label="fall of the Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689084" start="14393" end="14397" title="Afghan National Army" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246669" start="14487" end="14502" title="Vice President of Afghanistan" label="Vice Presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q603838" start="14504" end="14513" title="Cabinet of Afghanistan" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630098" start="14519" end="14528" title="list of current governors of Afghanistan" label="governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q115596" start="14538" end="14551" title="Karim Khalili" label="Karim Khalili"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424823" start="14553" end="14566" title="Sarwar Danish" label="Sarwar Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q262364" start="14568" end="14578" title="Sima Samar" label="Sima Samar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167145" start="14580" end="14596" title="Muhammad Mohaqiq" label="Muhammad Mohaqiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q460159" start="14598" end="14611" title="Habiba Sarābi" label="Habiba Sarābi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665406" start="14613" end="14629" title="Abdul Haq Shafaq" label="Abdul Haq Shafaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429150" start="14631" end="14650" title="Sayed Anwar Rahmati" label="Sayed Anwar Rahmati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272936" start="14652" end="14671" title="Qurban Ali Urozgani" label="Qurban Ali Urozgani"/>
<link wikidata="Q31069426" start="14673" end="14697" title="Muhammad Arif Shah Jahan" label="Muhammad Arif Shah Jahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47467986" start="14699" end="14713" title="Mahmoud Baligh" label="Mahmoud Baligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429351" start="14715" end="14735" title="Sayyed Mohammad Eqbal Munib" label="Mohammad Eqbal Munib"/>
<link wikidata="Q23304516" start="14741" end="14759" title="Mohammad Asim Asim" label="Mohammad Asim Asim"/>
<link wikidata="Q127142" start="14761" end="14772" title="Azra Jafari" label="Azra Jafari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241119" start="14787" end="14801" title="Nili, Afghanistan" label="Nili, Daykundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q983034" start="14879" end="14899" title="Sultan Ali Keshtmand" label="Sultan Ali Keshtmand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428987" start="14901" end="14919" title="Abdul Wahed Sarābi" label="Abdul Wahed Sarābi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116632" start="14921" end="14931" title="Akram Yari" label="Akram Yari"/>
<link wikidata="Q18615722" start="14933" end="14950" title="Ghulam Ali Wahdat" label="Ghulam Ali Wahdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q740955" start="14952" end="14972" title="Sayed Mustafa Kazemi" label="Sayed Mustafa Kazemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28100708" start="14974" end="14994" title="Ghulam Husain Naseri" label="Ghulam Husain Naseri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663780" start="14996" end="15007" title="Abbas Noyan" label="Abbas Noyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30001727" start="15009" end="15019" title="Daoud Naji" label="Daoud Naji"/>
<link wikidata="Q31069227" start="15021" end="15039" title="Abbas Ibrahim Zada" label="Abbas Ibrahim Zada"/>
<link wikidata="Q203903" start="15041" end="15059" title="Ramazan Bashardost" label="Ramazan Bashardost"/>
<link wikidata="Q31069219" start="15061" end="15079" title="Ahmad Shah Ramazan" label="Ahmad Shah Ramazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25938142" start="15081" end="15093" title="Ahmad Behzad" label="Ahmad Behzad"/>
<link wikidata="Q31069372" start="15095" end="15121" title="Nasrullah Sadiqi Zada Nili" label="Nasrullah Sadiqi Zada Nili"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745324" start="15123" end="15136" title="Fahim Hashimy" label="Fahim Hashimy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21162694" start="15138" end="15151" title="Maryam Monsef" label="Maryam Monsef"/>
<link wikidata="Q613251" start="15676" end="15687" title="Band-e Amir" label="Band-e Amir"/>
<link wikidata="Q171382" start="15691" end="15706" title="Bamyan Province" label="Bamyan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="15724" end="15737" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q214495" start="15775" end="15781" title="Bamyan" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171382" start="15887" end="15893" title="Bamyan Province" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181220" start="15895" end="15903" title="Daykundi Province" label="Daykundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="15985" end="15995" title="ski resort" label="ski resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244978" start="16094" end="16100" title="Kuchis" label="Kuchis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43944" start="16782" end="16794" title="Hamid Karzai" label="Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262124" start="17108" end="17119" title="Afghan Peace Jirga 2010" label="Peace Jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="17322" end="17327" title="Tajiks" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="17329" end="17334" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q106768320" start="17512" end="17537" title="2021 Kabul school bombing" label="2021 Kabul school bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226749" start="17571" end="17584" title="Dashte Barchi" label="Dashte Barchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="17625" end="17630" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070585" start="17695" end="17728" title="Islamic State – Khorasan Province" label="Islamic State – Khorasan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q108102583" start="17745" end="17758" title="Fall of Kabul (2021)" label="fall of Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="17961" end="17970" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478723" start="17978" end="17997" title="La Trobe University" label="La Trobe University"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="18234" end="18252" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="18677" end="18690" title="West Eurasian" label="West Eurasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905442" start="18695" end="18708" title="Ancient East Eurasian" label="East Eurasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="18793" end="18798" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="18874" end="18879" title="Tajiks" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="18884" end="18891" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtun"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="18968" end="18974" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588098" start="18976" end="18984" title="Mongolic peoples" label="Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="18990" end="19005" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="19152" end="19158" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="19174" end="19186" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="19191" end="19200" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588098" start="19216" end="19224" title="Mongolic peoples" label="Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503548" start="19516" end="19530" title="genetic makeup" label="genetic makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="19568" end="19573" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="19575" end="19581" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="19583" end="19589" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="19591" end="19597" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="19603" end="19609" title="Mongols" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="19738" end="19748" title="Mongolians" label="Mongolians"/>
<link wikidata="Q26764649" start="19750" end="19761" title="East Asians" label="East Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453813" start="19766" end="19779" title="Indo-Iranians" label="Indo-Iranians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="20924" end="20930" title="Tajiks" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="20932" end="20940" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060646" start="20946" end="20964" title="South Asian ethnic groups" label="Indian populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="21041" end="21055" title="Eastern Africa" label="Eastern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651742" start="21241" end="21258" title="Haplogroup C-M217 (Y-DNA)" label="haplogroup C-M217"/>
<link wikidata="Q674896" start="21292" end="21306" title="haplogroup R1b" label="haplogroup R1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="21406" end="21412" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q485348" start="21417" end="21425" title="Bashkirs" label="Bashkirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="21486" end="21498" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075999" start="22092" end="22117" title="population of Afghanistan" label="population of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136178" start="22187" end="22206" title="Hazara genocide (19th century)" label="1888–1893 uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247674" start="22493" end="22521" title="ethnic groups in Afghanistan" label="ethnic groups in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178796" start="22549" end="22559" title="Hazaristan" label="Hazaristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31649" start="22926" end="22938" title="Abdur Rahman Khan" label="Abdur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136178" start="22944" end="22956" title="1888–1893 Hazara uprisings" label="1888 to 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="22983" end="22996" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="23011" end="23026" title="Russian Empire" label="Tsarist Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="23049" end="23059" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="23061" end="23071" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="23073" end="23085" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="23091" end="23101" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="23141" end="23150" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764" start="23155" end="23162" title="Bukhara" label="Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="23418" end="23439" title="British Raj" label="British colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="23447" end="23466" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="23547" end="23560" title="working-class" label="working-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="23624" end="23632" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="23758" end="23764" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q989092" start="23794" end="23816" title="First Anglo-Afghan War" label="First Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="23877" end="23882" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250182" start="23955" end="23977" title="government of Pakistan" label="government of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858207" start="24026" end="24054" title="ethnic groups of Pakistan" label="country&amp;#x27;s ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q163239" start="24094" end="24105" title="Balochistan, Pakistan" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="24133" end="24139" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870518" start="24182" end="24193" title="Hazara Town" label="Hazara Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809713" start="24198" end="24206" title="Mariabad" label="Mariabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639447" start="24478" end="24496" title="Pakistan Air Force" label="Pakistan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267302" start="24528" end="24545" title="Qazi Muhammad Isa" label="Qazi Muhammad Isa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918416" start="24547" end="24564" title="General Musa Khan" label="General Musa Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39012074" start="24591" end="24630" title="Commander-in-Chief of the Pakistan Army" label="Commander-in-Chief of the Pakistan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q407517" start="24650" end="24661" title="Air Marshal" label="Air Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489441" start="24662" end="24682" title="Sharbat Ali Changezi" label="Sharbat Ali Changezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639447" start="24702" end="24720" title="Pakistan Air Force" label="Pakistan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949510" start="24740" end="24759" title="Hussain Ali Yousafi" label="Hussain Ali Yousafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687570" start="24787" end="24810" title="Hazara Democratic Party" label="Hazara Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983137" start="24816" end="24836" title="Sayed Nasir Ali Shah" label="Sayed Nasir Ali Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983325" start="24907" end="24932" title="Haji Sayed Hussain Hazara" label="Haji Sayed Hussain Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665089" start="24970" end="24989" title="Pakistan Parliament" label="Pakistan Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="25001" end="25011" title="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq" label="Zia-ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746169" start="25086" end="25103" title="Lashkar-e-Jhangvi" label="Lashkar-e-Jhangvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="25238" end="25256" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687570" start="25398" end="25421" title="Hazara Democratic Party" label="Hazara Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665489" start="25468" end="25487" title="Abdul Khaliq Hazara (Politician)" label="Abdul Khaliq Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="25525" end="25529" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="25850" end="25855" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q950481" start="25880" end="25895" title="Treaty of Paris (1857)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q159416" start="25924" end="25941" title="Naser al-Din Shah" label="Naser al-Din Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="25987" end="26003" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Greater Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="26234" end="26246" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Qajar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q207991" start="26262" end="26276" title="Pahlavi dynasty" label="Pahlavi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q56365500" start="26289" end="26315" title="Muhammad Yusuf Khan Hazara" label="Muhammad Yusuf Khan Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="26373" end="26378" title="Sunni" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q16051001" start="26443" end="26461" title="National Consultative Assembly" label="Iranian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="26548" end="26560" title="legislatures" label="legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818136" start="26581" end="26590" title="Attarwala" label="Attarwala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="26643" end="26650" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="26652" end="26657" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="26694" end="26700" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="26740" end="26744" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q83653" start="26779" end="26787" title="Jahangir" label="Jahangir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070" start="26850" end="26859" title="Ahmedabad" label="Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q158467" start="26864" end="26871" title="Gwalior" label="Gwalior"/>
<link wikidata="Q652376" start="26873" end="26879" title="Ratlam" label="Ratlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708114" start="26885" end="26891" title="Godhra" label="Godhra"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="26970" end="26996" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094977" start="27095" end="27100" title="ittar" label="ittar"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="27234" end="27252" title="partition of India" label="partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="27287" end="27295" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279267" start="27367" end="27386" title="Alessandro Monsutti" label="Alessandro Monsutti"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="27408" end="27423" title="anthropological" label="anthropological"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="27434" end="27443" title="Human migration" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479024" start="27683" end="27713" title="Sectarianism in Pakistan" label="sectarian violence in Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="27771" end="27780" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="27782" end="27793" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="27795" end="27801" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="27807" end="27820" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="27826" end="27840" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="27863" end="27878" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="27899" end="27905" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="27910" end="27917" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681747" start="28196" end="28208" title="Tampa affair" label="Tampa affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="28278" end="28287" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q325935" start="28298" end="28318" title="MV Tampa" label="MV &amp;quot;Tampa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="28344" end="28349" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="28759" end="28771" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="28776" end="28786" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="28921" end="28934" title="Afghan Tajiks" label="Afghan Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="28939" end="28947" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147843" start="29236" end="29248" title="Aimaq Hazara" label="Aimaq Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="29271" end="29283" title="semi-nomadic" label="semi-nomadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189964" start="29308" end="29312" title="felt" label="felt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680" start="29313" end="29318" title="yurts" label="yurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687594" start="29424" end="29432" title="Hazara culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950042" start="29728" end="29733" title="Barak (cloth)" label="barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q113946425" start="29769" end="29772" title="Hazara hat" label="hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q474959" start="30155" end="30166" title="Myalgia" label="muscle pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q683498" start="30194" end="30204" title="Arthralgia" label="joint pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048455" start="30263" end="30279" title="perahan o tunban" label="perahan o tunban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460567" start="30308" end="30314" title="turban" label="turban"/>
<link wikidata="Q39908" start="30416" end="30422" title="Trousers" label="tunban"/>
<link wikidata="Q198763" start="30426" end="30438" title="undergarment" label="undergarment"/>
<link wikidata="Q243519" start="30565" end="30571" title="velvet" label="velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066766" start="30573" end="30577" title="zari" label="zari"/>
<link wikidata="Q504825" start="30582" end="30585" title="Net (textile)" label="net"/>
<link wikidata="Q463843" start="31087" end="31094" title="chador" label="chadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="31254" end="31263" title="Jewellery" label="ornaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q189299" start="31388" end="31396" title="necklace" label="necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053956" start="31411" end="31415" title="bead" label="bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q160464" start="31418" end="31424" title="button" label="button"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537455" start="31427" end="31433" title="bangle" label="bangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201664" start="31455" end="31463" title="bracelet" label="bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460567" start="31721" end="31727" title="turbans" label="turban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="31731" end="31739" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060372" start="31803" end="31816" title="Central Asian cuisine" label="Central Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566053" start="31818" end="31829" title="South Asian cuisine" label="South Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342397" start="31835" end="31842" title="Persian cuisine" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="32095" end="32099" title="Dari" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33398" start="32108" end="32116" title="Hazaragi" label="Hazaragi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="32117" end="32124" title="Persian dialects" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="32132" end="32148" title="Persian language" label="Persian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145236" start="32174" end="32196" title="Encyclopaedia of Islam" label="Encyclopaedia of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="32271" end="32279" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="32310" end="32333" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="32412" end="32421" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="32426" end="32432" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139550" start="32457" end="32478" title="Encyclopaedia Iranica" label="Encyclopaedia Iranica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473370" start="33061" end="33093" title="Languages of Afghanistan" label="official language of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="33621" end="33626" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="33655" end="33673" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768199" start="33698" end="33724" title="Great Russian Encyclopedia" label="Great Russian Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="34064" end="34069" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="34093" end="34103" title="Shia Islam" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="34143" end="34148" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="34186" end="34199" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ilism" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731064" start="34204" end="34228" title="Non-denominational Islam" label="Non-denominational Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075999" start="34246" end="34275" title="Demographics of Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170062" start="34333" end="34360" title="Persecution of Hazaras" label="discrimination Hazaras face"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="34445" end="34455" title="Shia Islam" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q161205" start="34607" end="34622" title="Safavid dynasty" label="Safavid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="34701" end="34714" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q31649" start="34784" end="34796" title="Abdul Rahman Khan" label="Abdul Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178796" start="34818" end="34830" title="Hazarajat" label="Hazara lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136178" start="34947" end="34962" title="Hazara genocide (19th century)" label="Hazara genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q188933" start="35020" end="35025" title="Kabul province" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q170309" start="35027" end="35034" title="Baghlan province" label="Baghlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172052" start="35036" end="35043" title="Badghis province" label="Badghis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186392" start="35045" end="35049" title="Ghor province" label="Ghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q186418" start="35051" end="35057" title="Kunduz province" label="Kunduz"/>
<link wikidata="Q181235" start="35059" end="35067" title="Panjshir province" label="Panjshir"/>
<link wikidata="Q171382" start="35069" end="35075" title="Bamyan province" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165376" start="35077" end="35087" title="Badakhshan province" label="Badakhshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188157" start="35093" end="35099" title="Parwan province" label="Parwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="35148" end="35157" title="Bey" label="chieftain"/>
<link wikidata="Q26396" start="35176" end="35195" title="Qala e Naw" label="Qala-e-Naw, Badghis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662997" start="35265" end="35278" title="Herat (1793–1863)" label="Herat in 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="35340" end="35348" title="Qandahar" label="Qandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q826769" start="35360" end="35374" title="Maiwand" label="Maiwand desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q989092" start="35386" end="35408" title="First Anglo-Afghan War" label="First Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302518" start="35434" end="35460" title="Afghan Civil War (1996–2001)" label="1996-2001 Afghan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="35466" end="35473" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="35558" end="35571" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ilism" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q188933" start="35617" end="35622" title="Kabul province" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q188157" start="35624" end="35630" title="Parwan province" label="Parwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170309" start="35632" end="35639" title="Baghlan province" label="Baghlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171382" start="35641" end="35647" title="Bamyan province" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183056" start="35649" end="35662" title="Maidan Wardak province" label="Maidan Wardak"/>
<link wikidata="Q183015" start="35664" end="35672" title="Samangan province" label="Samangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q139126" start="35678" end="35683" title="Zabul province" label="Zabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170062" start="35771" end="35788" title="Persecution of Hazaras" label="political reasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="35858" end="35863" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492895" start="35903" end="35913" title="Sheikh Ali (Hazara tribe)" label="Sheikh Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122605" start="35915" end="35922" title="Jaghori (Hazara tribe)" label="Jaghori"/>
<link wikidata="Q108280273" start="35924" end="35931" title="Jaghatu (Hazara tribe)" label="Jaghatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q108311154" start="35933" end="35943" title="Qara Baghi (Hazara tribe)" label="Qara Baghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180415" start="35945" end="35954" title="Ghazni Province" label="Ghaznichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961585" start="35956" end="35971" title="Muhammad Khwaja" label="Muhammad Khwaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875006" start="35973" end="35980" title="Behsudi (Hazara tribe)" label="Behsudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209020" start="35982" end="35992" title="Dai Mirdad (Hazara tribe)" label="Dai Mirdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855462" start="35994" end="36002" title="Turkmun (Hazara tribe)" label="Turkmani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901572" start="36004" end="36012" title="Uruzgani (Hazara tribe)" label="Uruzgani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209179" start="36014" end="36022" title="Daikundi (Hazara tribe)" label="Daikundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209847" start="36024" end="36032" title="Daizangi (Hazara tribe)" label="Daizangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208981" start="36034" end="36043" title="Dai Chopan (Hazara tribe)" label="Daichopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209852" start="36045" end="36054" title="Daizinyat (Hazara tribe)" label="Daizinyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687559" start="36064" end="36071" title="Qarlugh (Hazara tribe)" label="Qarlugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147843" start="36073" end="36085" title="Aimaq Hazara" label="Aimaq Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178796" start="36127" end="36137" title="Hazaristan" label="Hazaristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188157" start="36163" end="36169" title="Parwan province" label="Parwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171382" start="36171" end="36177" title="Bamyan province" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180415" start="36179" end="36185" title="Ghazni province" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q186392" start="36187" end="36191" title="Ghor province" label="Ghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183028" start="36193" end="36200" title="Uruzgan province" label="Uruzgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181220" start="36202" end="36210" title="Daikundi province" label="Daikundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183056" start="36216" end="36229" title="Maidan Wardak province" label="Maidan Wardak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064681" start="36427" end="36446" title="Faiz Muhammad Kateb" label="Faiz Muhammad Kateb"/>
<link wikidata="Q207817" start="36448" end="36468" title="Amir Khosrow Dehlavi" label="Amir Khosrow Dehlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859548" start="36470" end="36483" title="Ismael Balkhi" label="Ismael Balkhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679795" start="36485" end="36498" title="Hassan Poladi" label="Hassan Poladi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729563" start="36500" end="36513" title="Kazim Yazdani" label="Kazim Yazdani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945389" start="36515" end="36532" title="Ali Mohaqiq Nasab" label="Ali Mohaqiq Nasab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152406" start="36534" end="36550" title="Kamran Mir Hazar" label="Kamran Mir Hazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14252772" start="36552" end="36563" title="Basir Ahang" label="Basir Ahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660308" start="36565" end="36584" title="Sayed Askar Mousavi" label="Sayed Askar Mousavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724693" start="36586" end="36598" title="Ali Baba Taj" label="Ali Baba Taj"/>
<link wikidata="Q61746866" start="36600" end="36624" title="Sayed Abutalib Mozaffari" label="Sayed Abutalib Mozaffari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557470" start="36626" end="36642" title="Rahnaward Zaryab" label="Rahnaward Zaryab"/>
<link wikidata="Q29886435" start="36648" end="36659" title="Aziz Royesh" label="Aziz Royesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236973" start="36768" end="36775" title="dambura" label="dambura"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="36854" end="36864" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="36866" end="36876" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="36882" end="36892" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56367310" start="36947" end="36962" title="Sarwar Sarkhosh" label="Sarwar Sarkhosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347166" start="36964" end="36979" title="Dawood Sarkhosh" label="Dawood Sarkhosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398432" start="36981" end="36996" title="Safdar Tawakoli" label="Safdar Tawakoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q65197036" start="37002" end="37018" title="Sayed Anwar Azad" label="Sayed Anwar Azad"/>
<link wikidata="Q265147" start="37034" end="37053" title="Revolutionary song" label="Revolutionary hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521728" start="37287" end="37295" title="ghaychak" label="ghaychak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="37472" end="37492" title="stringed instruments" label="stringed instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310017" start="37520" end="37529" title="Pakistani" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q299073" start="37539" end="37560" title="Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan" label="Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875006" start="37605" end="37612" title="Behsudi (Hazara tribe)" label="Behsudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="37646" end="37652" title="Film industry" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843545" start="37749" end="37763" title="Hussain Sadiqi" label="Hussain Sadiqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667579" start="37765" end="37780" title="Abid Ali Nazish" label="Abid Ali Nazish"/>
<link wikidata="Q113711982" start="37782" end="37797" title="Shamila Shirzad" label="Shamila Shirzad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608877" start="37799" end="37813" title="Nikbakht Noruz" label="Nikbakht Noruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="37893" end="37901" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="37903" end="37913" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="37915" end="37924" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="37926" end="37938" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="37940" end="37946" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="37948" end="37954" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="37956" end="37965" title="taekwondo" label="taekwondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="37967" end="37971" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479346" start="37973" end="37978" title="wushu (sport)" label="wushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="37980" end="37987" title="Jujutsu" label="Jujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="37989" end="37996" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="37998" end="38004" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560409" start="38016" end="38039" title="Mohammad Ebrahim Khedri" label="Pahlawan Ebrahim Khedri"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162236" start="38149" end="38171" title="Wakil Hussain Allahdad" label="Wakil Hussain Allahdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q52108280" start="38191" end="38206" title="22 April 2018 Kabul suicide bombing" label="suicide bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226749" start="38210" end="38223" title="Dashte Barchi" label="Dashte Barchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q230854" start="38251" end="38266" title="Rohullah Nikpai" label="Rohullah Nikpai"/>
<link wikidata="Q873364" start="38274" end="38286" title="bronze medal" label="bronze medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="38290" end="38299" title="Taekwondo" label="Taekwondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="38312" end="38328" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="Beijing Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q709596" start="38355" end="38373" title="Juan Antonio Ramos" label="Juan Antonio Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="38626" end="38635" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="38918" end="38927" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="38933" end="38944" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="38950" end="38958" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q835570" start="38960" end="38972" title="Hamid Rahimi" label="Hamid Rahimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843545" start="39040" end="39054" title="Hussain Sadiqi" label="Hussain Sadiqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48796372" start="39060" end="39077" title="Hazara Australian" label="Hazara Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020604" start="39123" end="39134" title="stage combat" label="fight scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131329" start="39204" end="39221" title="Zohib Islam Amiri" label="Zohib Islam Amiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q192966" start="39251" end="39285" title="Afghanistan national football team" label="Afghanistan national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916263" start="39287" end="39302" title="Moshtaq Yaqoubi" label="Moshtaq Yaqoubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q85739971" start="39307" end="39321" title="Afghans in Finland" label="Afghan-Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336634" start="39347" end="39351" title="HIFK Fotboll" label="HIFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q745506" start="39353" end="39366" title="Mustafa Amini" label="Mustafa Amini"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="39414" end="39424" title="midfielder" label="midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q204752" start="39429" end="39445" title="Danish Superliga" label="Danish Superliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q301431" start="39451" end="39454" title="Aarhus Gymnastikforening" label="AGF"/>
<link wikidata="Q268208" start="39463" end="39487" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="Australian national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q41658797" start="39489" end="39502" title="Rahmat Akbari" label="Rahmat Akbari"/>
<link wikidata="Q839997" start="39559" end="39572" title="Brisbane Roar FC" label="Brisbane Roar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22005562" start="39604" end="39622" title="Roholla Iqbalzadeh" label="Rohullah Iqbalzada"/>
<link wikidata="Q40567185" start="39624" end="39637" title="Omran Haydary" label="Omran Haydary"/>
<link wikidata="Q57313651" start="39639" end="39651" title="Zelfy Nazary" label="Zelfy Nazary"/>
<link wikidata="Q108558277" start="39653" end="39667" title="Moshtaq Ahmadi" label="Moshtaq Ahmadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62591339" start="39673" end="39687" title="Zahra Mahmoodi" label="Zahra Mahmoodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="39814" end="39826" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q331174" start="39846" end="39859" title="Abrar Hussain (boxer)" label="Abrar Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125703" start="39930" end="39951" title="Pakistan Sports Board" label="Pakistan Sports Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q729561" start="40033" end="40049" title="1990 Asian Games" label="1990 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="40053" end="40060" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4062214" start="40100" end="40110" title="Haider Ali (boxer)" label="Haider Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="40114" end="40132" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40151" end="40159" title="Boxing at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Featherweight" label="Olympian"/>
<link wikidata="Q390989" start="40210" end="40241" title="Pakistan national football team" label="Pakistan national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q121462939" start="40243" end="40258" title="Qayyum Changezi" label="Qayyum Changezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="40415" end="40421" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10553031" start="40433" end="40445" title="Muhammad Ali (footballer, born 1989)" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q123253638" start="40450" end="40466" title="Rajab Ali (footballer)" label="Rajab Ali Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q102036355" start="40495" end="40509" title="Kulsoom Hazara" label="Kulsoom Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683676" start="40650" end="40673" title="Pride of Performance" label="Pride of Pakistan Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q56249075" start="40715" end="40733" title="Nargis Hameedullah" label="Nargis Hameedullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q483463" start="40817" end="40828" title="Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q102036048" start="40854" end="40868" title="Shahida Abbasi" label="Shahida Abbasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q745218" start="41035" end="41043" title="Buzkashi" label="Buzkashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="41119" end="41123" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935" start="41127" end="41131" title="calf (animal)" label="calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="41323" end="41332" title="Archery" label="Tirandāzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404776" start="41422" end="41431" title="Pahlawani" label="Pahlawani"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="41461" end="41470" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593815" start="41941" end="41959" title="Hazara nationalism" label="Hazara nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247674" start="41962" end="41990" title="Ethnic groups in Afghanistan" label="Ethnic groups in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256126" start="41993" end="42021" title="Demographics of Central Asia" label="Demographics of Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147843" start="42024" end="42036" title="Aimaq Hazara" label="Aimaq Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11937170" start="42039" end="42046" title="Moghols" label="Moghols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515048" start="42187" end="42215" title="US Naval Postgraduate School" label="US Naval Postgraduate School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14132" wikidata="Q1123811" url="?curid=14132" title="Hawala">
<text>Hawala or hewala ( , meaning &quot;transfer&quot; or sometimes &quot;trust&quot;), originating in India as havala (), also known as &#x27; in Persian, and &#x27; or  in Somali, is a popular and informal value transfer system based on the performance and honour of a huge network of money brokers (known as &quot;hawaladars&quot;). They operate outside of, or parallel to, traditional banking, financial channels and remittance systems. The system requires a minimum of two hawaladars that take care of the &quot;transaction&quot; without the movement of cash or telegraphic transfer. While hawaladars are spread throughout the world, they are primarily located in the Middle East, North Africa, the Horn of Africa, and the Indian subcontinent. Hawala follows Islamic traditions but its use is not limited to Muslims.

== Origins ==
The hawala system originated in India. In 2003 Hawala as a legal concept was documented, finding evidence of Hawala reaching back to 1327, in a publication by Matthias Schramm and Markus Taube, with the title &quot;Evolution and institutional foundation of the hawala financial system&quot;. 

It has been speculated that &quot;Hawala&quot; itself influenced the development of the agency in common law and in civil laws, such as the &quot;aval&quot; in French law, the aval in Portuguese law, and the &quot;avallo&quot; in Italian law. The words &quot;aval&quot; and &quot;avallo&quot; bear a similarity to &quot;hawala,&quot; and the context of intensive trade between Italian cities and the Muslim world suggests a possible link. The transfer of debt was &quot;not permissible under Roman law but became widely practiced in medieval Europe, especially in commercial transactions&quot;, potentially borrowing from hawala. Agency was also &quot;an institution unknown to Roman law&quot; as no &quot;individual could conclude a binding contract on behalf of another as his agent&quot;. On the other hand, Islamic law and the later common law &quot;had no difficulty in accepting agency as one of its institutions in the field of contracts and of obligations in general&quot;. The claims about the Islamic origins of hawala have later been challenged by Cinar.

==Regulation==
Following the September 11 attacks in 2001, international organizations responsible for counterterrorism and enforcing laws against money laundering have directed their efforts on identifying problems within the hawala, as well as other remittance systems. The First International Conference on Hawala in May 2002 published the &quot;Regulatory Frameworks for Hawala and Other Remittance Systems&quot;. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) contributed a chapter, in which informal value transfer systems were considered. According to the IMF, countries with limited financial services experience macroeconomic consequences because residents rely heavily on informal fund transfer systems. Informal value transfer systems share common characteristics, including anonymity and lack of regulation or official scrutiny. Therefore informal value transfer systems may be susceptible to use by criminal organizations for money laundering and terrorist financing.

== Procedure ==
In the most basic variant of the hawala system, money is transferred via a network of hawala brokers, or &quot;hawaladars&quot;, without actually moving money. According to the author Sam Vaknin, there are large hawaladar operators with networks of middlemen in cities across many countries, but most hawaladars are small businesses who work at hawala as a sideline or moonlighting operation.

In general, the process of hawala operates as follows:

# Sending money: The sender provides a sum of money to a hawala agent known as the sending broker. This money is intended for the recipient in another city, often in a foreign country.
# Providing instructions: Along with the money, the sender provides a code or password (token) to the sending broker. This token serves as a key for the recipient to receive the money.
# Communicating the token: The sender informs the recipient of the token, either directly or through a different channel like a phone call or more recently, electronic messaging.
# Initiating transfer: The sending broker contacts another hawala agent, the receiving broker, located in the recipient&#x27;s area. They inform the receiving broker about the money to be transferred and provide the token necessary for the recipient to collect the funds.
# Receiving money: The recipient approaches the Receiving broker, who disburses the transferred sum to them, usually after deducting a small commission.
# Trust mechanism: Hawala relies on a system of trust between brokers. The sending broker owes the receiving broker the amount disbursed to the recipient. This trust is established over time and through established relationships within the hawala network. Despite the absence of formal documentation, hawala transactions heavily depend on the reputation and reliability of the brokers involved.
# Maintaining integrity: The hawala network ensures integrity and trust by carefully vetting new brokers and maintaining strict adherence to established protocols and codes of conduct. Reputation within the network is paramount, and any breach of trust can result in severe consequences, including ostracism from the network.

The unique feature of the system is that no promissory instruments are exchanged between the hawala brokers; the transaction takes place entirely on the honour system. As the system does not depend on the legal enforceability of claims, it can operate even in the absence of a legal and juridical environment. Trust and extensive use of connections are the components that distinguish it from other remittance systems. Hawaladar networks are often based on membership in the same family, village, clan or ethnic group, and cheating is punished by effective excommunication and the loss of honour, which lead to severe economic hardship.

Informal records are produced of individual transactions, and a running tally of the amount owed by one broker to another is kept. Settlements of debts between hawala brokers can take a variety of forms (such as goods, services, properties, transfers of employees, etc.), and need not take the form of direct cash transactions.

In addition to commissions, hawala brokers often earn their profits through bypassing official exchange rates. Generally, the funds enter the system in the source country&#x27;s currency and leave the system in the recipient country&#x27;s currency. As settlements often take place without any foreign exchange transactions, they can be made at other than official exchange rates.

Hawala is attractive to customers because it provides a fast and convenient transfer of funds, usually with a far lower commission than that charged by banks. Its advantages are most pronounced when the receiving country applies unprofitable exchange rate regulations or when the banking system in the receiving country is less complex (e.g., due to differences in the legal environment in places such as Afghanistan, Yemen, and Somalia). Moreover, in some parts of the world, it is the only option for legitimate fund transfers. It has been used even by aid organizations in areas in which it is the best-functioning institution.

== Regional variants ==
Dubai has been prominent for decades as a welcoming hub for hawala transactions worldwide.

=== South Asia ===

==== Hundis ====
The &quot;hundi&quot; is a financial instrument that developed on the Indian sub-continent for use in trade and credit transactions. Hundis are used as a form of remittance instrument to transfer money from place to place, as a form of credit instrument or IOU to borrow money and as a bill of exchange in trade transactions. The Reserve Bank of India describes the Hundi as &quot;an unconditional order in writing made by a person directing another to pay a certain sum of money to a person named in the order.&quot;

=== Horn of Africa ===
According to the CIA, with the dissolution of Somalia&#x27;s formal banking system, many informal money transfer operators arose to fill the void. It estimates that such &quot;hawaladars&quot;, &quot;xawilaad&quot; or &quot;xawala&quot; brokers are now responsible for the transfer of up to $1.6 billion per year in remittances to the country, most coming from working Somalis outside Somalia. Such funds have in turn had a stimulating effect on local business activity.

=== West Africa ===
The 2012 Tuareg rebellion left Northern Mali without an official money transfer service for months. The coping mechanisms that appeared were patterned on the hawala system.

== See also ==

* FATF blacklist
* Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF)
* Hawala and crime
* Hawala scandal
* Informal value transfer system
* Jizya
* Global ranking of remittance by nations
* Remittances to India
* Riba
* Terrorism financing
* Zakat

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1123811" start="0" end="6" title="Hawala" label="Hawala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123811" start="10" end="16" title="Hawala" label="hewala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123811" start="107" end="113" title="Hawala" label="havala"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="142" end="149" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123811" start="165" end="165" title="Hawala" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="169" end="175" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030580" start="194" end="224" title="informal value transfer system" label="informal value transfer system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="416" end="426" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647187" start="562" end="582" title="telegraphic transfer" label="telegraphic transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="668" end="679" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="681" end="693" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="699" end="713" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="723" end="742" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="759" end="764" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="808" end="815" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q835173" start="1214" end="1220" title="Agency (law)" label="agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="1224" end="1234" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q222249" start="1242" end="1252" title="civil law (private law)" label="civil laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195493" start="1286" end="1296" title="Law of France" label="French law"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1302" end="1306" title=":pt:aval" label="aval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039817" start="1310" end="1324" title="Portuguese law" label="Portuguese law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="1581" end="1585" title="debt" label="debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="1618" end="1627" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166072" start="1690" end="1712" title="commercial transaction" label="commercial transaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q835173" start="1756" end="1762" title="Agent (law)" label="Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="2222" end="2242" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="2296" end="2312" title="counterterrorism" label="counterterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="2340" end="2356" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="2445" end="2455" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2615" end="2642" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030580" start="2681" end="2711" title="informal value transfer system" label="informal value transfer system"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="2775" end="2793" title="financial services" label="financial services"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="2805" end="2818" title="macroeconomic" label="macroeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q308859" start="2970" end="2979" title="anonymity" label="anonymity"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="2992" end="3002" title="regulation" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439360" start="3015" end="3023" title="scrutiny" label="scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703925" start="3144" end="3163" title="terrorist financing" label="terrorist financing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470570" start="3366" end="3376" title="Sam Vaknin" label="Sam Vaknin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863649" start="3551" end="3563" title="Side job" label="moonlighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q190122" start="5372" end="5394" title="promissory note" label="promissory instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084335" start="5481" end="5494" title="honour system" label="honour system"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="6390" end="6403" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="7333" end="7338" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359388" start="7748" end="7764" title="bill of exchange" label="bill of exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="7792" end="7813" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="8021" end="8024" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525846" start="8500" end="8521" title="Tuareg rebellion (2012)" label="2012 Tuareg rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q607466" start="8688" end="8702" title="FATF blacklist" label="FATF blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q681487" start="8705" end="8752" title="Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering" label="Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181314" start="8762" end="8778" title="Hawala and crime" label="Hawala and crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4494441" start="8781" end="8795" title="Hawala scandal" label="Hawala scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030580" start="8798" end="8828" title="Informal value transfer system" label="Informal value transfer system"/>
<link wikidata="Q461786" start="8831" end="8836" title="Jizya" label="Jizya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="8839" end="8878" title="Remittance" label="Global ranking of remittance by nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053213" start="8881" end="8901" title="Remittances to India" label="Remittances to India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518246" start="8904" end="8908" title="Riba" label="Riba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703925" start="8911" end="8930" title="Terrorism financing" label="Terrorism financing"/>
<link wikidata="Q124058" start="8933" end="8938" title="Zakat" label="Zakat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14133" wikidata="Q191667" url="?curid=14133" title="Hydroponics">
<text>Hydroponics is a type of horticulture and a subset of hydroculture which involves growing plants, usually crops or medicinal plants, without soil, by using water-based mineral nutrient solutions in an artificial environment. Terrestrial or aquatic plants may grow freely with their roots exposed to the nutritious liquid or the roots may be mechanically supported by an inert medium such as perlite, gravel, or other substrates.

Despite inert media, roots can cause changes of the rhizosphere pH and root exudates can affect rhizosphere biology and physiological balance of the nutrient solution when secondary metabolites are produced in plants. Transgenic plants grown hydroponically allow the release of pharmaceutical proteins as part of the root exudate into the hydroponic medium.

The nutrients used in hydroponic systems can come from many different organic or inorganic sources, including fish excrement, duck manure, purchased chemical fertilizers, or artificial standard or hybrid nutrient solutions.

In contrast to field cultivation, plants are commonly grown hydroponically in a greenhouse or contained environment on inert media, adapted to the controlled-environment agriculture (CEA) process. Plants commonly grown hydroponically include tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers, strawberries, lettuces, and cannabis, usually for commercial use, as well as &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot;, which serves as a model organism in plant science and genetics.

Hydroponics offers many advantages, notably a decrease in water usage in agriculture. To grow of tomatoes using

* intensive farming methods requires of water; 
* using hydroponics, ; and 
* only using aeroponics.

Hydroponic cultures lead to highest biomass and protein production compared to other growth substrates, of plants cultivated in the same environmental conditions and supplied with equal amounts of nutrients.

Hydroponics is not only used on earth, but has also proven itself in plant production experiments in Earth orbit.

== History ==

The earliest published work on growing terrestrial plants without soil was the 1627 book &quot;Sylva Sylvarum&quot; or &#x27;A Natural History&#x27; by Francis Bacon, printed a year after his death. As a result of his work, water culture became a popular research technique. In 1699, John Woodward published his water culture experiments with spearmint. He found that plants in less-pure water sources grew better than plants in distilled water. By 1842, a list of nine elements believed to be essential for plant growth had been compiled, and the discoveries of German botanists Julius von Sachs and Wilhelm Knop, in the years 1859–1875, resulted in a development of the technique of soilless cultivation. To quote von Sachs directly: &quot;In the year 1860, I published the results of experiments which demonstrated that land plants are capable of absorbing their nutritive matters out of watery solutions, without the aid of soil, and that it is possible in this way not only to maintain plants alive and growing for a long time, as had long been known, but also to bring about a vigorous increase of their organic substance, and even the production of seed capable of germination.&quot; Growth of terrestrial plants without soil in mineral nutrient solutions was later called &quot;solution culture&quot; in reference to &quot;soil culture&quot;. It quickly became a standard research and teaching technique in the 19th and 20th centuries and is still widely used in plant nutrition science.

Around the 1930s plant nutritionists investigated diseases of certain plants, and thereby, observed symptoms related to existing soil conditions such as salinity. In this context, water culture experiments were undertaken with the hope of delivering similar symptoms under controlled laboratory conditions. This approach forced by Dennis Robert Hoagland led to innovative model systems (e.g., green algae Nitella) and standardized nutrient recipes playing an increasingly important role in modern plant physiology. In 1929, William Frederick Gericke of the University of California at Berkeley began publicly promoting that the principles of solution culture be used for agricultural crop production. He first termed this cultivation method &quot;aquiculture&quot; created in analogy to &quot;agriculture&quot; but later found that the cognate term aquaculture was already applied to culture of aquatic organisms. Gericke created a sensation by growing tomato vines high in his backyard in mineral nutrient solutions rather than soil. He then introduced the term &quot;Hydroponics&quot;, water culture, in 1937, proposed to him by W. A. Setchell, a phycologist with an extensive education in the classics. Hydroponics is derived from neologism υδρωπονικά (derived from Greek ύδωρ=water and πονέω=cultivate), constructed in analogy to γεωπονικά (derived from Greek γαία=earth and πονέω=cultivate), geoponica, that which concerns agriculture, replacing, γεω-, earth, with ὑδρο-, water.

Despite initial successes, however, Gericke realized that the time was not yet ripe for the general technical application and commercial use of hydroponics for producing crops. He also wanted to make sure all aspects of hydroponic cultivation were researched and tested before making any of the specifics available to the public. Reports of Gericke&#x27;s work and his claims that hydroponics would revolutionize plant agriculture prompted a huge number of requests for further information. Gericke had been denied use of the university&#x27;s greenhouses for his experiments due to the administration&#x27;s skepticism, and when the university tried to compel him to release his preliminary nutrient recipes developed at home, he requested greenhouse space and time to improve them using appropriate research facilities. While he was eventually provided greenhouse space, the university assigned Hoagland and Arnon to re-evaluate Gericke&#x27;s claims and show his formula held no benefit over soil grown plant yields, a view held by Hoagland. Because of these irreconcilable conflicts, Gericke left his academic position in 1937 in a climate that was politically unfavorable and continued his research independently in his greenhouse. In 1940, Gericke, whose work is considered to be the basis for all forms of hydroponic growing, published the book, &quot;Complete Guide to Soilless Gardening&quot;. Therein, for the first time, he published his basic formulas involving the macro- and micronutrient salts for hydroponically-grown plants.

As a result of research of Gericke&#x27;s claims by order of the Director of the &quot;California Agricultural Experiment Station&quot; of the University of California, Claude Hutchison, Dennis Hoagland and Daniel Arnon wrote a classic 1938 agricultural bulletin, &quot;The Water Culture Method for Growing Plants Without Soil&quot;, one of the most important works on solution culture ever, which made the claim that hydroponic crop yields were no better than crop yields obtained with good-quality soils. Ultimately, crop yields would be limited by factors other than mineral nutrients, especially light and aeration of the culture medium. However, in the introduction to his landmark book on soilless cultivation, published two years later, Gericke pointed out that the results published by Hoagland and Arnon in comparing the yields of experimental plants in sand, soil and solution cultures, were based on several systemic errors (&quot;...these experimenters have made the mistake of limiting the productive capacity of hydroponics to that of soil. Comparison can be only by growing as great a number of plants in each case as the fertility of the culture medium can support&quot;).

For example, the Hoagland and Arnon study did not adequately appreciate that hydroponics has other key benefits compared to soil culture including the fact that the roots of the plant have constant access to oxygen and that the plants have access to as much or as little water and nutrients as they need. This is important as one of the most common errors when cultivating plants is over- and underwatering; hydroponics prevents this from occurring as large amounts of water, which may drown root systems in soil, can be made available to the plant in hydroponics, and any water not used, is drained away, recirculated, or actively aerated, eliminating anoxic conditions in the root area. In soil, a grower needs to be very experienced to know exactly how much water to feed the plant. Too much and the plant will be unable to access oxygen because air in the soil pores is displaced, which can lead to root rot; too little and the plant will undergo water stress or lose the ability to absorb nutrients, which are typically moved into the roots while dissolved, leading to nutrient deficiency symptoms such as chlorosis or fertilizer burn. Eventually, Gericke&#x27;s advanced ideas led to the implementation of hydroponics into commercial agriculture while Hoagland&#x27;s views and helpful support by the University prompted Hoagland and his associates to develop several new formulas (recipes) for mineral nutrient solutions, universally known as Hoagland solution.

One of the earliest successes of hydroponics occurred on Wake Island, a rocky atoll in the Pacific Ocean used as a refueling stop for Pan American Airlines. Hydroponics was used there in the 1930s to grow vegetables for the passengers. Hydroponics was a necessity on Wake Island because there was no soil, and it was prohibitively expensive to airlift in fresh vegetables.

From 1943 to 1946, Daniel I. Arnon served as a major in the United States Army and used his prior expertise with plant nutrition to feed troops stationed on barren Ponape Island in the western Pacific by growing crops in gravel and nutrient-rich water because there was no arable land available.

In the 1960s, Allen Cooper of England developed the nutrient film technique. The Land Pavilion at Walt Disney World&#x27;s EPCOT Center opened in 1982 and prominently features a variety of hydroponic techniques.

In recent decades, NASA has done extensive hydroponic research for its Controlled Ecological Life Support System (CELSS). Hydroponics research mimicking a Martian environment uses LED lighting to grow in a different color spectrum with much less heat. Ray Wheeler, a plant physiologist at Kennedy Space Center&#x27;s Space Life Science Lab, believes that hydroponics will create advances within space travel, as a bioregenerative life support system.

As of 2017, Canada had hundreds of acres of large-scale commercial hydroponic greenhouses, producing tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers.

Due to technological advancements within the industry and numerous economic factors, the global hydroponics market is forecast to grow from US$226.45 million in 2016 to US$724.87 million by 2023.

==Techniques==
There are two main variations for each medium: sub-irrigation and top irrigation. For all techniques, most hydroponic reservoirs are now built of plastic, but other materials have been used, including concrete, glass, metal, vegetable solids, and wood. The containers should exclude light to prevent algae and fungal growth in the hydroponic medium.

===Static solution culture===

In static solution culture, plants are grown in containers of nutrient solution, such as glass Mason jars (typically, in-home applications), pots, buckets, tubs, or tanks. The solution is usually gently aerated but may be un-aerated. If un-aerated, the solution level is kept low enough that enough roots are above the solution so they get adequate oxygen. A hole is cut (or drilled) in the top of the reservoir for each plant; if it is a jar or tub, it may be its lid, but otherwise, cardboard, foil, paper, wood or metal may be put on top. A single reservoir can be dedicated to a single plant, or to various plants. Reservoir size can be increased as plant size increases. A home-made system can be constructed from food containers or glass canning jars with aeration provided by an aquarium pump, aquarium airline tubing, aquarium valves or even a biofilm of green algae on the glass, through photosynthesis. Clear containers can also be covered with aluminium foil, butcher paper, black plastic, or other material to eliminate the effects of negative phototropism. The nutrient solution is changed either on a schedule, such as once per week, or when the concentration drops below a certain level as determined with an electrical conductivity meter. Whenever the solution is depleted below a certain level, either water or fresh nutrient solution is added. A Mariotte&#x27;s bottle, or a float valve, can be used to automatically maintain the solution level. In raft solution culture, plants are placed in a sheet of buoyant plastic that is floated on the surface of the nutrient solution. That way, the solution level never drops below the roots.

===Continuous-flow solution culture===

In continuous-flow solution culture, the nutrient solution constantly flows past the roots. It is much easier to automate than the static solution culture because sampling and adjustments to the temperature, pH, and nutrient concentrations can be made in a large storage tank that has potential to serve thousands of plants. A popular variation is the nutrient film technique or NFT, whereby a very shallow stream of water containing all the dissolved nutrients required for plant growth is recirculated in a thin layer past a bare root mat of plants in a watertight channel, with an upper surface exposed to air. As a consequence, an abundant supply of oxygen is provided to the roots of the plants. A properly designed NFT system is based on using the right channel slope, the right flow rate, and the right channel length. The main advantage of the NFT system over other forms of hydroponics is that the plant roots are exposed to adequate supplies of water, oxygen, and nutrients. In all other forms of production, there is a conflict between the supply of these requirements, since excessive or deficient amounts of one results in an imbalance of one or both of the others. NFT, because of its design, provides a system where all three requirements for healthy plant growth can be met at the same time, provided that the simple concept of NFT is always remembered and practised. The result of these advantages is that higher yields of high-quality produce are obtained over an extended period of cropping. A downside of NFT is that it has very little buffering against interruptions in the flow (e.g., power outages). But, overall, it is probably one of the more productive techniques.

The same design characteristics apply to all conventional NFT systems. While slopes along channels of 1:100 have been recommended, in practice it is difficult to build a base for channels that is sufficiently true to enable nutrient films to flow without ponding in locally depressed areas. As a consequence, it is recommended that slopes of 1:30 to 1:40 are used. This allows for minor irregularities in the surface, but, even with these slopes, ponding and water logging may occur. The slope may be provided by the floor, benches or racks may hold the channels and provide the required slope. Both methods are used and depend on local requirements, often determined by the site and crop requirements.

As a general guide, flow rates for each gully should be one liter per minute. At planting, rates may be half this and the upper limit of 2 L/min appears about the maximum. Flow rates beyond these extremes are often associated with nutritional problems. Depressed growth rates of many crops have been observed when channels exceed 12 meters in length. On rapidly growing crops, tests have indicated that, while oxygen levels remain adequate, nitrogen may be depleted over the length of the gully. As a consequence, channel length should not exceed 10–15 meters. In situations where this is not possible, the reductions in growth can be eliminated by placing another nutrient feed halfway along the gully and halving the flow rates through each outlet.

===Aeroponics===

Aeroponics is a system wherein roots are continuously or discontinuously kept in an environment saturated with fine drops (a mist or aerosol) of nutrient solution. The method requires no substrate and entails growing plants with their roots suspended in a deep air or growth chamber with the roots periodically wetted with a fine mist of atomized nutrients. Excellent aeration is the main advantage of aeroponics.

Aeroponic techniques have proven to be commercially successful for propagation, seed germination, seed potato production, tomato production, leaf crops, and micro-greens. Since inventor Richard Stoner commercialized aeroponic technology in 1983, aeroponics has been implemented as an alternative to water intensive hydroponic systems worldwide. A major limitation of hydroponics is the fact that of water can only hold of air, no matter whether aerators are utilized or not.

Another distinct advantage of aeroponics over hydroponics is that any species of plants can be grown in a true aeroponic system because the microenvironment of an aeroponic can be finely controlled. Another limitation of hydroponics is that certain species of plants can only survive for so long in water before they become waterlogged. In contrast, suspended aeroponic plants receive 100% of the available oxygen and carbon dioxide to their roots zone, stems, and leaves, thus accelerating biomass growth and reducing rooting times. NASA research has shown that aeroponically grown plants have an 80% increase in dry weight biomass (essential minerals) compared to hydroponically grown plants. Aeroponics also uses 65% less water than hydroponics. NASA concluded that aeroponically grown plants require ¼ the nutrient input compared to hydroponics. Unlike hydroponically grown plants, aeroponically grown plants will not suffer transplant shock when transplanted to soil, and offers growers the ability to reduce the spread of disease and pathogens.
Aeroponics is also widely used in laboratory studies of plant physiology and plant pathology. Aeroponic techniques have been given special attention from NASA since a mist is easier to handle than a liquid in a zero-gravity environment.

===Fogponics===

Fogponics is a derivation of aeroponics wherein the nutrient solution is aerosolized by a diaphragm vibrating at ultrasonic frequencies. Solution droplets produced by this method tend to be 5–10 μm in diameter, smaller than those produced by forcing a nutrient solution through pressurized nozzles, as in aeroponics. The smaller size of the droplets allows them to diffuse through the air more easily, and deliver nutrients to the roots without limiting their access to oxygen.

===Passive sub-irrigation===
Passive sub-irrigation, also known as passive hydroponics, semi-hydroponics, or &quot;hydroculture&quot;, is a method wherein plants are grown in an inert porous medium that moves water and fertilizer to the roots by capillary action from a separate reservoir as necessary, reducing labor and providing a constant supply of water to the roots. In the simplest method, the pot sits in a shallow solution of fertilizer and water or on a capillary mat saturated with nutrient solution. The various hydroponic media available, such as expanded clay and coconut husk, contain more air space than more traditional potting mixes, delivering increased oxygen to the roots, which is important in epiphytic plants such as orchids and bromeliads, whose roots are exposed to the air in nature. Additional advantages of passive hydroponics are the reduction of root rot.

===Ebb and flow (flood and drain) sub-irrigation===
In its simplest form, nutrient-enriched water is pumped into containers with plants in a growing medium such as Expanded clay aggregate At regular intervals, a simple timer causes a pump to fill the containers with nutrient solution, after which the solution drains back down into the reservoir. This keeps the medium regularly flushed with nutrients and air.

===Run-to-waste===
In a run-to-waste system, nutrient and water solution is periodically applied to the medium surface. The method was invented in Bengal in 1946; for this reason it is sometimes referred to as &quot;The Bengal System&quot;.

This method can be set up in various configurations. In its simplest form, a nutrient-and-water solution is manually applied one or more times per day to a container of inert growing media, such as rockwool, perlite, vermiculite, coco fibre, or sand. In a slightly more complex system, it is automated with a delivery pump, a timer and irrigation tubing to deliver nutrient solution with a delivery frequency that is governed by the key parameters of plant size, plant growing stage, climate, substrate, and substrate conductivity, pH, and water content.

In a commercial setting, watering frequency is multi-factorial and governed by computers or PLCs.

Commercial hydroponics production of large plants like tomatoes, cucumber, and peppers uses one form or another of run-to-waste hydroponics.

===Deep water culture===
The hydroponic method of plant production by means of suspending the plant roots in a solution of nutrient-rich, oxygenated water. Traditional methods favor the use of plastic buckets and large containers with the plant contained in a net pot suspended from the centre of the lid and the roots suspended in the nutrient solution.
The solution is oxygen saturated by an air pump combined with porous stones. With this method, the plants grow much faster because of the high amount of oxygen that the roots receive. The Kratky Method is similar to deep water culture, but uses a non-circulating water reservoir.

====Top-fed deep water culture====
&quot;Top-fed&quot; deep water culture is a technique involving delivering highly oxygenated nutrient solution direct to the root zone of plants. While deep water culture involves the plant roots hanging down into a reservoir of nutrient solution, in top-fed deep water culture the solution is pumped from the reservoir up to the roots (top feeding). The water is released over the plant&#x27;s roots and then runs back into the reservoir below in a constantly recirculating system. As with deep water culture, there is an airstone in the reservoir that pumps air into the water via a hose from outside the reservoir. The airstone helps add oxygen to the water. Both the airstone and the water pump run 24 hours a day.

The biggest advantage of top-fed deep water culture over standard deep water culture is increased growth during the first few weeks. With deep water culture, there is a time when the roots have not reached the water yet. With top-fed deep water culture, the roots get easy access to water from the beginning and will grow to the reservoir below much more quickly than with a deep water culture system. Once the roots have reached the reservoir below, there is not a huge advantage with top-fed deep water culture over standard deep water culture. However, due to the quicker growth in the beginning, grow time can be reduced by a few weeks.

== Advantages ==
* Space optimization: Vertical farming and advanced control technologies maximize the use of limited spaces. 
* Resource management: Reduced water and fertilizer consumption through the recycling of nutrient solutions. 
* Protection for sensitive species: Controlled conditions shield plants from climatic extremes, pests, and diseases.

Hydrozones lie at the intersection of urban agriculture innovations, environmental concerns, and biodiversity conservation efforts. Notable examples include specialized botanical gardens, cultivation facilities for threatened endemic species, and domestic spaces for advanced horticulture enthusiasts.

===Rotary===

A rotary hydroponic garden is a style of commercial hydroponics created within a circular frame which rotates continuously during the entire growth cycle of whatever plant is being grown.

While system specifics vary, systems typically rotate once per hour, giving a plant 24 full turns within the circle each 24-hour period. Within the center of each rotary hydroponic garden can be a high intensity grow light, designed to simulate sunlight, often with the assistance of a mechanized timer.

Each day, as the plants rotate, they are periodically watered with a hydroponic growth solution to provide all nutrients necessary for robust growth. Due to the plants continuous fight against gravity, plants typically mature much more quickly than when grown in soil or other traditional hydroponic growing systems. Because rotary hydroponic systems have a small size, they allow for more plant material to be grown per area of floor space than other traditional hydroponic systems.

Rotary hydroponic systems should be avoided in most circumstances, mainly because of their experimental nature and their high costs for finding, buying, operating, and maintaining them.

=== Vertical Farming ===
Some benefits of vertical farming include that plants grown with this technique can take place inside, be stacked up in layers, and can take advantage of soilless plant-growing techniques such as hydroponics.

==Substrates (growing support materials)==
Different media are appropriate for different growing techniques.

===Rock wool===

Rock wool (mineral wool) is the most widely used medium in hydroponics. Rock wool is an inert substrate suitable for both run-to-waste and recirculating systems. Rock wool is made from molten rock, basalt or &#x27;slag&#x27; that is spun into bundles of single filament fibres, and bonded into a medium capable of capillary action, and is, in effect, protected from most common microbiological degradation. Rock wool is typically used only for the seedling stage, or with newly cut clones, but can remain with the plant base for its lifetime. Rock wool has many advantages and some disadvantages. The latter being the possible skin irritancy (mechanical) whilst handling (1:1000). Flushing with cold water usually brings relief. Advantages include its proven efficiency and effectiveness as a commercial hydroponic substrate. Most of the rock wool sold to date is a non-hazardous, non-carcinogenic material, falling under Note Q of the European Union Classification Packaging and Labeling Regulation (CLP).

Mineral wool products can be engineered to hold large quantities of water and air that aid root growth and nutrient uptake in hydroponics; their fibrous nature also provides a good mechanical structure to hold the plant stable. The naturally high pH of mineral wool makes them initially unsuitable to plant growth and requires &quot;conditioning&quot; to produce a wool with an appropriate, stable pH.

===Expanded clay aggregate===
Baked clay pellets are suitable for hydroponic systems in which all nutrients are carefully controlled in water solution. The clay pellets are inert, pH-neutral, and do not contain any nutrient value.

The clay is formed into round pellets and fired in rotary kilns at . This causes the clay to expand, like popcorn, and become porous. It is light in weight, and does not compact over time. The shape of an individual pellet can be irregular or uniform depending on brand and manufacturing process. The manufacturers consider expanded clay to be an ecologically sustainable and re-usable growing medium because of its ability to be cleaned and sterilized, typically by washing in solutions of white vinegar, chlorine bleach, or hydrogen peroxide (), and rinsing completely.

Another view is that clay pebbles are best not re-used even when they are cleaned, due to root growth that may enter the medium. Breaking open a clay pebble after use can reveal this growth.

===Growstones===
Growstones, made from glass waste, have both more air and water retention space than perlite and peat. This aggregate holds more water than parboiled rice hulls. Growstones by volume consist of 0.5 to 5% calcium carbonate – for a standard 5.1 kg bag of Growstones that corresponds to 25.8 to 258 grams of calcium carbonate. The remainder is soda-lime glass.

===Coconut Coir===

Coconut coir, also known as coir peat, is a natural byproduct derived from coconut processing. The outer husk of a coconut consists of fibers which are commonly used to make a myriad of items ranging from floor mats to brushes. After the long fibers are used for those applications, the dust and short fibers are merged to create coir. Coconuts absorb high levels of nutrients throughout their life cycle, so the coir must undergo a maturation process before it becomes a viable growth medium. This process removes salt, tannins and phenolic compounds through substantial water washing. Contaminated water is a byproduct of this process, as three hundred to six hundred liters of water per one cubic meter of coir are needed. Additionally, this maturation can take up to six months and one study concluded the working conditions during the maturation process are dangerous and would be illegal in North America and Europe. Despite requiring attention, posing health risks and environmental impacts, coconut coir has impressive material properties. When exposed to water, the brown, dry, chunky and fibrous material expands nearly three or four times its original size. This characteristic combined with coconut coir&#x27;s water retention capacity and resistance to pests and diseases make it an effective growth medium. Used as an alternative to rock wool, coconut coir offers optimized growing conditions.

===Rice husks===

Parboiled rice husks (PBH) are an agricultural byproduct that would otherwise have little use. They decay over time, and allow drainage, and even retain less water than growstones. A study showed that rice husks did not affect the effects of plant growth regulators.

===Perlite===

Perlite is a volcanic rock that has been superheated into very lightweight expanded glass pebbles. It is used loose or in plastic sleeves immersed in the water. It is also used in potting soil mixes to decrease soil density. It does contain a high amount of fluorine which could be harmful to some plants. Perlite has similar properties and uses to vermiculite but, in general, holds more air and less water and is buoyant.

===Vermiculite===

Like perlite, vermiculite is a mineral that has been superheated until it has expanded into light pebbles. Vermiculite holds more water than perlite and has a natural &quot;wicking&quot; property that can draw water and nutrients in a passive hydroponic system. If too much water and not enough air surrounds the plants roots, it is possible to gradually lower the medium&#x27;s water-retention capability by mixing in increasing quantities of perlite.

===Pumice===

Like perlite, pumice is a lightweight, mined volcanic rock that finds application in hydroponics.

===Sand===
Sand is cheap and easily available. However, it is heavy, does not hold water very well, and it must be sterilized between uses.

===Gravel===
The same type that is used in aquariums, though any small gravel can be used, provided it is washed first. Indeed, plants growing in a typical traditional gravel filter bed, with water circulated using electric powerhead pumps, are in effect being grown using gravel hydroponics, also termed &quot;nutriculture&quot;. Gravel is inexpensive, easy to keep clean, drains well and will not become waterlogged. However, it is also heavy, and, if the system does not provide continuous water, the plant roots may dry out.

===Wood fiber===

Wood fibre, produced from steam friction of wood, is an efficient organic substrate for hydroponics. It has the advantage that it keeps its structure for a very long time. Wood wool (i.e. wood slivers) have been used since the earliest days of the hydroponics research. However, more recent research suggests that wood fibre may have detrimental effects on &quot;plant growth regulators&quot;.

===Sheep wool===
Wool from shearing sheep is a little-used yet promising renewable growing medium. In a study comparing wool with peat slabs, coconut fibre slabs, perlite and rockwool slabs to grow cucumber plants, sheep wool had a greater air capacity of 70%, which decreased with use to a comparable 43%, and water capacity that increased from 23% to 44% with use. Using sheep wool resulted in the greatest yield out of the tested substrates, while application of a biostimulator consisting of humic acid, lactic acid and Bacillus subtilis improved yields in all substrates.

===Brick shards===
Brick shards have similar properties to gravel. They have the added disadvantages of possibly altering the pH and requiring extra cleaning before reuse.

===Polystyrene packing peanuts===

Polystyrene packing peanuts are inexpensive, readily available, and have excellent drainage. However, they can be too lightweight for some uses. They are used mainly in closed-tube systems. Note that non-biodegradable polystyrene peanuts must be used; biodegradable packing peanuts will decompose into a sludge. Plants may absorb styrene and pass it to their consumers; this is a possible health risk.

==Nutrient solutions==
===Inorganic hydroponic solutions===
The formulation of hydroponic solutions is an application of plant nutrition, with nutrient deficiency symptoms mirroring those found in traditional soil based agriculture. However, the underlying chemistry of hydroponic solutions can differ from soil chemistry in many significant ways. Important differences include:
* Unlike soil, hydroponic nutrient solutions do not have cation-exchange capacity (CEC) from clay particles or organic matter. The absence of CEC and soil pores means the pH, oxygen saturation, and nutrient concentrations can change much more rapidly in hydroponic setups than is possible in soil.
* Selective absorption of nutrients by plants often imbalances the amount of counterions in solution. This imbalance can rapidly affect solution pH and the ability of plants to absorb nutrients of similar ionic charge (see article membrane potential). For instance, nitrate anions are often consumed rapidly by plants to form proteins, leaving an excess of cations in solution. This cation imbalance can lead to deficiency symptoms in other cation based nutrients (e.g. Mg2+) even when an ideal quantity of those nutrients are dissolved in the solution.
* Depending on the pH or on the presence of water contaminants, nutrients such as iron can precipitate from the solution and become unavailable to plants. Routine adjustments to pH, buffering the solution, or the use of chelating agents is often necessary.
* Unlike soil types, which can vary greatly in their composition, hydroponic solutions are often standardized and require routine maintenance for plant cultivation. Under controlled laboratory conditions hydroponic solutions are periodically pH adjusted to near neutral (pH 6.0) and are aerated with oxygen. Also, water levels must be refilled to account for transpiration losses and nutrient solutions require re-fortification to correct the nutrient imbalances that occur as plants grow and deplete nutrient reserves. Sometimes the regular measurement of nitrate ions is used as a key parameter to estimate the remaining proportions and concentrations of other essential nutrient ions to restore a balanced solution.
* Well-known examples of standardized, balanced nutrient solutions are the Hoagland solution, the Long Ashton nutrient solution, or the Knop solution.

As in conventional agriculture, nutrients should be adjusted to satisfy Liebig&#x27;s law of the minimum for each specific plant variety. Nevertheless, generally acceptable concentrations for nutrient solutions exist, with minimum and maximum concentration ranges for most plants being somewhat similar. Most nutrient solutions are mixed to have concentrations between 1,000 and 2,500 ppm. Acceptable concentrations for the individual nutrient ions, which comprise that total ppm figure, are summarized in the following table. For essential nutrients, concentrations below these ranges often lead to nutrient deficiencies while exceeding these ranges can lead to nutrient toxicity. Optimum nutrition concentrations for plant varieties are found empirically by experience or by plant tissue tests.

===Organic hydroponic solutions===
Organic fertilizers can be used to supplement or entirely replace the inorganic compounds used in conventional hydroponic solutions. However, using organic fertilizers introduces a number of challenges that are not easily resolved. Examples include:
* organic fertilizers are highly variable in their nutritional compositions in terms of minerals and different organic and inorganic species. Even similar materials can differ significantly based on their source (e.g. the quality of manure varies based on an animal&#x27;s diet).
* organic fertilizers are often sourced from animal byproducts, making disease transmission a serious concern for plants grown for human consumption or animal forage.
* organic fertilizers are often particulate and can clog substrates or other growing equipment. Sieving or milling the organic materials to fine dusts is often necessary.
* biochemical degradation and conversion processes of organic materials can make their mineral ingredients available to plants.
* some organic materials (i.e. particularly manures and offal) can further degrade to emit foul odors under anaerobic conditions.
* many organic molecules (i.e. sugars) demand additional oxygen during aerobic degradation, which is essential for cellular respiration in the plant roots.
* organic compounds (i.e. sugars, vitamins, a.o.) are not necessary for normal plant nutrition.

Nevertheless, if precautions are taken, organic fertilizers can be used successfully in hydroponics.

====Organically sourced macronutrients====
Examples of suitable materials, with their average nutritional contents tabulated in terms of percent dried mass, are listed in the following table.
====Organically sourced micronutrients====
Micronutrients can be sourced from organic fertilizers as well. For example, composted pine bark is high in manganese and is sometimes used to fulfill that mineral requirement in hydroponic solutions. To satisfy requirements for National Organic Programs, pulverized, unrefined minerals (e.g. Gypsum, Calcite, and glauconite) can also be added to satisfy a plant&#x27;s nutritional needs.

===Additives===
Compounds can be added in both organic and conventional hydroponic systems to improve nutrition acquisition and uptake by the plant&quot;.&quot; Chelating agents and humic acid have been shown to increase nutrient uptake. Additionally, plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR), which are regularly utilized in field and greenhouse agriculture, have been shown to benefit hydroponic plant growth development and nutrient acquisition. Some PGPR are known to increase nitrogen fixation. While nitrogen is generally abundant in hydroponic systems with properly maintained fertilizer regimens, &quot;Azospirillum&quot; and &quot;Azotobacter&quot; genera can help maintain mobilized forms of nitrogen in systems with higher microbial growth in the rhizosphere. Traditional fertilizer methods often lead to high accumulated concentrations of nitrate within plant tissue at harvest. &quot;Rhodopseudo-monas palustris&quot; has been shown to increase nitrogen use efficiency, increase yield, and decrease nitrate concentration by 88% at harvest compared to traditional hydroponic fertilizer methods in leafy greens. Many &quot;Bacillus&quot; spp., &quot;Pseudomonas&quot; spp. and &quot;Streptomyces&quot; spp. convert forms of phosphorus in the soil that are unavailable to the plant into soluble anions by decreasing soil pH, releasing phosphorus bound in chelated form that is available in a wider pH range, and mineralizing organic phosphorus.

Some studies have found that &quot;Bacillus&quot; inoculants allow hydroponic leaf lettuce to overcome high salt stress that would otherwise reduce growth. This can be especially beneficial in regions with high electrical conductivity or salt content in their water source. This could potentially avoid costly reverse osmosis filtration systems while maintaining high crop yield.

===Tools===
====Common equipment====
Managing nutrient concentrations, oxygen saturation, and pH values within acceptable ranges is essential for successful hydroponic horticulture. Common tools used to manage hydroponic solutions include:
* Electrical conductivity meters, a tool which estimates nutrient ppm by measuring how well a solution transmits an electric current.
* pH meter, a tool that uses an electric current to determine the concentration of hydrogen ions in solution.
* Oxygen electrode, an electrochemical sensor for determining the oxygen concentration in solution.
* Litmus paper, disposable pH indicator strips that determine hydrogen ion concentrations by color changing chemical reaction.
* Graduated cylinders or measuring spoons to measure out premixed, commercial hydroponic solutions.

====Equipment====
Chemical equipment can also be used to perform accurate chemical analyses of nutrient solutions. Examples include:
* Balances for accurately measuring materials.
* Laboratory glassware, such as burettes and pipettes, for performing titrations.
* Colorimeters for solution tests which apply the Beer–Lambert law.
* Spectrophotometer to measure the concentrations of the key parameter nitrate and other nutrients, such as phosphate, sulfate or iron.
* Containers for growing and storing the plants.

Using chemical equipment for hydroponic solutions can be beneficial to growers of any background because nutrient solutions are often reusable. Because nutrient solutions are virtually never completely depleted, and should never be due to the unacceptably low osmotic pressure that would result, re-fortification of old solutions with new nutrients can save growers money and can control point source pollution, a common source for the eutrophication of nearby lakes and streams.

====Software====
Although pre-mixed concentrated nutrient solutions are generally purchased from commercial nutrient manufacturers by hydroponic hobbyists and small commercial growers, several tools exist to help anyone prepare their own solutions without extensive knowledge about chemistry. The free and open source tools HydroBuddy and HydroCal have been created by professional chemists to help any hydroponics grower prepare their own nutrient solutions. The first program is available for Windows, Mac and Linux while the second one can be used through a simple JavaScript interface. Both programs allow for basic nutrient solution preparation although HydroBuddy provides added functionality to use and save custom substances, save formulations and predict electrical conductivity values.

===Mixing solutions===
Often mixing hydroponic solutions using individual salts is impractical for hobbyists or small-scale commercial growers because commercial products are available at reasonable prices. However, even when buying commercial products, multi-component fertilizers are popular. Often these products are bought as three part formulas which emphasize certain nutritional roles. For example, solutions for vegetative growth (i.e. high in nitrogen), flowering (i.e. high in potassium and phosphorus), and micronutrient solutions (i.e. with trace minerals) are popular. The timing and application of these multi-part fertilizers should coincide with a plant&#x27;s growth stage. For example, at the end of an annual plant&#x27;s life cycle, a plant should be restricted from high nitrogen fertilizers. In most plants, nitrogen restriction inhibits vegetative growth and helps induce flowering.

==Additional improvements==

=== Growrooms ===
With pest problems reduced and nutrients constantly fed to the roots, productivity in hydroponics is high; however, growers can further increase yield by manipulating a plant&#x27;s environment by constructing sophisticated growrooms.

===CO2 enrichment===

To increase yield further, some sealed greenhouses inject CO2 into their environment to help improve growth and plant fertility.

==See also==

* Aeroponics
* Anthroponics
* Aquaponics
* Digeponics
* Fogponics
* Folkewall
* Grow box
* Growroom
* Nutrient film technique
* Organoponics
* Passive hydroponics
* Plant factory
* Plant nutrition
* Plant pathology
* Root rot
* Vertical farming
* Xeriscaping

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191667" start="0" end="11" title="Hydroponics" label="Hydroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="25" end="37" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54" end="66" title="#Passive sub-irrigation" label="hydroculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="90" end="95" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="106" end="111" title="crops" label="crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q188840" start="115" end="131" title="medicinal plants" label="medicinal plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="141" end="145" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="168" end="175" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q8328350" start="176" end="184" title="Plant nutrition" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="185" end="193" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671452" start="225" end="236" title="Terrestrial plant" label="Terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="240" end="253" title="aquatic plant" label="aquatic plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="282" end="286" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q655819" start="391" end="398" title="perlite" label="perlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="400" end="406" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="411" end="427" title="Hydroponics#Substrates (growing support materials)" label="other substrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124578" start="482" end="493" title="rhizosphere" label="rhizosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="494" end="496" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630098" start="501" end="513" title="root exudate" label="root exudate"/>
<link wikidata="Q522244" start="602" end="622" title="secondary metabolite" label="secondary metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q18340432" start="648" end="665" title="Genetically modified plant" label="Transgenic plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142427" start="708" end="731" title="Pharming (genetics)" label="pharmaceutical proteins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="811" end="829" title="Hydroponics#Techniques" label="hydroponic systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783121" start="859" end="866" title="Organic matter" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190065" start="870" end="879" title="Inorganic compound" label="inorganic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="899" end="913" title="fish excrement" label="fish excrement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="915" end="919" title="duck" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="920" end="926" title="manure" label="manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="938" end="957" title="chemical fertilizer" label="chemical fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="974" end="982" title="Dennis Robert Hoagland#Standard nutrient solutions" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="986" end="992" title="Dennis Robert Hoagland#Hybrid nutrient solutions" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="1094" end="1104" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611726" start="1108" end="1129" title="Growroom" label="contained environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951286" start="1161" end="1195" title="controlled-environment agriculture" label="controlled-environment agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="1256" end="1264" title="tomatoes" label="tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201959" start="1266" end="1273" title="Capsicum" label="peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="1275" end="1284" title="cucumbers" label="cucumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="1286" end="1298" title="Strawberry" label="strawberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q83193" start="1300" end="1308" title="lettuces" label="lettuces"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="1314" end="1322" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="1369" end="1389" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="1415" end="1429" title="model organism" label="model organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="1433" end="1446" title="botany" label="plant science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="1451" end="1459" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="1577" end="1594" title="intensive farming" label="intensive farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q381640" start="1664" end="1674" title="aeroponics" label="aeroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945560" start="1713" end="1720" title="Biomass (ecology)" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1725" end="1732" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5824490" start="1762" end="1779" title="Substrate (biology)" label="growth substrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="1814" end="1838" title="Biophysical environment" label="environmental conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="1987" end="1998" title="low Earth orbit" label="Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="2168" end="2181" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q706904" start="2300" end="2313" title="John Woodward (naturalist)" label="John Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q160114" start="2359" end="2368" title="spearmint" label="spearmint"/>
<link wikidata="Q61650" start="2596" end="2612" title="Julius von Sachs" label="Julius von Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q68077" start="2617" end="2629" title="Wilhelm Knop" label="Wilhelm Knop"/>
<link wikidata="Q192154" start="2839" end="2850" title="Embryophyte" label="land plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="3188" end="3199" title="germination" label="germination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8328350" start="3487" end="3502" title="plant nutrition" label="plant nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q188956" start="3563" end="3571" title="Plant pathology" label="diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="3666" end="3674" title="Soil salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206468" start="3844" end="3866" title="Dennis Robert Hoagland" label="Dennis Robert Hoagland"/>
<link wikidata="Q271844" start="3906" end="3917" title="green algae" label="green algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011489" start="3918" end="3925" title="Nitella" label="Nitella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3931" end="3960" title="Dennis Robert Hoagland#Hewitt&amp;#x27;s Table 30A" label="standardized nutrient recipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185973" start="4010" end="4026" title="plant physiology" label="plant physiology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4037" end="4062" title="William Frederick Gericke" label="William Frederick Gericke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="4184" end="4212" title="agriculture" label="agricultural crop production"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="4362" end="4373" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756633" start="4408" end="4425" title="Aquatic animal" label="aquatic organisms"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4644" end="4658" title=":es:William Albert Setchell" label="W. A. Setchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188391" start="4662" end="4673" title="phycology" label="phycologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="4747" end="4756" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235421" start="4910" end="4919" title="geoponica" label="geoponica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="5098" end="5119" title="Technology" label="technical application"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="5124" end="5138" title="Commerce" label="commercial use"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="5542" end="5552" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206468" start="5895" end="5903" title="Dennis Robert Hoagland" label="Hoagland"/>
<link wikidata="Q323030" start="5908" end="5913" title="Daniel I. Arnon" label="Arnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="6684" end="6708" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976935" start="6710" end="6726" title="Claude B. Hutchison" label="Claude Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q323030" start="6748" end="6760" title="Daniel Arnon" label="Daniel Arnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="6970" end="6980" title="crop yield" label="crop yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q196372" start="7460" end="7475" title="Observational error" label="systemic errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="7939" end="7945" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="8384" end="8390" title="Anoxic waters" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554918" start="8580" end="8583" title="Soil gas" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073758" start="8591" end="8601" title="Pore space in soil" label="soil pores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442077" start="8634" end="8642" title="root rot" label="root rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894868" start="8682" end="8694" title="Moisture stress" label="water stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q304618" start="8718" end="8724" title="Active transport" label="absorb"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="8783" end="8792" title="Solvation" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075317" start="8842" end="8851" title="chlorosis" label="chlorosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445591" start="8855" end="8870" title="fertilizer burn" label="fertilizer burn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9058" end="9085" title="Dennis Robert Hoagland#Bibliography" label="Hoagland and his associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142702" start="9181" end="9198" title="Hoagland solution" label="Hoagland solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296" start="9258" end="9269" title="Wake Island" label="Wake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="9335" end="9356" title="Pan American Airlines" label="Pan American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q323030" start="9594" end="9609" title="Daniel I. Arnon" label="Daniel I. Arnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="9635" end="9653" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q319836" start="9739" end="9752" title="Ponape Island" label="Ponape Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="9768" end="9775" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="9848" end="9859" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346520" start="9924" end="9947" title="nutrient film technique" label="nutrient film technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082163" start="9949" end="9966" title="The Land (Disney)" label="The Land Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="10104" end="10108" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548765" start="10156" end="10197" title="Controlled Ecological Life Support System" label="Controlled Ecological Life Support System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10337" end="10348" title="Raymond M. Wheeler" label="Ray Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965851" start="10499" end="10534" title="bioregenerative life support system" label="bioregenerative life support system"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="10739" end="10755" title="Factors of production" label="economic factors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10931" end="10945" title="irrigation#Subirrigation" label="sub-irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="10954" end="10964" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q289340" start="11361" end="11370" title="Mason jar" label="Mason jar"/>
<link wikidata="Q869381" start="11407" end="11411" title="Flowerpot" label="pots"/>
<link wikidata="Q381105" start="12028" end="12036" title="aeration" label="aeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q467410" start="12118" end="12125" title="biofilm" label="biofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q271844" start="12129" end="12140" title="green algae" label="green algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="12163" end="12177" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q863119" start="12322" end="12334" title="phototropism" label="phototropism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992339" start="12490" end="12519" title="EC meter" label="electrical conductivity meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q899865" start="12630" end="12652" title="Mariotte&amp;#x27;s bottle" label="Mariotte&amp;#x27;s bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346520" start="13312" end="13335" title="nutrient film technique" label="nutrient film technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430825" start="15111" end="15124" title="waterlogging (agriculture)" label="water logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q381640" start="16126" end="16136" title="Aeroponics" label="Aeroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192196" start="16251" end="16255" title="mist" label="mist"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="16259" end="16266" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167111" start="16464" end="16482" title="Atomizer nozzle" label="atomized nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430825" start="17341" end="17352" title="waterlogging (agriculture)" label="waterlogged"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="17551" end="17555" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073283" start="18413" end="18458" title="ultrasonic humidifier" label="diaphragm vibrating at ultrasonic frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q262175" start="18980" end="18985" title="Chemically inert" label="inert"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="18986" end="18992" title="porous" label="porous"/>
<link wikidata="Q188603" start="19048" end="19064" title="capillary action" label="capillary action"/>
<link wikidata="Q886974" start="19362" end="19375" title="ex-clay" label="expanded clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029620" start="19380" end="19392" title="Coir" label="coconut husk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="19518" end="19527" title="epiphyte" label="epiphytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="19543" end="19550" title="Orchidaceae" label="orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q156529" start="19555" end="19565" title="Bromeliaceae" label="bromeliads"/>
<link wikidata="Q886974" start="19854" end="19877" title="Expanded clay aggregate" label="Expanded clay aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="20250" end="20256" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188674" start="20993" end="20997" title="Programmable logic controller" label="PLCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699026" start="21559" end="21572" title="airstone" label="porous stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q65072605" start="21685" end="21698" title="Kratky Method" label="Kratky Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699026" start="22336" end="22344" title="airstone" label="airstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070535" start="23214" end="23230" title="Vertical farming" label="Vertical farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070535" start="25055" end="25071" title="vertical farming" label="vertical farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q611617" start="25386" end="25398" title="mineral wool" label="mineral wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="26630" end="26632" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="26966" end="26968" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="27076" end="27080" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="27524" end="27532" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11587" start="27533" end="27539" title="bleach" label="bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="27544" end="27561" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611727" start="27800" end="27810" title="Growstones" label="Growstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q286388" start="27940" end="27960" title="parboiled rice hulls" label="parboiled rice hulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="28004" end="28021" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="28105" end="28122" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029620" start="28179" end="28191" title="Coconut coir" label="Coconut coir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29606" end="29626" title="Rice husks#Fertilizer and substrate" label="Parboiled rice husks"/>
<link wikidata="Q192949" start="29848" end="29871" title="plant hormones" label="plant growth regulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q655819" start="29889" end="29896" title="Perlite" label="Perlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q194358" start="30238" end="30249" title="vermiculite" label="vermiculite"/>
<link wikidata="Q194358" start="30347" end="30358" title="vermiculite" label="vermiculite"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="30815" end="30821" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625473" start="31589" end="31599" title="Wood fibre" label="Wood fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625803" start="31761" end="31770" title="Wood wool" label="Wood wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="32001" end="32005" title="Wool" label="Wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="32020" end="32025" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463810" start="32782" end="32797" title="packing peanuts" label="packing peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="32988" end="32999" title="polystyrene" label="polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q28917" start="33100" end="33107" title="styrene" label="styrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077570" start="33237" end="33248" title="formulation" label="formulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8328350" start="33294" end="33309" title="plant nutrition" label="plant nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693974" start="33382" end="33404" title="Agricultural soil science" label="soil based agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="33480" end="33494" title="Soil nutrient" label="soil chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q898477" start="33609" end="33633" title="cation-exchange capacity" label="cation-exchange capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073758" start="33702" end="33711" title="soil pore" label="soil pore"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="33723" end="33725" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294669" start="33727" end="33744" title="oxygen saturation" label="oxygen saturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268418" start="33927" end="33937" title="counterion" label="counterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q389844" start="34081" end="34099" title="membrane potential" label="membrane potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="34124" end="34129" title="anion" label="anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="34176" end="34183" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="34207" end="34213" title="cation" label="cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="34320" end="34324" title="Magnesium" label="Mg2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="34448" end="34466" title="Water pollution" label="water contaminants"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="34495" end="34506" title="Precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208465" start="34586" end="34595" title="Buffer solution" label="buffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="34624" end="34639" title="chelating agent" label="chelating agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926413" start="34670" end="34679" title="soil type" label="soil type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263816" start="34714" end="34725" title="Chemical composition" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34758" end="34770" title="Dennis Robert Hoagland#Hewitt&amp;#x27;s Table 30A" label="standardized"/>
<link wikidata="Q167980" start="35020" end="35033" title="transpiration" label="transpiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="35218" end="35225" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142702" start="35455" end="35472" title="Hoagland solution" label="Hoagland solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672226" start="35478" end="35507" title="Long Ashton Research Station" label="Long Ashton nutrient solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q68077" start="35516" end="35529" title="Wilhelm Knop" label="Knop solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q428265" start="35604" end="35636" title="Liebig&amp;#x27;s law of the minimum" label="Liebig&amp;#x27;s law of the minimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q767728" start="35661" end="35668" title="Variety (botany)" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="35917" end="35920" title="parts per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="36277" end="36288" title="empirically" label="empirically"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201544" start="36309" end="36326" title="plant tissue test" label="plant tissue test"/>
<link wikidata="Q539815" start="36365" end="36383" title="Organic fertilizer" label="Organic fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190065" start="36435" end="36453" title="inorganic compound" label="inorganic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="36703" end="36711" title="Mineral (nutrient)" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q899336" start="36748" end="36755" title="chemical species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="36848" end="36854" title="manure" label="manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q525512" start="36966" end="36986" title="Transmission (medicine)" label="disease transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377214" start="37054" end="37060" title="forage" label="forage"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="37094" end="37105" title="particulate" label="particulate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37119" end="37129" title="Hydroponics#Substrates (growing support materials)" label="substrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q381155" start="37158" end="37165" title="Sieve" label="Sieving"/>
<link wikidata="Q44494" start="37169" end="37176" title="mill (grinding)" label="milling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="37235" end="37246" title="Biochemistry" label="biochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q696715" start="37247" end="37258" title="Biodegradation" label="degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904052" start="37340" end="37349" title="Bioavailability (soil)" label="available"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="37405" end="37412" title="manures" label="manures"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="37417" end="37422" title="offal" label="offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="37469" end="37489" title="Anaerobic digestion" label="anaerobic conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="37522" end="37527" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="37606" end="37626" title="cellular respiration" label="cellular respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="37681" end="37688" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="38158" end="38165" title="compost" label="compost"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="38168" end="38172" title="conifer" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="38189" end="38198" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336915" start="38310" end="38334" title="National Organic Program" label="National Organic Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="38359" end="38366" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="38374" end="38380" title="Gypsum" label="Gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="38382" end="38389" title="Calcite" label="Calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q423034" start="38395" end="38405" title="glauconite" label="glauconite"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="40479" end="40491" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992339" start="40553" end="40582" title="Electrical conductivity meter" label="Electrical conductivity meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="40667" end="40683" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q300965" start="40687" end="40695" title="pH meter" label="pH meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518755" start="40768" end="40780" title="hydrogen ion" label="hydrogen ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q491332" start="40797" end="40813" title="Clark electrode" label="Oxygen electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q185082" start="40897" end="40909" title="Litmus paper" label="Litmus paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q300951" start="40922" end="40934" title="pH indicator" label="pH indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="41003" end="41020" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q213452" start="41024" end="41042" title="Graduated cylinder" label="Graduated cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426230" start="41047" end="41062" title="measuring spoon" label="measuring spoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="41197" end="41214" title="chemical analysis" label="chemical analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q134566" start="41258" end="41266" title="Weighing scale" label="Balances"/>
<link wikidata="Q657709" start="41305" end="41325" title="Laboratory glassware" label="Laboratory glassware"/>
<link wikidata="Q201554" start="41335" end="41342" title="burette" label="burette"/>
<link wikidata="Q163373" start="41348" end="41355" title="pipette" label="pipette"/>
<link wikidata="Q191010" start="41373" end="41382" title="titration" label="titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q374869" start="41387" end="41399" title="Colorimeter (chemistry)" label="Colorimeters"/>
<link wikidata="Q217351" start="41435" end="41451" title="Beer–Lambert law" label="Beer–Lambert law"/>
<link wikidata="Q332084" start="41455" end="41472" title="Spectrophotometry" label="Spectrophotometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q987767" start="41591" end="41601" title="Containers" label="Containers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193135" start="41899" end="41915" title="osmotic pressure" label="osmotic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735963" start="42027" end="42049" title="point source pollution" label="point source pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="42075" end="42089" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="43638" end="43650" title="annual plant" label="annual plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="43658" end="43668" title="Biological life cycle" label="life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="43805" end="43821" title="Flowering transition" label="induce flowering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611726" start="44095" end="44103" title="growroom" label="growroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="44187" end="44190" title="carbon dioxide" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q381640" start="44275" end="44285" title="Aeroponics" label="Aeroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30692741" start="44288" end="44300" title="Anthroponics" label="Anthroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q557542" start="44303" end="44313" title="Aquaponics" label="Aquaponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798336" start="44316" end="44326" title="Digeponics" label="Digeponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464138" start="44329" end="44338" title="Fogponics" label="Fogponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464541" start="44341" end="44350" title="Folkewall" label="Folkewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547822" start="44353" end="44361" title="Grow box" label="Grow box"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611726" start="44364" end="44372" title="Growroom" label="Growroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346520" start="44375" end="44398" title="Nutrient film technique" label="Nutrient film technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491124" start="44401" end="44413" title="Organoponics" label="Organoponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142807" start="44416" end="44435" title="Passive hydroponics" label="Passive hydroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201524" start="44438" end="44451" title="Plant factory" label="Plant factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8328350" start="44454" end="44469" title="Plant nutrition" label="Plant nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q188956" start="44472" end="44487" title="Plant pathology" label="Plant pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442077" start="44490" end="44498" title="Root rot" label="Root rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070535" start="44501" end="44517" title="Vertical farming" label="Vertical farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706851" start="44520" end="44531" title="Xeriscaping" label="Xeriscaping"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14134" wikidata="Q1209185" url="?curid=14134" title="Humanist (disambiguation)">
<text>Humanist may refer to:

* A proponent or practitioner of humanism, which has several distinct senses, listed at:
** Humanism (disambiguation)
* A scholar or academic in the humanities
* Humanist, more precisely humanist minuscule, a style of handwriting that developed in 15th-century Italy; inspired the typefaces below
* Humanist, a typeface class under the Vox-ATypI classification, which may refer to:
** Humanist sans-serif typefaces
** Humanist or old-style serif typefaces
* Humanist (electronic seminar), an email discussion list on international &quot;humanities computing and the digital humanities&quot;
* &quot;The Humanist&quot; (journal), a periodical published by the American Humanist Association
* &quot;Humanist&quot; (journal), a periodical published by the Norwegian Humanist Association

==See also==
* Humanist Christianity, a philosophy that combines Christian ethics and humanist principles
** Renaissance humanist, a humanistic scholar during the European Renaissance (14th–16th centuries)
* Humanist Democratic Centre (), a former Christian-democratic, centrist political party in Belgium
* Humanist education, an approach to education based on the work of humanistic psychologists
* Humanist International, consortium of humanist-movement political parties
* Humanist Judaism, a Jewish cultural movement that offers a non-theistic alternative to traditional Judaism
* &quot;Humanist Manifesto&quot;, a series of documents (1933, 1973, 2003) outlining humanist principles
* Humanist Marxism, a more liberal form of Marxism
* Humanist Movement, an international volunteer organisation linked to Mario &quot;Silo&quot; Rodriguez Cobos; sometimes referred to as New Humanism or Siloism
* Humanist psychology, a psychological approach that combines elements of holism, mindfulness, and behavioral therapy
* &quot;Humanistic&quot; (album), the 2001 debut album by Abandoned Pools</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1209185" start="0" end="8" title="Humanist (disambiguation)" label="Humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="57" end="65" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177175" start="116" end="141" title="Humanism (disambiguation)" label="Humanism (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="173" end="183" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953117" start="211" end="229" title="humanist minuscule" label="humanist minuscule"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="323" end="331" title="Vox-ATypI classification#Humanist" label="Humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="409" end="428" title="Humanist sans-serif" label="Humanist sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="454" end="469" title="old-style serif" label="old-style serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939336" start="482" end="511" title="Humanist (electronic seminar)" label="Humanist (electronic seminar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27716878" start="617" end="651" title="The Humanist (journal)" label="&amp;quot;The Humanist&amp;quot; (journal)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="715" end="745" title="Humanist (journal)" label="&amp;quot;Humanist&amp;quot; (journal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569318" start="777" end="807" title="Norwegian Humanist Association" label="Norwegian Humanist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327432" start="824" end="845" title="Humanist Christianity" label="Humanist Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="918" end="938" title="Renaissance humanist" label="Renaissance humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q113903993" start="1017" end="1043" title="Humanist Democratic Centre" label="Humanist Democratic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q355534" start="1117" end="1135" title="Humanist education" label="Humanist education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492245" start="1210" end="1232" title="Humanist International" label="Humanist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q951353" start="1286" end="1302" title="Humanist Judaism" label="Humanist Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637977" start="1401" end="1419" title="Humanist Manifesto" label="Humanist Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842" start="1500" end="1516" title="Humanist Marxism" label="Humanist Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056375" start="1551" end="1568" title="Humanist Movement" label="Humanist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q23364" start="1711" end="1730" title="Humanist psychology" label="Humanist psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939380" start="1829" end="1859" title="Humanistic (album)" label="&amp;quot;Humanistic&amp;quot; (album)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14135" wikidata="Q9695" url="?curid=14135" title="Henry Purcell">
<text>Henry Purcell (, rare: ; September 1659 – 21 November 1695) was an English composer of Baroque music, most remembered for his more than 100 songs; a tragic opera, Dido and Aeneas; and his incidental music to a version of Shakespeare&#x27;s A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream called The Fairy Queen. 

Purcell&#x27;s musical style was uniquely English, although it incorporated Italian and French elements. Generally considered among the greatest English opera composers, Purcell has been assessed with John Dunstaple and William Byrd as England&#x27;s most important early music composer. 

== Life and work ==

===Early life===

Purcell was born in St Ann&#x27;s Lane, Old Pye Street, Westminster in 1659. Henry Purcell Senior, whose older brother Thomas Purcell was a musician, was a gentleman of the Chapel Royal and sang at the coronation of King Charles II of England. Henry the elder had three sons: Edward, Henry and Daniel. Daniel Purcell, the youngest of the brothers, was also a prolific composer who wrote the music for much of the final act of &quot;The Indian Queen&quot; after his brother Henry&#x27;s death. The family lived just a few hundred yards west of Westminster Abbey from 1659 onwards.

After his father&#x27;s death in 1664, Purcell was placed under the guardianship of his uncle Thomas, who showed him great affection and kindness. Thomas arranged for Henry to be admitted as a chorister. Henry studied first under Captain Henry Cooke, Master of the Children, and afterwards under Cooke&#x27;s successor Pelham Humfrey, who was a pupil of Lully. The composer Matthew Locke was a family friend and, particularly with his semi-operas, probably also had a musical influence on the young Purcell. Henry was a chorister in the Chapel Royal until his voice broke in 1673 when he became assistant to the organ-builder John Hingston, who held the post of keeper of wind instruments to the King.

===Early Career===
Purcell is said to have been composing at nine years old, but the earliest work that can be certainly identified as his is an ode for the King&#x27;s birthday, written in 1670, when he was eleven. The dates for his compositions are often uncertain, despite considerable research. It is assumed that the three-part song &quot;Sweet tyranness, I now resign&quot; was written by him as a child. After Humfrey&#x27;s death, Purcell continued his studies under John Blow. He attended Westminster School and in 1676 was appointed copyist at Westminster Abbey. Henry Purcell&#x27;s earliest anthem, &quot;Lord, who can tell&quot;, was composed in 1678. It is a psalm that is prescribed for Christmas Day and also to be read at morning prayer on the fourth day of the month.
In 1679, he wrote songs for John Playford&#x27;s &quot;Choice Ayres, Songs and Dialogues&quot; and an anthem, the name of which is unknown, for the Chapel Royal. From an extant letter written by Thomas Purcell we learn that this anthem was composed for the exceptionally fine voice of the Rev. John Gostling, then at Canterbury, but afterwards a gentleman of His Majesty&#x27;s Chapel. Purcell wrote several anthems at different times for Gostling&#x27;s extraordinary basso profondo voice, which is known to have had a range of at least two full octaves, from D below the bass staff to the D above it. The dates of very few of these sacred compositions are known; perhaps the most notable example is the anthem &quot;They that go down to the sea in ships.&quot; In gratitude for the providential escape of King Charles II from shipwreck, Gostling, who had been of the royal party, put together some verses from the Psalms in the form of an anthem and requested Purcell to set them to music. The challenging work opens with a passage which traverses the full extent of Gostling&#x27;s range, beginning on the upper D and descending two octaves to the lower.

===Dido and Aeneas===
Between 1680 and 1688 Purcell wrote music for seven plays. The composition of his chamber opera &quot;Dido and Aeneas&quot;, which forms a very important landmark in the history of English dramatic music, has been attributed to this period, and its earliest production may well have predated the documented one of 1689. It was written to a libretto furnished by Nahum Tate, and performed in 1689 in cooperation with Josias Priest, a dancing master and the choreographer for the Dorset Garden Theatre. Priest&#x27;s wife kept a boarding school for young gentlewomen, first in Leicester Fields and afterwards at Chelsea, where the opera was performed. It is occasionally considered the first genuine English opera, though that title is usually given to Blow&#x27;s &quot;Venus and Adonis&quot;: as in Blow&#x27;s work, the action does not progress in spoken dialogue but in Italian-style recitative. Each work runs to less than one hour. At the time, &quot;Dido and Aeneas&quot; never found its way to the theatre, though it appears to have been very popular in private circles. It is believed to have been extensively copied, but only one song was printed by Purcell&#x27;s widow in &quot;Orpheus Britannicus&quot;, and the complete work remained in manuscript until 1840 when it was printed by the Musical Antiquarian Society under the editorship of Sir George Macfarren. The composition of &quot;Dido and Aeneas&quot; gave Purcell his first chance to write a sustained musical setting of a dramatic text. It was his only opportunity to compose a work in which the music carried the entire drama. The story of &quot;Dido and Aeneas&quot; derives from the original source in Virgil&#x27;s epic the &quot;Aeneid&quot;. During the early part of 1679, he produced two important works for the stage, the music for Nathaniel Lee&#x27;s &quot;Theodosius&quot;, and Thomas d&#x27;Urfey&#x27;s &quot;Virtuous Wife&quot;. 

In 1679, Blow, who had been appointed organist of Westminster Abbey 10 years before, resigned his office in favour of Purcell. Purcell now devoted himself almost entirely to the composition of sacred music, and for six years severed his connection with the theatre. He had probably written his two important stage works before taking up his new office.

===Westminster Abbey and Chapel Royal===
Soon after Purcell&#x27;s marriage in 1682, on the death of Edward Lowe, he was appointed organist of the Chapel Royal, an office which he was able to hold simultaneously with his position at Westminster Abbey. His eldest son was born in this same year, but he was short-lived. His first printed composition, &quot;Twelve Sonatas&quot;, was published in 1683. For some years after this, he was busy in the production of sacred music, odes addressed to the king and royal family, and other similar works. In 1685, he wrote two of his finest anthems, &quot;I was glad&quot; and &quot;My heart is inditing,&quot; for the coronation of King James II. In 1690 he composed a setting of the birthday ode for Queen Mary, &quot;Arise, my muse&quot; and four years later wrote one of his most elaborate, important and magnificent works – a setting for another birthday ode for the Queen, written by Nahum Tate, entitled &quot;Come Ye Sons of Art&quot;.
===Theatre music===

In 1687, he resumed his connection with the theatre by furnishing the music for John Dryden&#x27;s tragedy &quot;Tyrannick Love&quot;. In this year, Purcell also composed a march and passepied called &quot;Quick-step&quot;, which became so popular that Lord Wharton adapted the latter to the verses of &quot;Lillibullero&quot;. In or before January 1688, Purcell composed his anthem &quot;Blessed are they that fear the Lord&quot; by the express command of the King. A few months later, he wrote the music for D&#x27;Urfey&#x27;s play, &quot;The Fool&#x27;s Preferment&quot;. In 1690, he composed the music for Betterton&#x27;s adaptation of Fletcher and Massinger&#x27;s &quot;Prophetess&quot; (afterwards called &quot;Dioclesian&quot;) and Dryden&#x27;s &quot;Amphitryon&quot;. In 1691, he wrote the music for what is sometimes considered his dramatic masterpiece, &quot;King Arthur, or The British Worthy&quot;. In 1692, he composed &quot;The Fairy-Queen&quot; (an adaptation of Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;), the score of which (his longest for theatre) was rediscovered in 1901 and published by the Purcell Society. &quot;The Indian Queen&quot; followed in 1695, in which year he also wrote songs for Dryden and Davenant&#x27;s version of Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;The Tempest&quot; (recently, this has been disputed by music scholars), probably including &quot;Full fathom five&quot; and &quot;Come unto these yellow sands&quot;. &quot;The Indian Queen&quot; was adapted from a tragedy by Dryden and Sir Robert Howard. In these semi-operas (another term for which at the time was &quot;dramatic opera&quot;), the main characters of the plays do not sing but speak their lines: the action moves in dialogue rather than recitative. The related songs are sung &quot;for&quot; them by singers, who have minor dramatic roles.

===Last works===
Purcell&#x27;s &quot;Te Deum&quot; and &quot;Jubilate Deo&quot; were written for Saint Cecilia&#x27;s Day, 1694, the first English &quot;Te Deum&quot; ever composed with orchestral accompaniment. This work was annually performed at St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral until 1712, after which it was performed alternately with Handel&#x27;s &quot;Utrecht Te Deum and Jubilate&quot; until 1743, when both works were replaced by Handel&#x27;s &quot;Dettingen Te Deum&quot;.

He composed an anthem and two elegies for Queen Mary II&#x27;s funeral, his &quot;Funeral Sentences and Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary&quot;. Besides the operas and semi-operas already mentioned, Purcell wrote the music and songs for Thomas d&#x27;Urfey&#x27;s &quot;The Comical History of Don Quixote&quot;, &quot;Bonduca&quot;, &quot;The Indian Queen&quot; and others, a vast quantity of sacred music, and numerous odes, cantatas, and other miscellaneous pieces. The quantity of his instrumental chamber music is minimal after his early career, and his keyboard music consists of an even more minimal number of harpsichord suites and organ pieces. In 1693, Purcell composed music for two comedies: &quot;The Old Bachelor&quot;, and &quot;The Double Dealer&quot;. Purcell also composed for five other plays within the same year. In July 1695, Purcell composed an ode for the Duke of Gloucester for his sixth birthday. The ode is titled &quot;Who can from joy refrain?&quot; Purcell&#x27;s four-part sonatas were issued in 1697. In the final six years of his life, Purcell wrote music for forty-two plays.

===Death===
Purcell died on 21 November 1695 at his home in Marsham Street, at the height of his career. He is believed to have been 35 or 36 years old at the time. The cause of his death is unclear: one theory is that he caught a chill after returning home late from the theatre one night to find that his wife had locked him out. Another is that he succumbed to tuberculosis. The beginning of Purcell&#x27;s will reads:

Purcell is buried adjacent to the organ in Westminster Abbey. The music that he had earlier composed for Queen Mary&#x27;s funeral was performed during his funeral. Purcell was universally mourned as &quot;a very great master of music&quot;.  Following his death, the officials at Westminster honoured him by unanimously voting that he be buried with no expense spared in the north aisle of the Abbey. His epitaph reads: &quot;Here lyes Henry Purcell Esq., who left this life and is gone to that Blessed Place where only His harmony can be exceeded.&quot;

Purcell and his wife Frances had six children, four of whom died in infancy. His wife, as well as his son Edward (1689–1740) and daughter Frances, survived him. His wife Frances died in 1706, having published a number of her husband&#x27;s works, including the now-famous collection called &quot;Orpheus Britannicus&quot;, in two volumes, printed in 1698 and 1702, respectively. Edward was appointed organist of St Clement&#x27;s, Eastcheap, London, in 1711 and was succeeded by his son Edward Henry Purcell (died 1765). Both men were buried in St Clement&#x27;s near the organ gallery.

== Legacy ==
=== Notable compositions ===
Purcell worked in many genres, both in works closely linked to the court, such as symphony song, to the Chapel Royal, such as the symphony anthem, and the theatre.

Among Purcell&#x27;s most notable works are his opera &quot;Dido and Aeneas&quot; (1688), his semi-operas &quot;Dioclesian&quot; (1690), &quot;King Arthur&quot; (1691), &quot;The Fairy-Queen&quot; (1692) and &quot;Timon of Athens&quot; (1695), as well as the compositions &quot;Hail! Bright Cecilia&quot; (1692), &quot;Come Ye Sons of Art&quot; (1694) and &quot;Funeral Sentences and Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary&quot; (1695).

===Influence and reputation===
After his death, Purcell was honoured by many of his contemporaries, including his old friend John Blow, who wrote &quot;An Ode, on the Death of Mr. Henry Purcell (Mark how the lark and linnet sing)&quot; with text by his old collaborator, John Dryden. William Croft&#x27;s 1724 setting for the Burial Service was written in the style of &quot;the great Master&quot;. Croft preserved Purcell&#x27;s setting of &quot;Thou knowest Lord&quot; (Z 58) in his service, for reasons &quot;obvious to any artist&quot;; it has been sung at every British state funeral ever since. More recently, the English poet Gerard Manley Hopkins wrote a famous sonnet entitled simply &quot;Henry Purcell&quot;, with a headnote reading: &quot;The poet wishes well to the divine genius of Purcell and praises him that, whereas other musicians have given utterance to the moods of man&#x27;s mind, he has, beyond that, uttered in notes the very make and species of man as created both in him and in all men generally.&quot;

Purcell also had a strong influence on the composers of the English musical renaissance of the early 20th century, most notably Benjamin Britten, who arranged many of Purcell&#x27;s vocal works for voice(s) and piano in &quot;Britten&#x27;s Purcell Realizations&quot;, including from &quot;Dido and Aeneas&quot;, and whose &quot;The Young Person&#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra&quot; is based on a theme from Purcell&#x27;s &quot;Abdelazar&quot;. Stylistically, the aria &quot;I know a bank&quot; from Britten&#x27;s opera &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; is clearly inspired by Purcell&#x27;s aria &quot;Sweeter than Roses&quot;, which Purcell originally wrote as part of incidental music to Richard Norton&#x27;s &quot;Pausanias, the Betrayer of His Country&quot;.

In a 1940 interview Ignaz Friedman stated that he considered Purcell as great as Bach and Beethoven. In Victoria Street, Westminster, England, there is a bronze monument to Purcell, sculpted by Glynn Williams and unveiled in 1995 to mark the 300th anniversary of his death. In 2009, Purcell was selected by the Royal Mail for their &quot;Eminent Britons&quot; commemorative postage stamp issue.

A Purcell Club was founded in London in 1836 for promoting the performance of his music but was dissolved in 1863. In 1876 a Purcell Society was founded, which published new editions of his works. A modern-day Purcell Club has been created, and provides guided tours and concerts in support of Westminster Abbey.

Today there is a Henry Purcell Society of Boston, which performs his music in live concert. There is a Purcell Society in London, which collects and studies Purcell manuscripts and musical scores, concentrating on producing revised versions of the scores of all his music. Purcell&#x27;s works have been catalogued by Franklin Zimmerman, who gave them a number preceded by Z.

So strong was his reputation that a popular wedding processional was incorrectly attributed to Purcell for many years. The so-called &quot;Purcell&#x27;s Trumpet Voluntary&quot; was in fact written around 1700 by a British composer named Jeremiah Clarke as the &quot;Prince of Denmark&#x27;s March&quot;.

===In popular culture===

Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary was reworked by Wendy Carlos for the title music of the 1971 film by Stanley Kubrick, &quot;A Clockwork Orange&quot;. The 1973 &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; review of Jethro Tull&#x27;s &quot;A Passion Play&quot; compared the musical style of the album with that of Purcell. In 2009 Pete Townshend of The Who, an English rock band that established itself in the 1960s, identified Purcell&#x27;s harmonies, particularly the use of suspension and resolution (Townshend has mentioned Chaconne from The Gordian Knot Untied) that he had learned from producer Kit Lambert, as an influence on the band&#x27;s music (in songs such as &quot;Won&#x27;t Get Fooled Again&quot; (1971), &quot;I Can See for Miles&quot; (1967) and the very Purcellian intro to &quot;Pinball Wizard&quot;). Purcell&#x27;s music was widely featured as background music in the Academy Award winning 1979 film &quot;Kramer vs. Kramer&quot;, with a soundtrack on CBS Masterworks Records. The 1995 film &quot;England, My England&quot; tells the story of an actor who is himself writing a play about Purcell&#x27;s life and music, and features many of his compositions.

In the 21st century, the soundtrack of the 2005 film version of &quot;Pride and Prejudice&quot; features a dance titled &quot;A Postcard to Henry Purcell&quot;. This is a version by composer Dario Marianelli of Purcell&#x27;s &quot;Abdelazar&quot; theme. In the German-language 2004 movie, &quot;Downfall&quot;, the music of Dido&#x27;s Lament is used repeatedly as Nazi Germany collapses. The 2012 film &quot;Moonrise Kingdom&quot; contains Benjamin Britten&#x27;s version of the Rondeau in Purcell&#x27;s &quot;Abdelazar&quot; created for his 1946 &quot;The Young Person&#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra&quot;. In 2013, the Pet Shop Boys released their single &quot;Love Is a Bourgeois Construct&quot; incorporating one of the same ground basses from &quot;King Arthur&quot; used by Michael Nyman in his &quot;The Draughtsman&#x27;s Contract&quot; score. Olivia Chaney performs her adaptation of &quot;There&#x27;s Not a Swain&quot; on her CD &quot;The Longest River&quot;. The song &quot;Music for a while&quot; from Purcell&#x27;s incidental music to &quot;Oedipus,&quot; Z. 583 was included in the soundtrack of the 2018 film &quot;The Favourite,&quot; along with the second movement of his Trumpet Sonata in D major, Z. 850, performed by the English Baroque Soloists, conducted by Sir John Eliot Gardiner.

&quot;What Power Art Thou&quot; (from King Arthur, or The British Worthy (Z. 628), a semi-opera in five acts with music by Purcell and a libretto by John Dryden) is featured in &quot;The Crown&quot;.

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* The Purcell Society
* 
* 
* Short biography, audio samples and images of Purcell 
* [ Henry Purcell] at AllMusic</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9695" start="0" end="13" title="Henry Purcell" label="Henry Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="87" end="100" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque music"/>
<link wikidata="Q746646" start="163" end="178" title="Dido and Aeneas" label="Dido and Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="240" end="270" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743188" start="278" end="293" title="The Fairy-Queen" label="The Fairy Queen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="373" end="380" title="Music of Italy#Baroque and Classical" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="385" end="391" title="Music of France#Baroque" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q215134" start="498" end="512" title="John Dunstaple" label="John Dunstaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q208375" start="517" end="529" title="William Byrd" label="William Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q436016" start="563" end="574" title="early music" label="early music"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="682" end="693" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062692" start="799" end="811" title="Chapel Royal" label="Chapel Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="847" end="868" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q372428" start="928" end="942" title="Daniel Purcell" label="Daniel Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521380" start="1058" end="1074" title="The Indian Queen (opera)" label="The Indian Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="1169" end="1186" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281698" start="1445" end="1456" title="Henry Cooke (composer)" label="Henry Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932649" start="1458" end="1480" title="Master of the Children" label="Master of the Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q941345" start="1526" end="1540" title="Pelham Humfrey" label="Pelham Humfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192" start="1561" end="1566" title="Jean-Baptiste Lully" label="Lully"/>
<link wikidata="Q947941" start="1581" end="1594" title="Matthew Locke (composer)" label="Matthew Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140240" start="1642" end="1652" title="semi-opera" label="semi-opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q502689" start="1767" end="1778" title="Voice change" label="voice broke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700466" start="1833" end="1846" title="John Hingston" label="John Hingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q311110" start="2385" end="2394" title="John Blow" label="John Blow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="2408" end="2426" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q541947" start="2513" end="2519" title="anthem" label="anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="2583" end="2588" title="Psalms" label="psalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282455" start="2724" end="2737" title="John Playford" label="John Playford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181623" start="2990" end="3003" title="John Gostling" label="John Gostling"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="3013" end="3023" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532487" start="3165" end="3179" title="basso profondo" label="basso profondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395595" start="3216" end="3221" title="Vocal range" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="3243" end="3249" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="3269" end="3279" title="Clef" label="bass staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="3612" end="3618" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q746646" start="3979" end="3994" title="Dido and Aeneas" label="Dido and Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="4217" end="4225" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q956310" start="4239" end="4249" title="Nahum Tate" label="Nahum Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290707" start="4293" end="4306" title="Josias Priest" label="Josias Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527632" start="4355" end="4376" title="Dorset Garden Theatre" label="Dorset Garden Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q848912" start="4452" end="4468" title="Leicester Fields" label="Leicester Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="4487" end="4494" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904882" start="4575" end="4588" title="Opera in English" label="English opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q381965" start="4646" end="4662" title="Venus and Adonis (opera)" label="Venus and Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q202534" start="4763" end="4773" title="recitative" label="recitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103980" start="5065" end="5084" title="Orpheus Britannicus" label="Orpheus Britannicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15841175" start="5175" end="5202" title="Musical Antiquarian Society" label="Musical Antiquarian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374708" start="5231" end="5247" title="George Alexander Macfarren" label="George Macfarren"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="5580" end="5586" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q595602" start="5686" end="5699" title="Nathaniel Lee" label="Nathaniel Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145838" start="5735" end="5754" title="Thomas d&amp;#x27;Urfey" label="Thomas d&amp;#x27;Urfey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131269" start="6508" end="6514" title="Sonata" label="Sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="6823" end="6831" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="6887" end="6897" title="Mary II of England" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151300" start="7102" end="7121" title="Come Ye Sons of Art" label="Come Ye Sons of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="7230" end="7241" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861432" start="7263" end="7277" title="Tyrannick Love" label="Tyrannick Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018066" start="7403" end="7415" title="Thomas Wharton, 1st Marquess of Wharton" label="Lord Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434350" start="7458" end="7470" title="Lillibullero" label="Lillibullero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511187" start="7761" end="7770" title="Thomas Betterton" label="Betterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q312444" start="7792" end="7800" title="John Fletcher (playwright)" label="Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q380291" start="7805" end="7814" title="Philip Massinger" label="Massinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279082" start="7870" end="7880" title="Dioclesian" label="Dioclesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748411" start="7912" end="7922" title="Amphitryon (Dryden)" label="Amphitryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428601" start="8023" end="8057" title="King Arthur (opera)" label="King Arthur, or The British Worthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743188" start="8092" end="8107" title="The Fairy-Queen" label="The Fairy-Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="8157" end="8187" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118761" start="8287" end="8302" title="Purcell Society" label="Purcell Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768332" start="8389" end="8423" title="The Tempest (Dryden)" label="Dryden and Davenant&amp;#x27;s version"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="8452" end="8463" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435421" start="8688" end="8705" title="Robert Howard (playwright)" label="Sir Robert Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140240" start="8716" end="8726" title="semi-opera" label="semi-opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q743376" start="9048" end="9055" title="Te Deum" label="Te Deum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068829" start="9072" end="9084" title="Psalm 100" label="Jubilate Deo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80513" start="9108" end="9121" title="Saint Cecilia" label="Saint Cecilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="9259" end="9283" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="9342" end="9348" title="George Frideric Handel" label="Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q821389" start="9362" end="9390" title="Utrecht Te Deum and Jubilate" label="Utrecht Te Deum and Jubilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q832119" start="9462" end="9479" title="Dettingen Te Deum" label="Dettingen Te Deum"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="9530" end="9543" title="Mary II of England" label="Queen Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941830" start="9570" end="9627" title="Funeral Sentences and Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary" label="Funeral Sentences and Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="9783" end="9794" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941450" start="9808" end="9815" title="Bonduca" label="Bonduca"/>
<link wikidata="Q178985" start="9910" end="9913" title="ode" label="ode"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="9916" end="9923" title="cantata" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754796" start="10199" end="10215" title="The Old Bachelor" label="The Old Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222939" start="10233" end="10250" title="The Double Dealer" label="The Double Dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="10964" end="10976" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="11648" end="11655" title="infant" label="infancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344922" start="11686" end="11692" title="Edward Purcell (musician)" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592845" start="11992" end="12020" title="St Clement&amp;#x27;s, Eastcheap" label="St Clement&amp;#x27;s, Eastcheap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343421" start="12067" end="12087" title="Edward Henry Purcell" label="Edward Henry Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q746646" start="12435" end="12450" title="Dido and Aeneas" label="Dido and Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140240" start="12469" end="12479" title="semi-opera" label="semi-opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279082" start="12487" end="12497" title="Dioclesian" label="Dioclesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428601" start="12518" end="12529" title="King Arthur (opera)" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743188" start="12550" end="12565" title="The Fairy-Queen" label="The Fairy-Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933000" start="12653" end="12673" title="Hail! Bright Cecilia" label="Hail! Bright Cecilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151300" start="12694" end="12713" title="Come Ye Sons of Art" label="Come Ye Sons of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941830" start="12737" end="12794" title="Funeral Sentences and Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary" label="Funeral Sentences and Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q311110" start="12935" end="12944" title="John Blow" label="John Blow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236164" start="13094" end="13107" title="William Croft" label="William Croft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274182" start="13120" end="13127" title="service (music)" label="setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="13385" end="13398" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q313693" start="13443" end="13464" title="Gerard Manley Hopkins" label="Gerard Manley Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="13969" end="13985" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q85749139" start="14067" end="14102" title="Britten&amp;#x27;s Purcell Realizations" label="Britten&amp;#x27;s Purcell Realizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q630779" start="14170" end="14216" title="The Young Person&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra" label="The Young Person&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q307837" start="14269" end="14278" title="Abdelazar" label="Abdelazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q605750" start="14368" end="14398" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (opera)" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147752" start="14522" end="14538" title="incidental music" label="incidental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q314518" start="14570" end="14579" title="Pausanias (general)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657463" start="14637" end="14651" title="Ignaz Friedman" label="Ignaz Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="14707" end="14716" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572983" start="14811" end="14825" title="Glynn Williams" label="Glynn Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q638098" start="14928" end="14938" title="Royal Mail" label="Royal Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598867" start="14949" end="15004" title="Great Britain commemorative stamps 2000–2009" label="&amp;quot;Eminent Britons&amp;quot; commemorative postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118761" start="15138" end="15153" title="Purcell Society" label="Purcell Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118761" start="15430" end="15445" title="Purcell Society" label="Purcell Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491287" start="15645" end="15663" title="Franklin B. Zimmerman" label="Franklin Zimmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q440020" start="15942" end="15957" title="Jeremiah Clarke" label="Jeremiah Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244331" start="15971" end="16001" title="Prince of Denmark&amp;#x27;s March" label="Prince of Denmark&amp;#x27;s March"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941830" start="16050" end="16071" title="Funeral Sentences and Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary" label="Funeral of Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q44641" start="16088" end="16100" title="Wendy Carlos" label="Wendy Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q181086" start="16164" end="16182" title="A Clockwork Orange (film)" label="A Clockwork Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="16205" end="16218" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192353" start="16235" end="16246" title="Jethro Tull (band)" label="Jethro Tull"/>
<link wikidata="Q300514" start="16260" end="16274" title="A Passion Play" label="A Passion Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="16351" end="16365" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="16369" end="16376" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915395" start="16622" end="16633" title="Kit Lambert" label="Kit Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754167" start="16700" end="16727" title="Won&amp;#x27;t Get Fooled Again" label="Won&amp;#x27;t Get Fooled Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468225" start="16748" end="16767" title="I Can See for Miles" label="I Can See for Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321342" start="16820" end="16834" title="Pinball Wizard" label="Pinball Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="16911" end="16924" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q193577" start="16949" end="16966" title="Kramer vs. Kramer" label="Kramer vs. Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562453" start="16995" end="17010" title="CBS Masterworks" label="CBS Masterworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377954" start="17040" end="17059" title="England, My England" label="England, My England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4143921" start="17226" end="17236" title="Pride &amp;amp; Prejudice (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q270385" start="17244" end="17261" title="Pride &amp;amp; Prejudice (2005 film)" label="2005 film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q170583" start="17271" end="17290" title="Pride and Prejudice (novel)" label="Pride and Prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q360399" start="17392" end="17408" title="Dario Marianelli" label="Dario Marianelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q307837" start="17433" end="17442" title="Abdelazar" label="Abdelazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q152857" start="17497" end="17505" title="Downfall (2004 film)" label="Downfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376991" start="17526" end="17544" title="Dido&amp;#x27;s Lament" label="Dido&amp;#x27;s Lament"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="17567" end="17589" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="Nazi Germany collapses"/>
<link wikidata="Q217112" start="17611" end="17627" title="Moonrise Kingdom" label="Moonrise Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="17643" end="17659" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q630779" start="17757" end="17803" title="The Young Person&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra" label="The Young Person&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="17824" end="17837" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q14645701" start="17866" end="17895" title="Love Is a Bourgeois Construct" label="Love Is a Bourgeois Construct"/>
<link wikidata="Q313639" start="17983" end="17996" title="Michael Nyman" label="Michael Nyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q673738" start="18010" end="18041" title="The Draughtsman&amp;#x27;s Contract" label="The Draughtsman&amp;#x27;s Contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202903" start="18055" end="18068" title="Olivia Chaney" label="Olivia Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719198" start="18259" end="18266" title="Oedipus (Dryden play)" label="Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001133" start="18335" end="18348" title="The Favourite" label="The Favourite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342808" start="18446" end="18470" title="English Baroque Soloists" label="English Baroque Soloists"/>
<link wikidata="Q160325" start="18485" end="18508" title="Sir John Eliot Gardiner" label="Sir John Eliot Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707362" start="18694" end="18703" title="The Crown (TV series)" label="The Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="18952" end="18960" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14136" wikidata="Q219567" url="?curid=14136" title="Hydrophobe">
<text>In chemistry, hydrophobicity is the chemical property of a molecule (called a hydrophobe) that is seemingly repelled from a mass of water. In contrast, hydrophiles are attracted to water.

Hydrophobic molecules tend to be nonpolar and, thus, prefer other neutral molecules and nonpolar solvents. Because water molecules are polar, hydrophobes do not dissolve well among them. Hydrophobic molecules in water often cluster together, forming micelles. Water on hydrophobic surfaces will exhibit a high contact angle.

Examples of hydrophobic molecules include the alkanes, oils, fats, and greasy substances in general. Hydrophobic materials are used for oil removal from water, the management of oil spills, and chemical separation processes to remove non-polar substances from polar compounds. 

The term &quot;hydrophobic&quot;—which comes from the Ancient Greek (), &quot;having a fear of water&quot;, constructed —is often used interchangeably with &quot;lipophilic&quot;, &quot;fat-loving&quot;. However, the two terms are not synonymous. While hydrophobic substances are usually lipophilic, there are exceptions, such as the silicones and fluorocarbons.

==Chemical background==
The hydrophobic interaction is mostly an entropic effect originating from the disruption of the highly dynamic hydrogen bonds between molecules of liquid water by the nonpolar solute, causing the water to compensate by forming a clathrate-like cage structure around the non-polar molecules. This structure is more highly ordered than free water molecules due to the water molecules arranging themselves to interact as much as possible with themselves, and thus results in a lower entropic state at the interface. This causes non-polar molecules to clump together to reduce the surface area exposed to water and thereby increase the entropy of the system. Thus, the two immiscible phases (hydrophilic vs. hydrophobic) will change so that their corresponding interfacial area will be minimal. This effect can be visualized in the phenomenon called phase separation.

==Superhydrophobicity==
Superhydrophobic surfaces, such as the leaves of the lotus plant, are those that are extremely difficult to wet. The contact angles of a water droplet exceeds 150°. This is referred to as the lotus effect, and is primarily a chemical property related to interfacial tension, rather than a chemical property.

===Theory===
In 1805, Thomas Young defined the contact angle &quot;θ&quot; by analyzing the forces acting on a fluid droplet resting on a solid surface surrounded by a gas.


:formula_1
where
:formula_2 = Interfacial tension between the solid and gas
:formula_3 = Interfacial tension between the solid and liquid
:formula_4 = Interfacial tension between the liquid and gas

&quot;θ&quot; can be measured using a contact angle goniometer.

Wenzel determined that when the liquid is in intimate contact with a microstructured surface, &quot;θ&quot; will change to &quot;θ&quot;W*
:formula_5

where &quot;r&quot; is the ratio of the actual area to the projected area. Wenzel&#x27;s equation shows that microstructuring a surface amplifies the natural tendency of the surface. A hydrophobic surface (one that has an original contact angle greater than 90°) becomes more hydrophobic when microstructured – its new contact angle becomes greater than the original. However, a hydrophilic surface (one that has an original contact angle less than 90°) becomes more hydrophilic when microstructured – its new contact angle becomes less than the original.
Cassie and Baxter found that if the liquid is suspended on the tops of microstructures, &quot;θ&quot; will change to &quot;θ&quot;CB*:

:formula_6

where &quot;φ&quot; is the area fraction of the solid that touches the liquid. Liquid in the Cassie–Baxter state is more mobile than in the Wenzel state.

We can predict whether the Wenzel or Cassie–Baxter state should exist by calculating the new contact angle with both equations. By a minimization of free energy argument, the relation that predicted the smaller new contact angle is the state most likely to exist. Stated in mathematical terms, for the Cassie–Baxter state to exist, the following inequality must be true.

:formula_7

A recent alternative criterion for the Cassie–Baxter state asserts that the Cassie–Baxter state exists when the following 2 criteria are met:1) Contact line forces overcome body forces of unsupported droplet weight and 2) The microstructures are tall enough to prevent the liquid that bridges microstructures from touching the base of the microstructures.

A new criterion for the switch between Wenzel and Cassie-Baxter states has been developed recently based on surface roughness and surface energy. The criterion focuses on the air-trapping capability under liquid droplets on rough surfaces, which could tell whether Wenzel&#x27;s model or Cassie-Baxter&#x27;s model should be used for certain combination of surface roughness and energy.

Contact angle is a measure of static hydrophobicity, and contact angle hysteresis and slide angle are dynamic measures. Contact angle hysteresis is a phenomenon that characterizes surface heterogeneity. When a pipette injects a liquid onto a solid, the liquid will form some contact angle. As the pipette injects more liquid, the droplet will increase in volume, the contact angle will increase, but its three-phase boundary will remain stationary until it suddenly advances outward. The contact angle the droplet had immediately before advancing outward is termed the advancing contact angle. The receding contact angle is now measured by pumping the liquid back out of the droplet. The droplet will decrease in volume, the contact angle will decrease, but its three-phase boundary will remain stationary until it suddenly recedes inward. The contact angle the droplet had immediately before receding inward is termed the receding contact angle. The difference between advancing and receding contact angles is termed contact angle hysteresis and can be used to characterize surface heterogeneity, roughness, and mobility. Surfaces that are not homogeneous will have domains that impede motion of the contact line. The slide angle is another dynamic measure of hydrophobicity and is measured by depositing a droplet on a surface and tilting the surface until the droplet begins to slide. In general, liquids in the Cassie–Baxter state exhibit lower slide angles and contact angle hysteresis than those in the Wenzel state.

==Research and development==

Dettre and Johnson discovered in 1964 that the superhydrophobic lotus effect phenomenon was related to rough hydrophobic surfaces, and they developed a theoretical model based on experiments with glass beads coated with paraffin or TFE telomer. The self-cleaning property of superhydrophobic micro-nanostructured surfaces was reported in 1977. Perfluoroalkyl, perfluoropolyether, and RF plasma -formed superhydrophobic materials were developed, used for electrowetting and commercialized for bio-medical applications between 1986 and 1995. Other technology and applications have emerged since the mid-1990s. A durable superhydrophobic hierarchical composition, applied in one or two steps, was disclosed in 2002 comprising nano-sized particles ≤ 100 nanometers overlaying a surface having micrometer-sized features or particles ≤ 100 micrometers. The larger particles were observed to protect the smaller particles from mechanical abrasion.

In recent research, superhydrophobicity has been reported by allowing alkylketene dimer (AKD) to solidify into a nanostructured fractal surface. Many papers have since presented fabrication methods for producing superhydrophobic surfaces including particle deposition, sol-gel techniques, plasma treatments, vapor deposition, and casting techniques. Current opportunity for research impact lies mainly in fundamental research and practical manufacturing. Debates have recently emerged concerning the applicability of the Wenzel and Cassie–Baxter models. In an experiment designed to challenge the surface energy perspective of the Wenzel and Cassie–Baxter model and promote a contact line perspective, water drops were placed on a smooth hydrophobic spot in a rough hydrophobic field, a rough hydrophobic spot in a smooth hydrophobic field, and a hydrophilic spot in a hydrophobic field. Experiments showed that the surface chemistry and geometry at the contact line affected the contact angle and contact angle hysteresis, but the surface area inside the contact line had no effect. An argument that increased jaggedness in the contact line enhances droplet mobility has also been proposed.

Many hydrophobic materials found in nature rely on Cassie&#x27;s law and are biphasic on the submicrometer level with one component air. The lotus effect is based on this principle. Inspired by it, many functional superhydrophobic surfaces have been prepared.

An example of a bionic or biomimetic superhydrophobic material in nanotechnology is nanopin film.

One study presents a vanadium pentoxide surface that switches reversibly between superhydrophobicity and superhydrophilicity under the influence of UV radiation. According to the study, any surface can be modified to this effect by application of a suspension of rose-like V2O5 particles, for instance with an inkjet printer. Once again hydrophobicity is induced by interlaminar air pockets (separated by 2.1 nm distances). The UV effect is also explained. UV light creates electron-hole pairs, with the holes reacting with lattice oxygen, creating surface oxygen vacancies, while the electrons reduce V5+ to V3+. The oxygen vacancies are met by water, and it is this water absorbency by the vanadium surface that makes it hydrophilic. By extended storage in the dark, water is replaced by oxygen and hydrophilicity is once again lost.

A significant majority of hydrophobic surfaces have their hydrophobic properties imparted by structural or chemical modification of a surface of a bulk material, through either coatings or surface treatments. That is to say, the presence of molecular species (usually organic) or structural features results in high contact angles of water. In recent years, rare earth oxides have been shown to possess intrinsic hydrophobicity. The intrinsic hydrophobicity of rare earth oxides depends on surface orientation and oxygen vacancy levels, and is naturally more robust than coatings or surface treatments, having potential applications in condensers and catalysts that can operate at high temperatures or corrosive environments.

==Applications and potential applications==
Hydrophobic concrete has been produced since the mid-20th century.

Active recent research on superhydrophobic materials might eventually lead to more industrial applications.

A simple routine of coating cotton fabric with silica or titania particles by sol-gel technique has been reported, which protects the fabric from UV light and makes it superhydrophobic.

An efficient routine has been reported for making polyethylene superhydrophobic and thus self-cleaning. 99% of dirt on such a surface is easily washed away.

Patterned superhydrophobic surfaces also have promise for lab-on-a-chip microfluidic devices and can drastically improve surface-based bioanalysis.

In pharmaceuticals, hydrophobicity of pharmaceutical blends affects important quality attributes of final products, such as drug dissolution and hardness. Methods have been developed to measure the hydrophobicity of pharmaceutical materials.

The development of hydrophobic passive daytime radiative cooling (PDRC) surfaces, whose effectiveness at solar reflectance and thermal emittance is predicated on their cleanliness, has improved the &quot;self-cleaning&quot; of these surfaces. Scalable and sustainable hydrophobic PDRCs that avoid VOCs have further been developed.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* What are superhydrophobic surfaces?</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="3" end="12" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="14" end="28" title="Hydrophobe" label="hydrophobicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q764285" start="36" end="53" title="chemical property" label="chemical property"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="59" end="67" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="78" end="88" title="Hydrophobe" label="hydrophobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q245031" start="108" end="116" title="intermolecular force" label="repelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="132" end="137" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="152" end="162" title="hydrophile" label="hydrophile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="222" end="230" title="chemical polarity#Nonpolar molecules" label="nonpolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="286" end="293" title="solvent" label="solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="350" end="358" title="dissolution (chemistry)" label="dissolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q421110" start="439" end="446" title="micelle" label="micelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q899239" start="499" end="512" title="contact angle" label="contact angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="539" end="547" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q41581" start="561" end="567" title="alkane" label="alkane"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="570" end="573" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="576" end="579" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q220187" start="693" end="702" title="oil spill" label="oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="848" end="861" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q898401" start="956" end="966" title="lipophilic" label="lipophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="1128" end="1137" title="silicones" label="silicones"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305225" start="1142" end="1154" title="fluorocarbon" label="fluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="1223" end="1231" title="entropy" label="entropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="1293" end="1306" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q781204" start="1411" end="1420" title="clathrate" label="clathrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622068" start="1759" end="1788" title="accessible surface area" label="surface area exposed to water"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="2028" end="2033" title="phase (matter)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q899239" start="2188" end="2201" title="contact angle" label="contact angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q901697" start="2263" end="2275" title="lotus effect" label="lotus effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q170749" start="2325" end="2344" title="interfacial tension" label="interfacial tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q170749" start="2585" end="2604" title="Interfacial tension" label="Interfacial tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126161" start="2792" end="2816" title="contact angle goniometer" label="contact angle goniometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q901959" start="4700" end="4714" title="surface energy" label="surface energy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5015" end="5039" title="Contact angle#Contact Angle Hysteresis" label="contact angle hysteresis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6424" end="6448" title="Contact angle#Contact Angle Hysteresis" label="contact angle hysteresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q901697" start="6576" end="6588" title="lotus effect" label="lotus effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="6810" end="6824" title="nanotechnology" label="nanostructured"/>
<link wikidata="Q907239" start="6966" end="6980" title="electrowetting" label="electrowetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q762043" start="7536" end="7541" title="dimer (chemistry)" label="dimer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8452" end="8476" title="Contact angle#Contact Angle Hysteresis" label="contact angle hysteresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258311" start="8698" end="8715" title="Cassie&amp;#x27;s law" label="Cassie&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="8724" end="8732" title="phase (matter)" label="biphasic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145644" start="8829" end="8843" title="Biomimetics" label="Inspired by it"/>
<link wikidata="Q189131" start="8924" end="8930" title="bionics" label="bionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145644" start="8934" end="8944" title="biomimetics" label="biomimetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="8974" end="8988" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17121855" start="8992" end="9004" title="nanopin film" label="nanopin film"/>
<link wikidata="Q409173" start="9028" end="9046" title="vanadium pentoxide" label="vanadium pentoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643448" start="9112" end="9131" title="superhydrophilicity" label="superhydrophilicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q26100" start="9256" end="9266" title="suspension (chemistry)" label="suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q95474715" start="9317" end="9331" title="inkjet printer" label="inkjet printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="9416" end="9418" title="nanometer" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q351558" start="9481" end="9499" title="electron-hole pair" label="electron-hole pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="9808" end="9822" title="hydrophilicity" label="hydrophilicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="10202" end="10212" title="Rare-earth element" label="rare earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878307" start="10615" end="10635" title="Hydrophobic concrete" label="Hydrophobic concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="10839" end="10845" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q193521" start="10849" end="10856" title="titanium dioxide" label="titania"/>
<link wikidata="Q48350" start="10870" end="10887" title="sol–gel process" label="sol-gel technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q143429" start="11029" end="11041" title="polyethylene" label="polyethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282807" start="11410" end="11426" title="Dissolution testing" label="drug dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673453" start="11431" end="11439" title="Tablet hardness testing" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q115533486" start="11560" end="11593" title="passive daytime radiative cooling" label="passive daytime radiative cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="11634" end="11651" title="solar reflectance" label="solar reflectance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369825" start="11656" end="11673" title="thermal emittance" label="thermal emittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="11826" end="11830" title="VOCs" label="VOCs"/>
</links>
</doc>
