<doc id="13617" wikidata="Q471148" url="?curid=13617" title="History of Scotland">
<text>The recorded history of [[Scotland]] begins with the arrival of the Roman Empire in the 1st century, when the province of Britannia reached as far north as the Antonine Wall. North of this was Caledonia, inhabited by the &quot;Picti&quot;, whose uprisings forced Rome&#x27;s legions back to Hadrian&#x27;s Wall. As Rome finally withdrew from Britain, a Gaelic tribe from Ireland called the &quot;Scoti&quot; began colonising Western Scotland and Wales. Before Roman times, prehistoric Scotland entered the Neolithic Era about 4000 BC, the Bronze Age about 2000 BC, and the Iron Age around 700 BC.

The Gaelic kingdom of Dál Riata was founded on the west coast of Scotland in the 6th century. In the following century, Irish missionaries introduced the previously pagan Picts to Celtic Christianity. Following England&#x27;s Gregorian mission, the Pictish king Nechtan chose to abolish most Celtic practices in favour of the Roman rite, restricting Gaelic influence on his kingdom and avoiding war with Anglian Northumbria. Towards the end of the 8th century, the Viking invasions began, forcing the Picts and Gaels to cease their historic hostility to each other and to unite in the 9th century, forming the Kingdom of Scotland.

The Kingdom of Scotland was united under the House of Alpin, whose members fought among each other during frequent disputed successions. The last Alpin king, Malcolm II, died without a male issue in the early 11th century and the kingdom passed through his daughter&#x27;s son to the House of Dunkeld or Canmore. The last Dunkeld king, Alexander III, died in 1286. He left only his infant granddaughter, Margaret, as heir, who died herself four years later. England, under Edward I, would take advantage of this questioned succession to launch a series of conquests, resulting in the Wars of Scottish Independence, as Scotland passed back and forth between the House of Balliol and the House of Bruce through the late Middle Ages. Scotland&#x27;s ultimate victory confirmed Scotland as a fully independent and sovereign kingdom.

In 1707, the Kingdom of Scotland united with the Kingdom of England to create the new state of the Kingdom of Great Britain under the terms of the Treaty of Union. The Parliament of Scotland was subsumed into the newly created Parliament of Great Britain which was located in London, with 45 Members of Parliament (MPs) representing Scottish affairs in the newly created parliament. In 1999, a Scottish Parliament was reconvened and a Scottish Government re–established under the terms of the Scotland Act 1998, with Donald Dewar leading the first Scottish Government since 1707, until his death in 2000. In 2007, the Scottish National Party (SNP) were elected to government following the 2007 election, with first minister Alex Salmond holding a referendum on Scotland regaining its independence from the United Kingdom. Held on 18 September 2014, 55% of the electorate voted to remain a country of the United Kingdom, with 45% voting for independence.

During the Scottish Enlightenment and Industrial Revolution, Scotland became one of the commercial, intellectual and industrial powerhouses of Europe. Later, its industrial decline following the Second World War was particularly acute. Today, 5,490,100 people live in Scotland, the majority of which are located in the central belt of the country in towns and cities such as Ayr, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Paisley and Kilmarnock, and cities such as Aberdeen, Dundee and Inverness to the north of the country. The economy has shifted from a heavy industry driven economy to be become one which is services and skills based, with Scottish Gross Domestic Product (GDP) estimated to be worth £218 billion in 2023, including offshore activity such as North Sea oil extraction.

==Pre-history==
People lived in Scotland for at least 8,500 years before Britain&#x27;s recorded history. At times during the last interglacial period (130,000–70,000 BC) Europe had a climate warmer than today&#x27;s, and early humans may have made their way to Scotland, with the possible discovery of pre-Ice Age axes on Orkney and mainland Scotland. Glaciers then scoured their way across most of Britain, and only after the ice retreated did Scotland again become habitable, around 9600 BC. Upper Paleolithic hunter-gatherer encampments formed the first known settlements, and archaeologists have dated an encampment near Biggar to around 12000 BC. Numerous other sites found around Scotland build up a picture of highly mobile boat-using people making tools from bone, stone and antlers. The oldest house for which there is evidence in Britain is the oval structure of wooden posts found at South Queensferry near the Firth of Forth, dating from the Mesolithic period, about 8240 BC. The earliest stone structures are probably the three hearths found at Jura, dated to about 6000 BC.

Neolithic farming brought permanent settlements. Evidence of these includes the well-preserved stone house at Knap of Howar on Papa Westray, dating from around 3500 BC and the village of similar houses at Skara Brae on West Mainland, Orkney from about 500 years later. The settlers introduced chambered cairn tombs from around 3500 BC, as at Maeshowe, and from about 3000 BC the many standing stones and circles such as those at Stenness on the mainland of Orkney, which date from about 3100 BC, of four stones, the tallest of which is in height. These were part of a pattern that developed in many regions across Europe at about the same time.

The creation of cairns and Megalithic monuments continued into the Bronze Age, which began in Scotland about 2000 BC. As elsewhere in Europe, hill forts were first introduced in this period, including the occupation of Eildon Hill near Melrose in the Scottish Borders, from around 1000 BC, which accommodated several hundred houses on a fortified hilltop. From the Early and Middle Bronze Age there is evidence of cellular round houses of stone, as at Jarlshof and Sumburgh in Shetland. There is also evidence of the occupation of crannogs, roundhouses partially or entirely built on artificial islands, usually in lakes, rivers and estuarine waters.

In the early Iron Age, from the seventh century BC, cellular houses began to be replaced on the northern isles by simple Atlantic roundhouses, substantial circular buildings with a dry stone construction. From about 400 BC, more complex Atlantic roundhouses began to be built, as at Howe, Orkney and Crosskirk, Caithness. The most massive constructions that date from this era are the circular broch towers, probably dating from about 200 BC. This period also saw the first wheelhouses, a roundhouse with a characteristic outer wall, within which was a circle of stone piers (bearing a resemblance to the spokes of a wheel), but these would flourish most in the era of Roman occupation. There is evidence for about 1,000 Iron Age hill forts in Scotland, most located below the Clyde-Forth line, which have suggested to some archaeologists the emergence of a society of petty rulers and warrior elites recognisable from Roman accounts.

==Roman invasion==
Of the surviving pre-Roman accounts of Scotland, the first written reference to Scotland was the Greek Pytheas of Massalia, who may have circumnavigated the British Isles of Albion (Britain) and Ierne (Ireland) sometime around 325 BC. The most northerly point of Britain was called &quot;Orcas&quot; (Orkney). By the time of Pliny the Elder, who died in AD 79, Roman knowledge of the geography of Scotland had extended to the &quot;Hebudes&quot; (The Hebrides), &quot;Dumna&quot; (probably the Outer Hebrides), the Caledonian Forest and the people of the Caledonii, from whom the Romans named the region north of their control Caledonia. Ptolemy, possibly drawing on earlier sources of information as well as more contemporary accounts from the Agricolan invasion, identified 18 tribes in Scotland in his &quot;Geography&quot;, but many of the names are obscure and the geography becomes less reliable in the north and west, suggesting early Roman knowledge of these areas was confined to observations from the sea.

The Roman invasion of Britain began in earnest in AD 43, leading to the establishment of the Roman province of Britannia in the south. By the year 71, the Roman governor Quintus Petillius Cerialis had launched an invasion of what is now Scotland. In the year 78, Gnaeus Julius Agricola arrived in Britain to take up his appointment as the new governor and began a series of major incursions. He is said to have pushed his armies to the estuary of the &quot;River Taus&quot; (usually assumed to be the River Tay) and established forts there, including a legionary fortress at Inchtuthil. After his victory over the northern tribes at Mons Graupius in 84, a series of forts and towers were established along the Gask Ridge, which marked the boundary between the Lowland and Highland zones, probably forming the first Roman &quot;limes&quot; or frontier in Scotland. Agricola&#x27;s successors were unable or unwilling to further subdue the far north. By the year 87, the occupation was limited to the Southern Uplands and by the end of the first century the northern limit of Roman expansion was a line drawn between the Tyne and Solway Firth. The Romans eventually withdrew to a line in what is now northern England, building the fortification known as Hadrian&#x27;s Wall from coast to coast.

Around 141, the Romans undertook a reoccupation of southern Scotland, moving up to construct a new &quot;limes&quot; between the Firth of Forth and the Firth of Clyde, which became the Antonine Wall. The largest Roman construction inside Scotland, it is a -covered wall made of turf around high, with nineteen forts. It extended for . Having taken twelve years to build, the wall was overrun and abandoned soon after 160. The Romans retreated to the line of Hadrian&#x27;s Wall. Roman troops penetrated far into the north of modern Scotland several more times, with at least four major campaigns. The most notable invasion was in 209 when the emperor Septimius Severus led a major force north. After the death of Severus in 210 they withdrew south to Hadrian&#x27;s Wall, which would be Roman frontier until it collapsed in the 5th century.

The Great Conspiracy constituted a seemingly coordinated invasion against Roman rule in Britain in the later 4th century, which included the participation of the Gaelic Scoti and the Caledonians, who were then known as Picts by the Romans. This was defeated by the &quot;comes&quot; Theodosius, however, Roman military government was withdrawn from the island altogether by the early 5th century, resulting in the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain and the immigration of the Saxons to southeastern Scotland and the rest of eastern Great Britain.

By the close of the Roman occupation of southern and central Britain in the 5th century, the Picts had emerged as the dominant force in northern Scotland, with the various Brythonic tribes the Romans had first encountered there occupying the southern half of the country. Roman influence on Scottish culture and history was not enduring.

==Post-Roman Scotland==
In the centuries after the departure of the Romans from Britain, there were four groups within the borders of what is now Scotland. In the east were the Picts, with kingdoms between the river Forth and Shetland. In the late 6th century the dominant force was the Kingdom of Fortriu, whose lands were centred on Strathearn and Menteith and who raided along the eastern coast into modern England. In the west were the Gaelic (Goidelic)-speaking people of Dál Riata with their royal fortress at Dunadd in Argyll, with close links with the island of Ireland, from whom comes the name Scots. In the south was the British (Brythonic) Kingdom of Strathclyde, descendants of the peoples of the Roman-influenced kingdoms of &quot;Hen Ogledd&quot; (Old north), often named Alt Clut, the Brythonic name for their capital at Dumbarton Rock. Finally, there were the English or &quot;Angles&quot;, Germanic invaders who had overrun much of southern Britain and held the Kingdom of Bernicia, in the south-east. The first English king in the historical record is Ida, who is said to have obtained the throne and the kingdom about 547. Ida&#x27;s grandson, Æthelfrith, united his kingdom with Deira to the south to form Northumbria around the year 604. There were changes of dynasty, and the kingdom was divided, but it was re-united under Æthelfrith&#x27;s son Oswald (r. 634–642).

Scotland was largely converted to Christianity by Irish-Scots missions associated with figures such as St Columba, from the fifth to the seventh centuries. These missions tended to found monastic institutions and collegiate churches that served large areas. Partly as a result of these factors, some scholars have identified a distinctive form of Celtic Christianity, in which abbots were more significant than bishops, attitudes to clerical celibacy were more relaxed and there were some significant differences in practice with Roman Christianity, particularly the form of tonsure and the method of calculating Easter, although most of these issues had been resolved by the mid-7th century.

==Rise of the Kingdom of Alba==

Conversion to Christianity may have sped a long-term process of gaelicisation of the Pictish kingdoms, which adopted Gaelic language and customs. There was also a merger of the Gaelic and Pictish crowns, although historians debate whether it was a Pictish takeover of Dál Riata, or the other way around. This culminated in the rise of Cínaed mac Ailpín (Kenneth MacAlpin) in the 840s, which brought to power the House of Alpin. In 867 AD the Vikings seized the southern half of Northumbria, forming the Kingdom of York; three years later they stormed the Britons&#x27; fortress of Dumbarton and subsequently conquered much of England except for a reduced Kingdom of Wessex, leaving the new combined Pictish and Gaelic kingdom almost encircled. When he died as king of the combined kingdom in 900, Domnall II (Donald II) was the first man to be called &quot;rí Alban&quot; (i.e. &quot;King of Alba&quot;). The term Scotia was increasingly used to describe the kingdom between North of the Forth and Clyde and eventually the entire area controlled by its kings was referred to as Scotland.
The long reign (900–942/3) of Causantín (Constantine II) is often regarded as the key to formation of the Kingdom of Alba. He was later credited with bringing Scottish Christianity into conformity with the Catholic Church. After fighting many battles, his defeat at Brunanburh was followed by his retirement as a Culdee monk at St. Andrews. The period between the accession of his successor Máel Coluim I (Malcolm I) and Máel Coluim mac Cináeda (Malcolm II) was marked by good relations with the Wessex rulers of England, intense internal dynastic disunity and relatively successful expansionary policies. In 945, Máel Coluim I annexed Strathclyde as part of a deal with King Edmund of England, where the kings of Alba had probably exercised some authority since the later 9th century, an event offset somewhat by loss of control in Moray. The reign of King Donnchad I (Duncan I) from 1034 was marred by failed military adventures, and he was defeated and killed by MacBeth, the mormaer of Moray, who became king in 1040. MacBeth ruled for seventeen years before he was overthrown by Máel Coluim, the son of Donnchad, who some months later defeated MacBeth&#x27;s step-son and successor Lulach to become King Máel Coluim III (Malcolm III).

It was Máel Coluim III, who acquired the nickname &quot;Canmore&quot; (&quot;Cenn Mór&quot;, &quot;Great Chief&quot;), which he passed to his successors and who did most to create the Dunkeld dynasty that ruled Scotland for the following two centuries. Particularly important was his second marriage to the Anglo-Hungarian princess Margaret. This marriage, and raids on northern England, prompted William the Conqueror to invade and Máel Coluim submitted to his authority, opening up Scotland to later claims of sovereignty by English kings. When Malcolm died in 1093, his brother Domnall III (Donald III) succeeded him. However, William II of England backed Máel Coluim&#x27;s son by his first marriage, Donnchad, as a pretender to the throne and he seized power. His murder within a few months saw Domnall restored with one of Máel Coluim sons by his second marriage, Edmund, as his heir. The two ruled Scotland until two of Edmund&#x27;s younger brothers returned from exile in England, again with English military backing. Victorious, Edgar, the oldest of the three, became king in 1097. Shortly afterwards Edgar and the King of Norway, Magnus Barefoot concluded a treaty recognising Norwegian authority over the Western Isles. In practice Norse control of the Isles was loose, with local chiefs enjoying a high degree of independence. He was succeeded by his brother Alexander, who reigned 1107–1124.
When Alexander died in 1124, the crown passed to Margaret&#x27;s fourth son David I, who had spent part of his life in England where he held a barony. His reign saw what has been characterised as a &quot;Davidian Revolution&quot;, by which Anglo-Norman followers of King David were granted lands and titles and intermixed their institutions with those of Scots intermarrying with the existing aristocracy, underpinning the development of later Medieval Scotland. David&#x27;s Anglo-Norman followers joined the Scottish aristocracy and he introduced a system of feudal land tenure, which produced knight service, castles and an available body of heavily armed cavalry. He created a style of court closer to that of the rest of Western Europe, introduced the office of justicar to oversee justice, and local offices of sheriffs to administer localities. He established the first royal burghs in Scotland, granting rights to particular villages and towns, which led to the development of the first true Scottish cities and helped facilitate economic development as did the introduction of the first recorded Scottish coinage. He continued a process begun by his mother and brothers helping to establish foundations that brought reform to Scottish monasticism based on those at Cluny and he played a part in organising diocese on lines closer to those in the rest of Western Europe.

These reforms were pursued under his successors and grandchildren Malcolm IV of Scotland and William I, with the crown now passing down the main line of descent through primogeniture, leading to the first of a series of minorities. The benefits of greater authority were reaped by William&#x27;s son Alexander II and his son Alexander III, who pursued a policy of peace with England to expand their authority in the Highlands and Islands. By the reign of Alexander III, the Scots were in a position to annexe the remainder of the western seaboard, which they did following Haakon Haakonarson&#x27;s ill-fated invasion and the stalemate of the Battle of Largs with the Treaty of Perth in 1266.

==The Wars of Independence==

The death of King Alexander III in 1286, and the death of his granddaughter and heir, Margaret, Maid of Norway, in 1290, left 14 rivals for succession. To prevent civil war the Scottish magnates asked Edward I of England to arbitrate, for which he extracted legal recognition that the realm of Scotland was held as a feudal dependency to the throne of England before choosing John Balliol, the man with the strongest claim, who became king in 1292. Robert Bruce, 5th Lord of Annandale, the next strongest claimant, accepted this outcome with reluctance. Over the next few years Edward I used the concessions he had gained to systematically undermine both the authority of King John and the independence of Scotland. In 1295, John, on the urgings of his chief councillors, entered into an alliance with France, known as the Auld Alliance.
In 1296, Edward invaded Scotland, deposing King John. The following year William Wallace and Andrew de Moray raised forces to resist the occupation and under their joint leadership an English army was defeated at the Battle of Stirling Bridge. For a short time Wallace ruled Scotland in the name of John Balliol as Guardian of the realm. Edward came north in person and defeated Wallace at the Battle of Falkirk in 1298. Wallace escaped but probably resigned as Guardian of Scotland. In 1305, he fell into the hands of the English, who executed him for treason despite the fact that he owed no allegiance to England.

Rivals John Comyn and Robert the Bruce, grandson of the claimant, were appointed as joint guardians in his place. On 10 February 1306, Bruce participated in the murder of Comyn, at Greyfriars Kirk in Dumfries. Less than seven weeks later, on 25 March, Bruce was crowned as King. However, Edward&#x27;s forces overran the country after defeating Bruce&#x27;s small army at the Battle of Methven. Despite the excommunication of Bruce and his followers by Pope Clement V, his support slowly strengthened; and by 1314 with the help of leading nobles such as Sir James Douglas and Thomas Randolph only the castles at Bothwell and Stirling remained under English control. Edward I had died in 1307. His heir Edward II moved an army north to break the siege of Stirling Castle and reassert control. Robert defeated that army at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314, securing &quot;de facto&quot; independence. In 1320, the Declaration of Arbroath, a remonstrance to the Pope from the nobles of Scotland, helped convince Pope John XXII to overturn the earlier excommunication and nullify the various acts of submission by Scottish kings to English ones so that Scotland&#x27;s sovereignty could be recognised by the major European dynasties. The Declaration has also been seen as one of the most important documents in the development of a Scottish national identity.

In 1326, what may have been the first full Parliament of Scotland met. The parliament had evolved from an earlier council of nobility and clergy, the &quot;colloquium&quot;, constituted around 1235, but perhaps in 1326 representatives of the burghs – the burgh commissioners – joined them to form the Three Estates. In 1328, Edward III signed the Treaty of Edinburgh–Northampton acknowledging Scottish independence under the rule of Robert the Bruce. However, four years after Robert&#x27;s death in 1329, England once more invaded on the pretext of restoring Edward Balliol, son of John Balliol, to the Scottish throne, thus starting the Second War of Independence. Despite victories at Dupplin Moor and Halidon Hill, in the face of tough Scottish resistance led by Sir Andrew Murray, the son of Wallace&#x27;s comrade in arms, successive attempts to secure Balliol on the throne failed. Edward III lost interest in the fate of his protégé after the outbreak of the Hundred Years&#x27; War with France. In 1341, David II, King Robert&#x27;s son and heir, was able to return from temporary exile in France. Balliol finally resigned his claim to the throne to Edward in 1356, before retiring to Yorkshire, where he died in 1364.

==The Stuarts==

After David II&#x27;s death, Robert II, the first of the Stewart kings, came to the throne in 1371. He was followed in 1390 by his ailing son John, who took the regnal name Robert III. During Robert III&#x27;s reign (1390–1406), actual power rested largely in the hands of his brother, Robert Stewart, Duke of Albany. After the suspicious death (possibly on the orders of the Duke of Albany) of his elder son, David, Duke of Rothesay in 1402, Robert, fearful for the safety of his younger son, the future James I, sent him to France in 1406. However, the English captured him en route and he spent the next 18 years as a prisoner held for ransom. As a result, after the death of Robert III, regents ruled Scotland: first, the Duke of Albany; and later his son Murdoch. When Scotland finally paid the ransom in 1424, James, aged 32, returned with his English bride determined to assert his authority. Several of the Albany family were executed; but he succeeded in centralising control in the hands of the crown, at the cost of increasing unpopularity, and was assassinated in 1437. His son James II (reigned 1437–1460), when he came of age in 1449, continued his father&#x27;s policy of weakening the great noble families, most notably taking on the powerful Black Douglas family that had come to prominence at the time of the Bruce.

In 1468, the last significant acquisition of Scottish territory occurred when James III was engaged to Margaret of Denmark, receiving the Orkney Islands and the Shetland Islands in payment of her dowry. Berwick upon Tweed was captured by England in 1482. With the death of James III in 1488 at the Battle of Sauchieburn, his successor James IV successfully ended the quasi-independent rule of the Lord of the Isles, bringing the Western Isles under effective Royal control for the first time. In 1503, he married Margaret Tudor, daughter of Henry VII of England, thus laying the foundation for the 17th-century Union of the Crowns.

Scotland advanced markedly in educational terms during the 15th century with the founding of the University of St Andrews in 1413, the University of Glasgow in 1450 and the University of Aberdeen in 1495, and with the passing of the Education Act 1496, which decreed that all sons of barons and freeholders of substance should attend grammar schools. James IV&#x27;s reign is often considered to have seen a flowering of Scottish culture under the influence of the European Renaissance.
In 1512, the Auld Alliance was renewed and under its terms, when the French were attacked by the English under Henry VIII, James IV invaded England in support. The invasion was stopped decisively at the Battle of Flodden Field during which the King, many of his nobles, and a large number of ordinary troops were killed, commemorated by the song &quot;Flowers of the Forest&quot;. Once again Scotland&#x27;s government lay in the hands of regents in the name of the infant James V.

James V finally managed to escape from the custody of the regents in 1528. He continued his father&#x27;s policy of subduing the rebellious Highlands, Western and Northern isles and the troublesome borders. He also continued the French alliance, marrying first the French noblewoman Madeleine of Valois and then after her death Marie of Guise. James V&#x27;s domestic and foreign policy successes were overshadowed by another disastrous campaign against England that led to defeat at the Battle of Solway Moss (1542). James died a short time later, a demise blamed by contemporaries on &quot;a broken heart&quot;. The day before his death, he was brought news of the birth of an heir: a daughter, who would become Mary, Queen of Scots.

Once again, Scotland was in the hands of a regent. Within two years, the Rough Wooing began, Henry VIII&#x27;s military attempt to force a marriage between Mary and his son, Edward. This took the form of border skirmishing and several English campaigns into Scotland. In 1547, after the death of Henry VIII, forces under the English regent Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset were victorious at the Battle of Pinkie Cleugh, the climax of the Rough Wooing, and followed up by the occupation of Haddington. Mary was then sent to France at the age of five, as the intended bride of the heir to the French throne. Her mother, Marie de Guise, stayed in Scotland to look after the interests of Mary – and of France – although the Earl of Arran acted officially as regent. Guise responded by calling on French troops, who helped stiffen resistance to the English occupation. By 1550, after a change of regent in England, the English withdrew from Scotland completely.

From 1554 on, Marie de Guise took over the regency and continued to advance French interests in Scotland. French cultural influence resulted in a large influx of French vocabulary into Scots. But anti-French sentiment also grew, particularly among Protestants, who saw the English as their natural allies. This led to armed conflict at the siege of Leith. Marie de Guise died in June 1560, and soon after the Auld Alliance also ended, with the signing of the Treaty of Edinburgh, which provided for the removal of French and English troops from Scotland. The Scottish Reformation took place only days later when the Scottish Parliament abolished the Roman Catholic religion and outlawed the Mass.
Meanwhile, Queen Mary had been raised as a Catholic in France, and married to the Dauphin, who became king as Francis II in 1559, making her queen consort of France. When Francis died in 1560, Mary, now 19, returned to Scotland to take up the government. Despite her private religion, she did not attempt to re-impose Catholicism on her largely Protestant subjects, thus angering the chief Catholic nobles. Her six-year personal reign was marred by a series of crises, largely caused by the intrigues and rivalries of the leading nobles. The murder of her secretary, David Riccio, was followed by that of her unpopular second husband Lord Darnley, and her abduction by and marriage to the Earl of Bothwell, who was implicated in Darnley&#x27;s murder. Mary and Bothwell confronted the lords at Carberry Hill and after their forces melted away, he fled and she was captured by Bothwell&#x27;s rivals. Mary was imprisoned in Lochleven Castle, and in July 1567, was forced to abdicate in favour of her infant son James VI. Mary eventually escaped and attempted to regain the throne by force. After her defeat at the Battle of Langside in 1568, she took refuge in England, leaving her young son in the hands of regents. In Scotland the regents fought a civil war on behalf of James VI against his mother&#x27;s supporters. In England, Mary became a focal point for Catholic conspirators and was eventually tried for treason and executed on the orders of her kinswoman Elizabeth I.

==Protestant Reformation==
During the 16th century, Scotland underwent a Protestant Reformation that created a predominantly Calvinist national Kirk, which became Presbyterian in outlook and severely reduced the powers of bishops. In the earlier part of the century, the teachings of first Martin Luther and then John Calvin began to influence Scotland, particularly through Scottish scholars, often training for the priesthood, who had visited Continental universities. The Lutheran preacher Patrick Hamilton was executed for heresy in St. Andrews in 1528. The execution of others, especially the Zwingli-influenced George Wishart, who was burnt at the stake on the orders of Cardinal Beaton in 1546, angered Protestants. Wishart&#x27;s supporters assassinated Beaton soon after and seized St. Andrews Castle, which they held for a year before they were defeated with the help of French forces. The survivors, including chaplain John Knox, were condemned to be galley slaves in France, stoking resentment of the French and creating martyrs for the Protestant cause.

Limited toleration and the influence of exiled Scots and Protestants in other countries, led to the expansion of Protestantism, with a group of lairds declaring themselves Lords of the Congregation in 1557 and representing their interests politically. The collapse of the French alliance and English intervention in 1560 meant that a relatively small, but highly influential, group of Protestants were in a position to impose reform on the Scottish church. A confession of faith, rejecting papal jurisdiction and the mass, was adopted by Parliament in 1560, while the young Mary, Queen of Scots, was still in France.

Knox, having escaped the galleys and spent time in Geneva as a follower of Calvin, emerged as the most significant figure of the period. The Calvinism of the reformers led by Knox resulted in a settlement that adopted a Presbyterian system and rejected most of the elaborate trappings of the medieval church. The reformed Kirk gave considerable power to local lairds, who often had control over the appointment of the clergy. There were widespread, but generally orderly outbreaks of iconoclasm. At this point the majority of the population was probably still Catholic in persuasion and the Kirk found it difficult to penetrate the Highlands and Islands, but began a gradual process of conversion and consolidation that, compared with reformations elsewhere, was conducted with relatively little persecution.

Women shared in the religiosity of the day. The egalitarian and emotional aspects of Calvinism appealed to men and women alike. Historian Alasdair Raffe finds that, &quot;Men and women were thought equally likely to be among the elect...Godly men valued the prayers and conversation of their female co-religionists, and this reciprocity made for loving marriages and close friendships between men and women.&quot; Furthermore, there was an increasingly intense relationship in the pious bonds between minister and his women parishioners. For the first time, laywomen gained numerous new religious roles and took a prominent place in prayer societies.

==17th century==

In 1603, James VI King of Scots inherited the throne of the Kingdom of England and became King James I of England, leaving Edinburgh for London and uniting England with Scotland under one monarch. The Union was a personal or dynastic union, with the Crowns remaining both distinct and separate—despite James&#x27;s best efforts to create a new &quot;imperial&quot; throne of &quot;Great Britain&quot;. The acquisition of the Irish crown along with the English facilitated a process of settlement by Scots in what was historically the most troublesome area of the kingdom in Ulster, with perhaps 50,000 Scots settling in the province by the mid-17th century. James adopted a different approach to impose his authority in the western Highlands and Islands. The additional military resource that was now available, particularly the English navy, resulted in the enactment of the Statutes of Iona which compelled integration of Hebridean clan leaders with the rest of Scottish society. Attempts to found a Scottish colony in North America in Nova Scotia were largely unsuccessful without sufficient funds or willing colonists.

===Wars of the Three Kingdoms and the Puritan Commonwealth===
====Bishops&#x27; Wars====
Although James had tried to get the Scottish Church to accept some of the High Church Anglicanism of his southern kingdom, he met with limited success. His son and successor, Charles I, took matters further, introducing an English-style Prayer Book into the Scottish church in 1637. This resulted in anger and widespread rioting. (The story goes that it was initiated by a certain Jenny Geddes who threw a stool in St Giles Cathedral.) Representatives of various sections of Scottish society drew up the National Covenant in 1638, objecting to the King&#x27;s liturgical innovations. In November of the same year matters were taken even further, when at a meeting of the General Assembly in Glasgow the Scottish bishops were formally expelled from the Church, which was then established on a full Presbyterian basis. Charles gathered a military force; but as neither side wished to push the matter to a full military conflict, a temporary settlement was concluded at Pacification of Berwick. Matters remained unresolved until 1640 when, in a renewal of hostilities, Charles&#x27;s northern forces were defeated by the Scots at the Battle of Newburn to the west of Newcastle. During the course of these Bishops&#x27; Wars Charles tried to raise an army of Irish Catholics, but was forced to back down after a storm of protest in Scotland and England. The backlash from this venture provoked a rebellion in Ireland and Charles was forced to appeal to the English Parliament for funds. Parliament&#x27;s demands for reform in England eventually resulted in the English Civil War. This series of civil wars that engulfed England, Ireland and Scotland in the 1640s and 1650s is known to modern historians as the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. The Covenanters meanwhile, were left governing Scotland, where they raised a large army of their own and tried to impose their religious settlement on Episcopalians and Roman Catholics in the north of the country. In England his religious policies caused similar resentment and he ruled without recourse to parliament from 1629.

====Civil war====

As the civil wars developed, the English Parliamentarians appealed to the Scots Covenanters for military aid against the King. A Solemn League and Covenant was entered into, guaranteeing the Scottish Church settlement and promising further reform in England. Scottish troops played a major part in the defeat of Charles I, notably at the battle of Marston Moor. An army under the Earl of Leven occupied the North of England for some time.

However, not all Scots supported the Covenanter&#x27;s taking arms against their King. In 1644, James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose attempted to raise the Highlands for the King. Few Scots would follow him, but, aided by 1,000 Irish, Highland and Islesmen troops sent by the Irish Confederates under Alasdair MacDonald (MacColla), and an instinctive genius for mobile warfare, he was stunningly successful. A Scottish Civil War began in September 1644 with his victory at battle of Tippermuir. After a series of victories over poorly trained Covenanter militias, the lowlands were at his mercy. However, at this high point, his army was reduced in size, as MacColla and the Highlanders preferred to continue the war in the north against the Campbells. Shortly after, what was left of his force was defeated at the Battle of Philiphaugh. Escaping to the north, Montrose attempted to continue the struggle with fresh troops; but in July 1646 his army was disbanded after the King surrendered to the Scots army at Newark, and the civil war came to an end.

The following year Charles, while he was being held captive in Carisbrooke Castle, entered into an agreement with moderate Scots Presbyterians. In this secret &#x27;Engagement&#x27;, the Scots promised military aid in return for the King&#x27;s agreement to implement Presbyterianism in England on a three-year trial basis. The Duke of Hamilton led an invasion of England to free the King, but he was defeated by Oliver Cromwell in August 1648 at the Battle of Preston.

====Cromwellian occupation and Restoration====

The execution of Charles I in 1649 was carried out in the face of objections by the Covenanter government and his son was immediately proclaimed as King Charles II in Edinburgh. Oliver Cromwell led an invasion of Scotland in 1650, and defeated the Scottish army at Dunbar. One year later, a Scottish invasion of England was again defeated by Cromwell at Worcester. Cromwell emerged as the leading figure in the English government and Scotland was occupied by an English force under George Monck. The country was incorporated into the Puritan-governed Commonwealth and lost its independent church government, parliament and legal system, but gained access to English markets. Various attempts were made to legitimise the union, calling representatives from the Scottish burghs and shires to negotiations and to various English parliaments, where they were always under-represented and had little opportunity for dissent. However, final ratification was delayed by Cromwell&#x27;s problems with his various parliaments and the union did not become the subject of an act until 1657 (see Tender of Union).

Following the death of Cromwell and the regime&#x27;s collapse, Charles II was restored in 1660 and Scotland again became an independent kingdom. Scotland regained its system of law, parliament and kirk, but also the Lords of the Articles (by which the crown managed parliament), bishops and a king who did not visit the country. He ruled largely without reference to Parliament, through a series of commissioners. These began with John, Earl of Middleton and ended with the king&#x27;s brother and heir, James, Duke of York (known in Scotland as the Duke of Albany). The English Navigation Acts prevented the Scots engaging in what would have been lucrative trading with England&#x27;s colonies. The restoration of episcopacy was a source of trouble, particularly in the south-west of the country, an area with strong Presbyterian sympathies. Abandoning the official church, many of the inhabitants began to attend illegal field assemblies, known as conventicles. Official attempts to suppress these led to a rising in 1679, defeated by James, Duke of Monmouth, the King&#x27;s illegitimate son, at the Battle of Bothwell Bridge. In the early 1680s a more intense phase of persecution began, later to be called &quot;the Killing Time&quot;. When Charles died in 1685 and his brother, a Roman Catholic, succeeded him as James VII of Scotland (and II of England), matters came to a head.

===The deposition of James VII===
James put Catholics in key positions in the government and attendance at conventicles was made punishable by death. He disregarded parliament, purged the council and forced through religious toleration to Roman Catholics, alienating his Protestant subjects. It was believed that the king would be succeeded by his daughter Mary, a Protestant and the wife of William of Orange, Stadtholder of the Netherlands, but when in 1688, James produced a male heir, James Francis Edward Stuart, it was clear that his policies would outlive him. An invitation by seven leading Englishmen led William to land in England with 40,000 men, and James fled, leading to the almost bloodless &quot;Glorious Revolution&quot;. The Estates issued a &quot;Claim of Right&quot; that suggested that James had forfeited the crown by his actions (in contrast to England, which relied on the legal fiction of an abdication) and offered it to William and Mary, which William accepted, along with limitations on royal power. The final settlement restored Presbyterianism and abolished the bishops who had generally supported James. However, William, who was more tolerant than the Kirk tended to be, passed acts restoring the Episcopalian clergy excluded after the Revolution.

Although William&#x27;s supporters dominated the government, there remained a significant following for James, particularly in the Highlands. His cause, which became known as Jacobitism, from the Latin &quot;(Jacobus)&quot; for James, led to a series of risings. An initial Jacobite military attempt was led by John Graham, Viscount Dundee. His forces, almost all Highlanders, defeated William&#x27;s forces at the Battle of Killiecrankie in 1689, but they took heavy losses and Dundee was slain in the fighting. Without his leadership the Jacobite army was soon defeated at the Battle of Dunkeld. In the aftermath of the Jacobite defeat on 13 February 1692, in an incident since known as the Massacre of Glencoe, 38 members of the Clan MacDonald of Glencoe were killed by members of the Earl of Argyll&#x27;s Regiment of Foot, on the grounds that they had not been prompt in pledging allegiance to the new monarchs.

===Economic crisis of the 1690s===
The closing decade of the 17th century saw the generally favourable economic conditions that had dominated since the Restoration come to an end. There was a slump in trade with the Baltic and France from 1689 to 1691, caused by French protectionism and changes in the Scottish cattle trade, followed by four years of failed harvests (1695, 1696 and 1698–1699), an era known as the &quot;seven ill years&quot;. The result was severe famine and depopulation, particularly in the north. The Parliament of Scotland of 1695 enacted proposals to help the desperate economic situation, including setting up the Bank of Scotland. The &quot;Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies&quot; received a charter to raise capital through public subscription.

With the dream of building a lucrative overseas colony for Scotland, the Company of Scotland invested in the Darien scheme, an ambitious plan devised by William Paterson to establish a colony on the Isthmus of Panama in the hope of establishing trade with the Far East. The Darién scheme won widespread support in Scotland as the landed gentry and the merchant class were in agreement in seeing overseas trade and colonialism as routes to upgrade Scotland&#x27;s economy. 

Since the capital resources of the Edinburgh merchants and landholder elite were insufficient, the company appealed to middling social ranks, who responded with patriotic fervour to the call for money; the lower classes volunteered as colonists. But the English government opposed the idea: involved in the War of the Grand Alliance from 1689 to 1697 against France, it did not want to offend Spain, which claimed the territory as part of New Granada. The English investors withdrew. Returning to Edinburgh, the Company raised 400,000 pounds in a few weeks. Three small fleets with a total of 3,000 men eventually set out for Panama in 1698. The exercise proved a disaster. Poorly equipped; beset by incessant rain; under attack by the Spanish from nearby Cartagena; and refused aid by the English in the West Indies, the colonists abandoned their project in 1700. Only 1,000 survived and only one ship managed to return to Scotland.

==18th century==

Scotland was a poor rural, agricultural society with a population of 1.3 million in 1755. Although Scotland lost home rule, the Union allowed it to break free of a stultifying system and opened the way for the Scottish Enlightenment as well as a great expansion of trade and increase in opportunity and wealth. Edinburgh economist Adam Smith concluded in 1776 that &quot;By the union with England, the middling and inferior ranks of people in Scotland gained a complete deliverance from the power of an aristocracy which had always before oppressed them.&quot; Historian Jonathan Israel holds that the Union &quot;proved a decisive catalyst politically and economically,&quot; by allowing ambitious Scots entry on an equal basis to a rich expanding empire and its increasing trade.

Scotland&#x27;s transformation into a rich leader of modern industry came suddenly and unexpectedly in the next 150 years, following its union with England in 1707 and its integration with the advanced English and imperial economies. The transformation was led by two cities that grew rapidly after 1770. Glasgow, on the river Clyde, was the base for the tobacco and sugar trade with an emerging textile industry. Edinburgh was the administrative and intellectual centre where the Scottish Enlightenment was chiefly based.

===Union with England===

By the start of the 18th century, a political union between Scotland and England became politically and economically attractive, promising to open up the much larger markets of England, as well as those of the growing English Empire. With economic stagnation since the late 17th century, which was particularly acute in 1704, the country depended more and more heavily on sales of cattle and linen to England, who used this to create pressure for a union. The Scottish parliament voted on 6 January 1707, by 110 to 69, to adopt the Treaty of Union. It was also a full economic union; indeed, most of its 25 articles dealt with economic arrangements for the new state known as &quot;Great Britain&quot;. It added 45 Scots to the 513 members of the House of Commons and 16 Scots to the 190 members of the House of Lords, and ended the Scottish parliament. It also replaced the Scottish systems of currency, taxation and laws regulating trade with laws made in London. Scottish law remained separate from English law, and the religious system was not changed. England had about five times the population of Scotland at the time, and about 36 times as much wealth.

===Jacobitism===

Jacobitism was revived by the unpopularity of the union. In 1708, James Francis Edward Stuart, the son of James VII, who became known as &quot;The Old Pretender&quot;, attempted an invasion with a French fleet carrying 6,000 men, but the Royal Navy prevented it from landing troops. A more serious attempt occurred in 1715, soon after the death of Anne and the accession of the first Hanoverian king, the eldest son of Sophie, as George I of Great Britain. This rising (known as &quot;The &#x27;Fifteen&quot;) envisaged simultaneous uprisings in Wales, Devon, and Scotland. However, government arrests forestalled the southern ventures. In Scotland, John Erskine, Earl of Mar, nicknamed &quot;Bobbin&#x27; John&quot;, raised the Jacobite clans but proved to be an indecisive leader and an incompetent soldier. 

Mar captured Perth, but let a smaller government force under the Duke of Argyll hold the Stirling plain. Part of Mar&#x27;s army joined up with risings in northern England and southern Scotland, and the Jacobites fought their way into England before being defeated at the Battle of Preston, surrendering on 14 November 1715. The day before, Mar had failed to defeat Argyll at the Battle of Sheriffmuir. At this point, James belatedly landed in Scotland, but was advised that the cause was hopeless. He fled back to France. An attempted Jacobite invasion with Spanish assistance in 1719 met with little support from the clans and ended in defeat at the Battle of Glen Shiel.

In 1745, the Jacobite rising known as &quot;The &#x27;Forty-Five&quot; began. Charles Edward Stuart, son of the &quot;Old Pretender&quot;, often referred to as &quot;Bonnie Prince Charlie&quot; or the &quot;Young Pretender&quot;, landed on the island of Eriskay in the Outer Hebrides.
===Post-Jacobite politics===

With the advent of the Union and the demise of Jacobitism, access to London and the Empire opened up very attractive career opportunities for ambitious middle-class and upper-class Scots, who seized the chance to become entrepreneurs, intellectuals, and soldiers. Thousands of Scots, mainly Lowlanders, took up positions of power in politics, civil service, the army and navy, trade, economics, colonial enterprises and other areas across the nascent British Empire. Historian Neil Davidson notes that &quot;after 1746 there was an entirely new level of participation by Scots in political life, particularly outside Scotland&quot;. Davidson also states that &quot;far from being ‘peripheral’ to the British economy, Scotland – or more precisely, the Lowlands – lay at its core&quot;. British officials especially appreciated Scottish soldiers. As the Secretary of War told Parliament in 1751, &quot;I am for having always in our army as many Scottish soldiers as possible...because they are generally more hardy and less mutinous&quot;. The national policy of aggressively recruiting Scots for senior civilian positions stirred up resentment among Englishmen, ranging from violent diatribes by John Wilkes, to vulgar jokes and obscene cartoons in the popular press, and the haughty ridicule by intellectuals such as Samuel Johnson that was much resented by Scots. In his great &quot;Dictionary&quot; Johnson defined oats as, &quot;a grain, which in England is generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people.&quot; To which Lord Elibank retorted, &quot;Very true, and where will you find such men and such horses?&quot;

Scottish politics in the late 18th century was dominated by the Whigs, with the benign management of Archibald Campbell, 3rd Duke of Argyll (1682–1761), who was in effect the &quot;viceroy of Scotland&quot; from the 1720s until his death in 1761. Scotland generally supported the king with enthusiasm during the American Revolution. Henry Dundas (1742–1811) dominated political affairs in the latter part of the century. Dundas defeated advocates of intellectual and social change through his ruthless manipulation of patronage in alliance with Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger, until he lost power in 1806.

The main unit of local government was the parish, and since it was also part of the church, the elders imposed public humiliation for what the locals considered immoral behaviour, including fornication, drunkenness, wife beating, cursing and Sabbath breaking. The main focus was on the poor and the landlords (&quot;lairds&quot;) and gentry, and their servants, were not subject to the parish&#x27;s control. The policing system weakened after 1800 and disappeared in most places by the 1850s.

===Collapse of the clan system===

The clan system of the Highlands and Islands had been seen as a challenge to the rulers of Scotland from before the 17th century. James VI&#x27;s various measures to exert control included the Statutes of Iona, an attempt to force clan leaders to become integrated into the rest of Scottish society. This started a slow process of change which, by the second half of the 18th century, saw clan chiefs start to think of themselves as commercial landlords, rather than as patriarchs of their people. To their tenants, initially this meant that monetary rents replaced those paid in kind. Later, rent increases became common. In the 1710s the Dukes of Argyll started putting leases of some of their land up for auction; by 1737 this was done across the Argyll property. This commercial attitude replaced the principle of &quot;&quot;, which included the obligation on clan chiefs to provide land for clan members. The shift of this attitude slowly spread through the Highland elite (but not among their tenants). 

As clan chiefs became more integrated into Scottish and British society, many of them built up large debts. It became easier to borrow against the security of a Highland estate from the 1770s onwards. As the lenders became predominantly people and organisations outside the Highlands, there was a greater willingness to foreclose if the borrower defaulted. Combined with an astounding level of financial incompetence among the Highland elite, this ultimately forced the sale of the estates of many Highland landed families over the period 1770–1850. (The greatest number of sales of whole estates was toward the end of this period.)

The Jacobite rebellion of 1745 gave a final period of importance to the ability of Highland clans to raise bodies of fighting men at short notice. With the defeat at Culloden, any enthusiasm for continued warfare disappeared and clan leaders returned to their transition to being commercial landlords. This was arguably accelerated by some of the punitive laws enacted after the rebellion. These included the Heritable Jurisdictions (Scotland) Act 1746 (20 Geo. 2. c. 43), which removed judicial roles from clan chiefs and gave them to the Scottish law courts. T. M. Devine warns against seeing a clear cause and effect relationship between the post-Culloden legislation and the collapse of clanship. He questions the basic effectiveness of the measures, quoting W. A. Speck who ascribes the pacification of the area more to &quot;a disinclination to rebel than to the government&#x27;s repressive measures.&quot; Devine points out that social change in Gaeldom did not pick up until the 1760s and 1770s, as this coincided with the increased market pressures from the industrialising and urbanising Lowlands.

The change of clan leaders from patriarchs of their people to commercial landowners gave rise to the first phase of the Highland clearances, with many tenant farmers being evicted and resettled in crofting communities.

In 1846 the Highland potato famine struck the crofting communities of the North and West Highlands. By 1850 the charitable relief effort was wound up, despite the continuing crop failure, and landlords, charities and the government resorted to encouraging emigration. The overall result was that almost 11,000 people were provided with &quot;assisted passages&quot; by their landlords between 1846 and 1856, with the greatest number travelling in 1851. A further 5,000 emigrated to Australia, through the Highland and Island Emigration Society. To this should be added an unknown, but significant number, who paid their own fares to emigrate, and a further unknown number assisted by the Colonial Land and Emigration Commission. This was out of a famine-affected population of about 200,000 people. Many of those who remained became even more involved in temporary migration for work in the Lowlands, both out of necessity during the famine and having become accustomed to working away by the time the famine ceased. Much longer periods were spent out of the Highlands – often for much of the year or more. One illustration of this migrant working was the estimated 30,000 men and women from the far west of the Gaelic speaking area who travelled to the east coast fishing ports for the herring fishing season – providing labour in an industry that grew by 60% between 1854 and 1884.

The clearances were followed by a period of even greater emigration from the Highlands, which continued (with a brief lull for the First World War) up to the start of the Great Depression.

===Enlightenment===
Historian Jonathan Israel argues that by 1750 Scotland&#x27;s major cities had created an intellectual infrastructure of mutually supporting institutions, such as universities, reading societies, libraries, periodicals, museums and masonic lodges. The Scottish network was &quot;predominantly liberal Calvinist, Newtonian, and &#x27;design&#x27; oriented in character which played a major role in the further development of the transatlantic Enlightenment .&quot; In France Voltaire said &quot;we look to Scotland for all our ideas of civilization,&quot; and the Scots in turn paid close attention to French ideas. Historian Bruce Lenman says their &quot;central achievement was a new capacity to recognize and interpret social patterns.&quot; 

The first major philosopher of the Scottish Enlightenment was Francis Hutcheson, who held the Chair of Philosophy at the University of Glasgow from 1729 to 1746. A moral philosopher who produced alternatives to the ideas of Thomas Hobbes, one of his major contributions to world thought was the utilitarian and consequentialist principle that virtue is that which provides, in his words, &quot;the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers&quot;. Much of what is incorporated in the scientific method (the nature of knowledge, evidence, experience, and causation) and some modern attitudes towards the relationship between science and religion were developed by his protégés David Hume and Adam Smith. Hume became a major figure in the skeptical philosophical and empiricist traditions of philosophy. He and other Scottish Enlightenment thinkers developed what he called a &#x27;science of man&#x27;, which was expressed historically in works by authors including James Burnett, Adam Ferguson, John Millar and William Robertson, all of whom merged a scientific study of how humans behave in ancient and primitive cultures with a strong awareness of the determining forces of modernity. Modern sociology largely originated from this movement and Hume&#x27;s philosophical concepts that directly influenced James Madison (and thus the United States Constitution) and when popularised by Dugald Stewart, would be the basis of classical liberalism. Adam Smith published &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot;, often considered the first work on modern economics. It had an immediate impact on British economic policy and in the 21st century still framed discussions on globalisation and tariffs. 

The focus of the Scottish Enlightenment ranged from intellectual and economic matters to the specifically scientific as in the work of the physician and chemist William Cullen, the agriculturalist and economist James Anderson, chemist and physician Joseph Black, natural historian John Walker and James Hutton, the first modern geologist.

===Beginnings of industrialisation===
With tariffs with England now abolished, the potential for trade for Scottish merchants was considerable. However, Scotland in 1750 was still a poor rural, agricultural society with a population of 1.3 million. Some progress was visible: agriculture in the Lowlands was steadily upgraded after 1700 and standards remained high. There were the sales of linen and cattle to England, the cash flows from military service, and the tobacco trade that was dominated by Glasgow Tobacco Lords after 1740. Merchants who profited from the American trade began investing in leather, textiles, iron, coal, sugar, rope, sailcloth, glassworks, breweries, and soapworks, setting the foundations for the city&#x27;s emergence as a leading industrial centre after 1815. The tobacco trade collapsed during the American Revolution (1776–1783), when its sources were cut off by the British blockade of American ports. However, trade with the West Indies began to make up for the loss of the tobacco business, reflecting the British demand for sugar and the demand in the West Indies for herring and linen goods.

Linen was Scotland&#x27;s premier industry in the 18th century and formed the basis for the later cotton, jute, and woollen industries. Scottish industrial policy was made by the board of trustees for Fisheries and Manufactures in Scotland, which sought to build an economy complementary, not competitive, with England. Since England had woollens, this meant linen. Encouraged and subsidised by the Board of Trustees so it could compete with German products, merchant entrepreneurs became dominant in all stages of linen manufacturing and built up the market share of Scottish linens, especially in the American colonial market. The British Linen Company, established in 1746, was the largest firm in the Scottish linen industry in the 18th century, exporting linen to England and America. As a joint-stock company, it had the right to raise funds through the issue of promissory notes or bonds. With its bonds functioning as bank notes, the company gradually moved into the business of lending and discounting to other linen manufacturers, and in the early 1770s banking became its main activity. It joined the established Scottish banks such as the Bank of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1695) and the Royal Bank of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1727). Glasgow would soon follow and Scotland had a flourishing financial system by the end of the century. There were over 400 branches, amounting to one office per 7,000 people, double the level in England, where banks were also more heavily regulated. Historians have emphasised that the flexibility and dynamism of the Scottish banking system contributed significantly to the rapid development of the economy in the 19th century.

German sociologist Max Weber mentioned Scottish Presbyterianism in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1905), and many scholars argued that &quot;this worldly asceticism&quot; of Calvinism was integral to Scotland&#x27;s rapid economic modernisation. More recent scholarship however emphasises other factors. These include technology transfers from England and the appeal of a highly mobile, low-cost labour-force for English investors like Richard Arkwright. Scotland&#x27;s natural resources in water power, black-band ironstone and coal were also important foundations for mechanised industry.

===Religious fragmentation===
In the 1690s the Presbyterian establishment purged the land of Episcopalians and heretics, and made blasphemy a capital crime. Thomas Aitkenhead, the son of an Edinburgh surgeon, aged 18, was indicted for blasphemy by order of the Privy Council for calling the New Testament &quot;The History of the Imposter Christ&quot;; he was hanged in 1696. Their extremism led to a reaction known as the &quot;Moderate&quot; cause that ultimately prevailed and opened the way for liberal thinking in the cities.

The early 18th century saw the beginnings of a fragmentation of the Church of Scotland. These fractures were prompted by issues of government and patronage, but reflected a wider division between the hard-line Evangelicals and the theologically more tolerant Moderate Party. The battle was over fears of fanaticism by the former and the promotion of Enlightenment ideas by the latter. The Patronage Act 1711 was a major blow to the evangelicals, for it meant that local landlords could choose the minister, not the members of the congregation. Schisms erupted as the evangelicals left the main body, starting in 1733 with the First Secession headed by figures including Ebenezer Erskine. The second schism in 1761 lead to the foundation of the independent Relief Church. These churches gained strength in the Evangelical Revival of the later 18th century. A key result was the main Presbyterian church was in the hands of the Moderate faction, which provided critical support for the Enlightenment in the cities.

Long after the triumph of the Church of Scotland in the Lowlands, Highlanders and Islanders clung to an old-fashioned Christianity infused with animistic folk beliefs and practices. The remoteness of the region and the lack of a Gaelic-speaking clergy undermined the missionary efforts of the established church. The later 18th century saw some success, owing to the efforts of the SSPCK missionaries and to the disruption of traditional society. Catholicism had been reduced to the fringes of the country, particularly the Gaelic-speaking areas of the Highlands and Islands. Conditions also grew worse for Catholics after the Jacobite rebellions and Catholicism was reduced to little more than a poorly run mission. Also important was Episcopalianism, which had retained supporters through the civil wars and changes of regime in the 17th century. Since most Episcopalians had given their support to the Jacobite rebellions in the early 18th century, they also suffered a decline in fortunes.

===Literature===
Although Scotland increasingly adopted the English language and wider cultural norms, its literature developed a distinct national identity and began to enjoy an international reputation. Allan Ramsay (1686–1758) laid the foundations of a reawakening of interest in older Scottish literature, as well as leading the trend for pastoral poetry, helping to develop the Habbie stanza as a poetic form. James Macpherson was the first Scottish poet to gain an international reputation, claiming to have found poetry written by Ossian, he published translations that acquired international popularity, being proclaimed as a Celtic equivalent of the Classical epics. &quot;Fingal&quot; written in 1762 was speedily translated into many European languages, and its deep appreciation of natural beauty and the melancholy tenderness of its treatment of the ancient legend did more than any single work to bring about the Romantic movement in European, and especially in German, literature, influencing Herder and Goethe. Eventually it became clear that the poems were not direct translations from the Gaelic, but flowery adaptations made to suit the aesthetic expectations of his audience. Both the major literary figures of the following century, Robert Burns and Walter Scott, would be highly influenced by the Ossian cycle. Burns, an Ayrshire poet and lyricist, is widely regarded as the national poet of Scotland and a major figure in the Romantic movement. As well as making original compositions, Burns also collected folk songs from across Scotland, often revising or adapting them. His poem (and song) &quot;Auld Lang Syne&quot; is often sung at Hogmanay (the last day of the year), and &quot;Scots Wha Hae&quot; served for a long time as an unofficial national anthem of the country.

===Education===
A legacy of the Reformation in Scotland was the aim of having a school in every parish, which was underlined by an act of the Scottish parliament in 1696 (reinforced in 1801). In rural communities this obliged local landowners (heritors) to provide a schoolhouse and pay a schoolmaster, while ministers and local presbyteries oversaw the quality of the education. The headmaster or &quot;dominie&quot; was often university educated and enjoyed high local prestige. The kirk schools were active in the rural lowlands but played a minor role in the Highlands, the islands, and in the fast-growing industrial towns and cities. The schools taught in English, not in Gaelic, because that language was seen as a leftover of Catholicism and was not an expression of Scottish nationalism. In cities such as Glasgow the Catholics operated their own schools, which directed their youth into clerical and middle class occupations, as well as religious vocations.

A &quot;democratic myth&quot; emerged in the 19th century to the effect that many a &quot;lad of pairts&quot; had been able to rise up through the system to take high office and that literacy was much more widespread in Scotland than in neighbouring states, particularly England. Historical research has largely undermined the myth. Kirk schools were not free, attendance was not compulsory and they generally imparted only basic literacy such as the ability to read the Bible. Poor children, starting at age 7, were done by age 8 or 9; the majority were finished by age 11 or 12. The result was widespread basic reading ability; since there was an extra fee for writing, half the people never learned to write. Scots were not significantly better educated than the English and other contemporary nations. A few talented poor boys did go to university, but usually they were helped by aristocratic or gentry sponsors. Most of them became poorly paid teachers or ministers, and none became important figures in the Scottish Enlightenment or the Industrial Revolution.

By the 18th century there were five universities in Scotland, at Edinburgh, Glasgow, St. Andrews and King&#x27;s and Marischial Colleges in Aberdeen, compared with only two in England. Originally oriented to clerical and legal training, after the religious and political upheavals of the 17th century they recovered with a lecture-based curriculum that was able to embrace economics and science, offering a high quality liberal education to the sons of the nobility and gentry. It helped the universities to become major centres of medical education and to put Scotland at the forefront of Enlightenment thinking.

==19th century==

Scotland&#x27;s transformation into a rich leader of modern industry came suddenly and unexpectedly. The population grew steadily in the 19th century, from 1,608,000 in the census of 1801 to 2,889,000 in 1851 and 4,472,000 in 1901. The economy, long based on agriculture, began to industrialise after 1790. At first the leading industry, based in the west, was the spinning and weaving of cotton. In 1861, the American Civil War suddenly cut off the supplies of raw cotton and the industry never recovered. Thanks to its many entrepreneurs and engineers, and its large stock of easily mined coal, Scotland became a world centre for engineering, shipbuilding, and locomotive construction, with steel replacing iron after 1870.

===Party politics===
The Scottish Reform Act 1832 increased the number of Scottish MPs and significantly widened the franchise to include more of the middle classes. From this point until the end of the century, the Whigs and (after 1859) their successors the Liberal Party, managed to gain a majority of the Westminster Parliamentary seats for Scotland, although these were often outnumbered by the much larger number of English and Welsh Conservatives. The English-educated Scottish peer Lord Aberdeen (1784–1860) led a coalition government from 1852 to 1855, but in general very few Scots held office in the government. From the mid-century there were increasing calls for Home Rule for Scotland and when the Conservative Lord Salisbury became prime minister in 1885 he responded to pressure by reviving the post of Secretary of State for Scotland, which had been in abeyance since 1746. He appointed the Duke of Richmond, a wealthy landowner who was both Chancellor of Aberdeen University and Lord Lieutenant of Banff. Towards the end of the century Prime Ministers of Scottish descent included the Tory, Peelite and Liberal William Gladstone, who held the office four times between 1868 and 1894. The first Scottish Liberal to become prime minister was the Earl of Rosebery, from 1894 to 1895, like Aberdeen before him a product of the English education system. In the later 19th century the issue of Irish Home Rule led to a split among the Liberals, with a minority breaking away to form the Liberal Unionists in 1886. The growing importance of the working classes was marked by Keir Hardie&#x27;s success in the 1888 Mid Lanarkshire by-election, leading to the foundation of the Scottish Labour Party, which was absorbed into the Independent Labour Party in 1895, with Hardie as its first leader.

===Industrial expansion===

From about 1790 textiles became the most important industry in the west of Scotland, especially the spinning and weaving of cotton, which flourished until in 1861 the American Civil War cut off the supplies of raw cotton. The industry never recovered, but by that time Scotland had developed heavy industries based on its coal and iron resources. The invention of the hot blast for smelting iron (1828) revolutionised the Scottish iron industry. As a result, Scotland became a centre for engineering, shipbuilding and the production of locomotives. Toward the end of the 19th century, steel production largely replaced iron production. Coal mining continued to grow into the 20th century, producing the fuel to heat homes, factories and drive steam engines locomotives and steamships. By 1914, there were 1,000,000 coal miners in Scotland. The stereotype emerged early on of Scottish colliers as brutish, non-religious and socially isolated serfs; that was an exaggeration, for their life style resembled the miners everywhere, with a strong emphasis on masculinity, equalitarianism, group solidarity, and support for radical labour movements.

Britain was the world leader in the construction of railways, and their use to expand trade and coal supplies. The first successful locomotive-powered line in Scotland, between Monkland and Kirkintilloch, opened in 1831. Not only was good passenger service established by the late 1840s, but an excellent network of freight lines reduce the cost of shipping coal, and made products manufactured in Scotland competitive throughout Britain. For example, railways opened the London market to Scottish beef and milk. They enabled the Aberdeen Angus to become a cattle breed of worldwide reputation. By 1900, Scotland had 3500 miles of railway; their main economic contribution was moving supplies in and product out for heavy industry, especially coal-mining.
Scotland was already one of the most urbanised societies in Europe by 1800. The industrial belt ran across the country from southwest to northeast; by 1900 the four industrialised counties of Lanarkshire, Renfrewshire, Dunbartonshire, and Ayrshire contained 44 per cent of the population. Glasgow became one of the largest cities in the world, and known as &quot;the Second City of the Empire&quot; after London. Shipbuilding on Clydeside (the river Clyde through Glasgow and other points) began when the first small yards were opened in 1712 at the Scott family&#x27;s shipyard at Greenock. After 1860, the Clydeside shipyards specialised in steamships made of iron (after 1870, made of steel), which rapidly replaced the wooden sailing vessels of both the merchant fleets and the battle fleets of the world. It became the world&#x27;s pre-eminent shipbuilding centre. &quot;Clydebuilt&quot; became an industry benchmark of quality, and the river&#x27;s shipyards were given contracts for warships.

===Public health and welfare===
The industrial developments, while they brought work and wealth, were so rapid that housing, town-planning, and provision for public health did not keep pace with them, and for a time living conditions in some of the towns and cities were notoriously bad, with overcrowding, high infant mortality, and growing rates of tuberculosis. The companies attracted rural workers, as well as immigrants from Catholic Ireland, by inexpensive company housing that was a dramatic move upward from the inner-city slums. This paternalistic policy led many owners to endorse government sponsored housing programs as well as self-help projects among the respectable working class.

===Intellectual life===

While the Scottish Enlightenment is traditionally considered to have concluded toward the end of the 18th century, disproportionately large Scottish contributions to British science and letters continued for another 50 years or more, thanks to such figures as the mathematicians and physicists James Clerk Maxwell, Lord Kelvin, and the engineers and inventors James Watt and William Murdoch, whose work was critical to the technological developments of the Industrial Revolution throughout Britain.

In literature the most successful figure of the mid-nineteenth century was Walter Scott, who began as a poet and also collected and published Scottish ballads. His first prose work, Waverley in 1814, is often called the first historical novel. It launched a highly successful career that probably more than any other helped define and popularise Scottish cultural identity. In the late 19th century, a number of Scottish-born authors achieved international reputations. Robert Louis Stevenson&#x27;s work included the urban Gothic novella &quot;Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde&quot; (1886), and played a major part in developing the historical adventure in books like &quot;Kidnapped&quot; and &quot;Treasure Island&quot;. Arthur Conan Doyle&#x27;s &quot;Sherlock Holmes&quot; stories helped found the tradition of detective fiction. The &quot;kailyard tradition&quot; at the end of the century, brought elements of fantasy and folklore back into fashion as can be seen in the work of figures like J. M. Barrie, most famous for his creation of Peter Pan, and George MacDonald, whose works, including &quot;Phantasies&quot;, played a major part in the creation of the fantasy genre.

Scotland also played a major part in the development of art and architecture. The Glasgow School, which developed in the late 19th century, and flourished in the early 20th century, produced a distinctive blend of influences including the Celtic Revival the Arts and Crafts Movement, and Japonisme, which found favour throughout the modern art world of continental Europe and helped define the Art Nouveau style. Among the most prominent members were the loose collective of The Four: acclaimed architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh, his wife the painter and glass artist Margaret MacDonald, her sister the artist Frances, and her husband, the artist and teacher Herbert MacNair.

===Decline and romanticism of the Highlands===
This period saw a process of rehabilitation for highland culture. Tartan had already been adopted for highland regiments in the British army, which poor highlanders joined in large numbers until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, but by the 19th century it had largely been abandoned by the ordinary people. In the 1820s, as part of the Romantic revival, tartan and the kilt were adopted by members of the social elite, not just in Scotland, but across Europe, prompted by the popularity of Macpherson&#x27;s Ossian cycle and then Walter Scott&#x27;s Waverley novels. The world paid attention to their literary redefinition of Scottishness, as they forged an image largely based on characteristics in polar opposition to those associated with England and modernity. This new identity made it possible for Scottish culture to become integrated into a wider European and North American context, not to mention tourist sites, but it also locked in a sense of &quot;otherness&quot; which Scotland began to shed only in the late 20th century. Scott&#x27;s &quot;staging&quot; of the royal Visit of King George IV to Scotland in 1822 and the king&#x27;s wearing of tartan, resulted in a massive upsurge in demand for kilts and tartans that could not be met by the Scottish linen industry. The designation of individual clan tartans was largely defined in this period and became a major symbol of Scottish identity. The fashion for all things Scottish was maintained by Queen Victoria, who helped secure the identity of Scotland as a tourist resort, with Balmoral Castle in Aberdeenshire becoming a major royal residence from 1852.

=== Land use and ownership ===
Despite these changes the highlands remained very poor and traditional, with few connections to the uplift of the Scottish Enlightenment and little role in the Industrial Revolution. A handful of powerful families, typified by the dukes of Argyll, Atholl, Buccleuch, and Sutherland, owned large amounts of land and controlled local political, legal and economic affairs. Particularly after the end of the boom created by the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1790–1815), these landlords needed cash to maintain their position in London society, and had less need of soldiers. They turned to money rents, displaced farmers to raise sheep, and downplayed the traditional patriarchal relationship that had historically sustained the clans. Potato blight reached the Highlands in 1846, where 150,000 people faced disaster because their food supply was largely potatoes (with a little herring, oatmeal and milk). They were rescued by an effective emergency relief system that stands in dramatic contrast to the failures of relief in Ireland. As the famine continued, landlords, charities and government agencies provided &quot;assisted passages&quot; for destitute tenants to emigrate to Canada and Australia; in excess of 16,000 people emigrated, with most travelling in 1851.

Caused by the advent of refrigeration and imports of lamb, mutton and wool from overseas, the 1870s brought with them a collapse of sheep prices and an abrupt halt in the previous sheep farming boom. Land prices subsequently plummeted, too, and accelerated the process of the so-called &quot;Balmoralisation&quot; of Scotland, an era in the second half of the 19th century that saw an increase in tourism and the establishment of large estates dedicated to field sports like deer stalking and grouse shooting, especially in the Scottish Highlands. The process was named after Balmoral estate, purchased by Queen Victoria in 1848, that fueled the romanticisation of upland Scotland and initiated an influx of the newly wealthy acquiring similar estates in the following decades. By the late 19th century just 118 people owned half of Scotland, with nearly 60 per cent of the whole country being part of shooting estates. While their relative importance has somewhat declined due to changing recreational interests throughout the 20th century, deer stalking and grouse shooting remain of prime importance on many private estates in Scotland.

===Rural life===
The unequal concentration of land ownership remained an emotional subject and eventually became a cornerstone of liberal radicalism. The politically powerless poor crofters embraced the popularly oriented, fervently evangelical Presbyterian revival after 1800, and the breakaway &quot;Free Church&quot; after 1843. This evangelical movement was led by lay preachers who themselves came from the lower strata, and whose preaching was implicitly critical of the established order. This energised the crofters and separated them from the landlords, preparing them for their successful and violent challenge to the landlords in the 1880s through the Highland Land League. Violence began on the Isle of Skye when Highland landlords cleared their lands for sheep and deer parks. It was quieted when the government stepped in passing the Crofters&#x27; Holdings (Scotland) Act, 1886 to reduce rents, guarantee fixity of tenure, and break up large estates to provide crofts for the homeless. In 1885, three Independent Crofter candidates were elected to Parliament, leading to explicit security for the Scottish smallholders; the legal right to bequeath tenancies to descendants; and creating a Crofting Commission. The Crofters as a political movement faded away by 1892, and the Liberal Party gained most of their votes.

===Emigration===

The population of Scotland grew steadily in the 19th century, from 1,608,000 in the census of 1801 to 2,889,000 in 1851 and 4,472,000 in 1901. Even with the development of industry there were insufficient good jobs; as a result, during the period 1841–1931, about 2 million Scots emigrated to North America and Australia, and another 750,000 Scots relocated to England. Scotland lost a much higher proportion of its population than England and Wales, reaching perhaps as much as 30.2 per cent of its natural increase from the 1850s onwards. This not only limited Scotland&#x27;s population increase, but meant that almost every family lost members due to emigration and, because more of them were young males, it skewed the sex and age ratios of the country.

Scots-born emigrants that played a leading role in the foundation and development of the United States included cleric and revolutionary John Witherspoon, sailor John Paul Jones, industrialist and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie, and scientist and inventor Alexander Graham Bell. In Canada they included soldier and governor of Quebec James Murray, Prime Minister John A. Macdonald and politician and social reformer Tommy Douglas. For Australia they included soldier and governor Lachlan Macquarie, governor and scientist Thomas Brisbane and Prime Minister Andrew Fisher. For New Zealand they included politician Peter Fraser and outlaw James Mckenzie. By the 21st century, there would be about as many people who were Scottish Canadians and Scottish Americans as the 5 million remaining in Scotland.

===Religious schism and revival===
After prolonged years of struggle, in 1834 the Evangelicals gained control of the General Assembly and passed the Veto Act, which allowed congregations to reject unwanted &quot;intrusive&quot; presentations to livings by patrons. The following &quot;Ten Years&#x27; Conflict&quot; of legal and political wrangling ended in defeat for the non-intrusionists in the civil courts. The result was a schism from the church by some of the non-intrusionists led by Dr Thomas Chalmers known as the Great Disruption of 1843. Roughly a third of the clergy, mainly from the North and Highlands, formed the separate Free Church of Scotland. The evangelical Free Churches, which were more accepting of Gaelic language and culture, grew rapidly in the Highlands and Islands, appealing much more strongly than did the established church. Chalmers&#x27;s ideas shaped the breakaway group. He stressed a social vision that revived and preserved Scotland&#x27;s communal traditions at a time of strain on the social fabric of the country. Chalmers&#x27;s idealised small equalitarian, kirk-based, self-contained communities that recognised the individuality of their members and the need for co-operation. That vision also affected the mainstream Presbyterian churches, and by the 1870s it had been assimilated by the established Church of Scotland. Chalmers&#x27;s ideals demonstrated that the church was concerned with the problems of urban society, and they represented a real attempt to overcome the social fragmentation that took place in industrial towns and cities.

In the late 19th century the major debates were between fundamentalist Calvinists and theological liberals, who rejected a literal interpretation of the Bible. This resulted in a further split in the Free Church as the rigid Calvinists broke away to form the Free Presbyterian Church in 1893. There were, however, also moves towards reunion, beginning with the unification of some secessionist churches into the United Secession Church in 1820, which united with the Relief Church in 1847 to form the United Presbyterian Church, which in turn joined with the Free Church in 1900 to form the United Free Church of Scotland. The removal of legislation on lay patronage would allow the majority of the Free Church to rejoin Church of Scotland in 1929. The schisms left small denominations including the Free Presbyterians and a remnant that had not merged in 1900 as the Free Church.

Catholic Emancipation in 1829 and the influx of large numbers of Irish immigrants, particularly after the famine years of the late 1840s, principally to the growing lowland centres like Glasgow, led to a transformation in the fortunes of Catholicism. In 1878, despite opposition, a Roman Catholic ecclesiastical hierarchy was restored to the country, and Catholicism became a significant denomination within Scotland. Episcopalianism also revived in the 19th century as the issue of succession receded, becoming established as the Episcopal Church in Scotland in 1804, as an autonomous organisation in communion with the Church of England. Baptist, Congregationalist and Methodist churches had appeared in Scotland in the 18th century, but did not begin significant growth until the 19th century, partly because more radical and evangelical traditions already existed within the Church of Scotland and the free churches. From 1879 they were joined by the evangelical revivalism of the Salvation Army, which attempted to make major inroads in the growing urban centres.

===Development of state education===
Industrialisation, urbanisation and the Disruption of 1843 all undermined the tradition of parish schools. From 1830 the state began to fund buildings with grants, then from 1846 it was funding schools by direct sponsorship, and in 1872 Scotland moved to a system like that in England of state-sponsored largely free schools, run by local school boards. Overall administration was in the hands of the Scotch (later Scottish) Education Department in London. Education was now compulsory from five to thirteen and many new board schools were built. Larger urban school boards established &quot;higher grade&quot; (secondary) schools as a cheaper alternative to the burgh schools. The Scottish Education Department introduced a Leaving Certificate Examination in 1888 to set national standards for secondary education and in 1890 school fees were abolished, creating a state-funded national system of free basic education and common examinations.

At the beginning of the 19th century, Scottish universities had no entrance exam, students typically entered at ages of 15 or 16, attended for as little as two years, chose which lectures to attend and could leave without qualifications. After two commissions of enquiry in 1826 and 1876 and reforming acts of parliament in 1858 and 1889, the curriculum and system of graduation were reformed to meet the needs of the emerging middle classes and the professions. Entrance examinations equivalent to the School Leaving Certificate were introduced and average ages of entry rose to 17 or 18. Standard patterns of graduation in the arts curriculum offered 3-year ordinary and 4-year honours degrees and separate science faculties were able to move away from the compulsory Latin, Greek and philosophy of the old MA curriculum. The historic University of Glasgow became a leader in British higher education by providing the educational needs of youth from the urban and commercial classes, as well as the upper class. It prepared students for non-commercial careers in government, the law, medicine, education, and the ministry and a smaller group for careers in science and engineering. St Andrews pioneered the admission of women to Scottish universities, creating the Lady Licentiate in Arts (LLA), which proved highly popular. From 1892 Scottish universities could admit and graduate women and the numbers of women at Scottish universities steadily increased until the early 20th century.
==Early 20th century==

===Fishing===
The years before the First World War were the golden age of the inshore fisheries. Landings reached new heights, and Scottish catches dominated Europe&#x27;s herring trade, accounting for a third of the British catch. High productivity came about thanks to the transition to more productive steam-powered boats, while the rest of Europe&#x27;s fishing fleets were slower because they were still powered by sails.

===Political realignment===

In the Khaki Election of 1900, nationalist concern with the Boer War meant that the Conservatives and their Liberal Unionist allies gained a majority of Scottish seats for the first time, although the Liberals regained their ascendancy in the next election. The Unionists and Conservatives merged in 1912, usually known as the Conservatives in England and Wales, they adopted the name Unionist Party in Scotland. Scots played a major part in the leadership of UK political parties producing a Conservative Prime Minister in Arthur Balfour (1902–1905) and a Liberal one in Henry Campbell-Bannerman (1905–1908). Various organisations, including the Independent Labour Party, joined to make the British Labour Party in 1906, with Keir Hardie as its first chairman.

===First World War (1914–1918)===

Scotland played a major role in the British effort in the First World War. It especially provided manpower, ships, machinery, food (particularly fish) and money, engaging with the conflict with some enthusiasm. Scotland&#x27;s industries were directed at the war effort. For example, the Singer Clydebank sewing machine factory received over 5000 government contracts, and made 303 million artillery shells, shell components, fuses, and aeroplane parts, as well as grenades, rifle parts, and 361,000 horseshoes. Its labour force of 14,000 was about 70 per cent female at war&#x27;s end.

With a population of 4.8 million in 1911, Scotland sent 690,000 men to the war, of whom 74,000 died in combat or from disease, and 150,000 were seriously wounded. Scottish urban centres, with their poverty and unemployment, were favourite recruiting grounds of the regular British army, and Dundee, where the female-dominated jute industry limited male employment, had one of the highest proportion of reservists and serving soldiers than almost any other British city. Concern for their families&#x27; standard of living made men hesitate to enlist; voluntary enlistment rates went up after the government guaranteed a weekly stipend for life to the survivors of men who were killed or disabled. After the introduction of conscription from January 1916 every part of the country was affected. Occasionally Scottish troops made up large proportions of the active combatants, and suffered corresponding loses, as at the Battle of Loos, where there were three full Scots divisions and other Scottish units. Thus, although Scots were only 10 per cent of the British population, they made up 15 per cent of the national armed forces and eventually accounted for 20 per cent of the dead. Some areas, like the thinly populated island of Lewis and Harris, suffered some of the highest proportional losses of any part of Britain. Clydeside shipyards and the nearby engineering shops were the major centres of war industry in Scotland. In Glasgow, radical agitation led to industrial and political unrest that continued after the war ended. After the end of the war in June 1919 the German fleet interned at Scapa Flow was scuttled by its German crews, to avoid its ships being taken over by the victorious allies.

At the start of the war, the main Scottish military airfield was RAF Montrose, established a year earlier by the Royal Flying Corps (RFC). The Royal Naval Air Service established flying-boat and seaplane stations on Shetland, at East Fortune and Inchinnan, the latter two also serving as the army&#x27;s airship bases and protecting Edinburgh and Glasgow, the two largest cities. The world&#x27;s first aircraft carriers were based at Rosyth Dockyard in Fife, where numerous trials were undertaken of aircraft landing on them. The Beardmore W.B.III aircraft was produced by the Glasgow–based William Beardmore and Company, and was the first Royal Navy aircraft designed for flight operations on an aircraft carrier. Due to the scale and significance of Rosyth dockyard to war efforts, it was a prime target for Germany at the outbreak of World War I.

===Economic boom and stagnation===

A boom was created by the First World War, with the shipbuilding industry expanding by a third, but a serious depression hit the economy by 1922. The most skilled craftsmen were especially hard hit, because there were few alternative uses for their specialised skills. The main social indicators such as poor health, bad housing, and long-term mass unemployment, pointed to terminal social and economic stagnation at best, or even a downward spiral. The heavy dependence on obsolescent heavy industry and mining was a central problem, and no one offered workable solutions. The despair reflected what Finlay (1994) describes as a widespread sense of hopelessness that prepared local business and political leaders to accept a new orthodoxy of centralised government economic planning when it arrived during the Second World War.

A few industries did grow, such as chemicals and whisky, which developed a global market for premium &quot;Scotch&quot;. However, in general the Scottish economy stagnated leading to growing unemployment and political agitation among industrial workers.

===Interwar politics===
Following World War I the Liberal Party began to disintegrate and Labour emerged as the party of progressive politics in Scotland, gaining a solid following among working classes of the urban lowlands. As a result, the Unionists were able to gain most of the votes of the middle classes, who now feared Bolshevik revolution, setting the social and geographical electoral pattern in Scotland that would last until the late 20th century. The fear of the left had been fuelled by the emergence of a radical movement led by militant trades unionists. John MacLean emerged as a key political figure in what became known as Red Clydeside, and in January 1919, the Sheriff of Lanarkshire called for military aid for the understrength Glasgow Police in the middle of a riot during the strike for a Forty Hours working week. Formerly a Liberal stronghold, the industrial districts switched to Labour by 1922, with a base in the Irish Catholic working class districts. Women were especially active in building neighbourhood solidarity on housing and rent issues. However, the &quot;Reds&quot; operated within the Labour Party and had little influence in Parliament; in the face of heavy unemployment the workers&#x27; mood changed to passive despair by the late 1920s. Scottish educated Bonar Law led a Conservative government from 1922 to 1923 and another Scot, Ramsay MacDonald, would be the Labour Party&#x27;s first Prime Minister in 1924 and again from 1929 to 1935.

With all the main parties committed to the Union, new nationalist and independent political groupings began to emerge, including the National Party of Scotland in 1928 and Scottish Party in 1930. They joined to form the Scottish National Party (SNP) in 1934, with the goal of creating an independent Scotland, but it enjoyed little electoral success in the Westminster system.

===Second World War (1939–1945)===
As in World War I, Scapa Flow in Orkney served as an important Royal Navy base. Attacks on Scapa Flow and Rosyth gave RAF fighters their first successes downing bombers in the Firth of Forth and East Lothian. The shipyards and heavy engineering factories in Glasgow and Clydeside played a key part in the war effort, and suffered attacks from the Luftwaffe, enduring great destruction and loss of life. As transatlantic voyages involved negotiating north-west Britain, Scotland played a key part in the battle of the North Atlantic. Shetland&#x27;s relative proximity to occupied Norway resulted in the Shetland Bus by which fishing boats helped Norwegians flee the Nazis, and expeditions across the North Sea to assist resistance. Significant individual contributions to the war effort by Scots included the invention of radar by Robert Watson-Watt, which was invaluable in the Battle of Britain, as was the leadership at RAF Fighter Command of Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding.

Scotland&#x27;s airfields provided &quot;a complex network of training and operational needs&quot;, with each airfield said to have had an &quot;essential role&quot; in war efforts. A number of squadrons located on the Ayrshire and Fife coasts were mainly used for anti-shipping patrols. Fighter squadrons on Scotland&#x27;s east coat – Wick, Dyce, Peterhead, Montrose, Leuchars, Drem, East Fortune, Kinloss and Grangemouth – were Coastal Command bases, and used mainly to protect and defend the fleet of aircraft and equipment at both Rosyth Dockyard and Scapa Flow. East Fortune also served as a diversion airfield for Handley Page Halifax and Avro Lancaster bombers returning from bombing operations over Nazi Germany. A total of 94 military airfields were in operation across Scotland during World War II.

In World War II, despite extensive bombing by the Luftwaffe, Scottish industry came out of the depression slump by a dramatic expansion of its industrial activity, absorbing unemployed men and many women as well. The shipyards were the centre of more activity, but many smaller industries produced the machinery needed by the British bombers, tanks and warships. Agriculture prospered, as did all sectors except for coal mining, which was operating mines near exhaustion. Real wages, adjusted for inflation, rose 25 per cent, and unemployment temporarily vanished. Increased income, and the more equal distribution of food, obtained through a tight rationing system, dramatically improved the health and nutrition; the average height of 13-year-olds in Glasgow increased by .

===End of mass emigration===
While emigration began to tail off in England and Wales after the First World War, it continued apace in Scotland, with 400,000 Scots, ten per cent of the population, estimated to have left the country between 1921 and 1931. The economic stagnation was only one factor; other push factors included a zest for travel and adventure, and the pull factors of better job opportunities abroad, personal networks to link into, and the basic cultural similarity of the United States, Canada, and Australia. Government subsidies for travel and relocation facilitated the decision to emigrate. Personal networks of family and friends who had gone ahead and wrote back, or sent money, prompted emigrants to retrace their paths. When the Great Depression hit in the 1930s there were no easily available jobs in the US and Canada and the numbers leaving fell to less than 50,000 a year, bringing to an end the period of mass emigrations that had opened in the mid-18th century.

===Literary renaissance===

In the early 20th century there was a new surge of activity in Scottish literature, influenced by modernism and resurgent nationalism, known as the Scottish Renaissance. The leading figure in the movement was Hugh MacDiarmid (the pseudonym of Christopher Murray Grieve). MacDiarmid attempted to revive the Scots language as a medium for serious literature in poetic works including &quot;A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle&quot; (1936), developing a form of Synthetic Scots that combined different regional dialects and archaic terms. Other writers that emerged in this period, and are often treated as part of the movement, include the poets Edwin Muir and William Soutar, the novelists Neil Gunn, George Blake, Nan Shepherd, A. J. Cronin, Naomi Mitchison, Eric Linklater and Lewis Grassic Gibbon, and the playwright James Bridie. All were born within a fifteen-year period (1887 and 1901) and, although they cannot be described as members of a single school, they all pursued an exploration of identity, rejecting nostalgia and parochialism and engaging with social and political issues.

===Educational reorganisation and retrenchment===

In the 20th century, the centre of the education system became more focused on Scotland, with the ministry of education partly moving north in 1918 and then finally having its headquarters relocated to Edinburgh in 1939. The school leaving age was raised to 14 in 1901, but despite attempts to raise it to 15 this was only made law in 1939 and then postponed because of the outbreak of war. In 1918, Roman Catholic schools were brought into the state system, but retained their distinct religious character, access to schools by priests and the requirement that school staff be acceptable to the Church.

The first half of the 20th century saw Scottish universities fall behind those in England and Europe in terms of participation and investment. The decline of traditional industries between the wars undermined recruitment. English universities increased the numbers of students registered between 1924 and 1927 by 19 per cent, but in Scotland the numbers fell, particularly among women. In the same period, while expenditure in English universities rose by 90 per cent, in Scotland the increase was less than a third of that figure.

===Naval role===

Scotland&#x27;s Scapa Flow was the main base for the Royal Navy in the 20th century. As the Cold War intensified in 1961, the United States deployed Polaris ballistic missiles, and submarines, in the Firth of Clyde&#x27;s Holy Loch. Public protests from CND campaigners proved futile. The Royal Navy successfully convinced the government to allow the base because it wanted its own Polaris submarines, and it obtained them in 1963. The RN&#x27;s nuclear submarine base opened with four Polaris submarines at the expanded Faslane Naval Base on the Gare Loch. The first patrol of a Trident-armed submarine occurred in 1994, although the US base was closed at the end of the Cold War.

During the outbreak of the Cold War, Scotland&#x27;s secret bunker at Anstruther were largely kept a closed and guarded secret. Initially used by the Royal Air Force (RAF) after World War II as one of a number of radar stations, it became a secret bunker to be used in the event of a nuclear attack. The bunker was 40 metres in depth and was constructed using a shell encased in three-metre solid concrete in order to deflect a nuclear attack. The facility remained in use until 1992, and was later redeveloped into a museum in 1994. The nuclear facility at Dounreay in the Highland area of Scotland was one of the 52 known nuclear targets of the Soviet Union until at least 1990.

==Postwar==
=== Overview ===
Following World War II, Scotland&#x27;s economic situation became progressively worse due to overseas competition, inefficient industry, and industrial disputes. This only began to change in the 1970s, partly due to the discovery and development of North Sea oil and gas and partly as Scotland moved towards a more service-based economy, with the services sector contributing 75% to the overall Scottish economy in 2020.

This period saw the emergence of the Scottish National Party and movements for both Scottish independence and more popularly devolution. A referendum on devolution in 1979 was unsuccessful as it did not achieve the support of 40 per cent of the electorate. However, in 1997 Scottish voters voted in favour of establishing a Scottish Parliament which was established in 1998 and thus Scottish devolution was reformed. In 2014, the independence referendum saw vote against independence by 55% to 45% choosing to remain in the United Kingdom.

===Politics and devolution===
In the second half of the 20th century the Labour Party usually won most Scottish seats in the Westminster parliament, losing this dominance briefly to the Unionists in the 1950s. Support in Scotland was critical to Labour&#x27;s overall electoral fortunes as without Scottish MPs it would have gained only two UK electoral victories in the 20th century (1945 and 1966). The number of Scottish seats represented by Unionists (known as Conservatives from 1965 onwards) went into steady decline from 1959 onwards, until it fell to zero in 1997. Politicians with Scottish connections continued to play a prominent part in UK political life, with Prime Ministers including the Conservatives Harold Macmillan (whose father was Scottish) from 1957 to 1963 and Alec Douglas-Home from 1963 to 1964.

The Scottish National Party gained its first seat at Westminster in 1945 and became a party of national prominence during the 1970s, achieving 11 MPs in 1974. However, a referendum on devolution in 1979 was unsuccessful as it did not achieve the necessary support of 40 per cent of the electorate (despite a small majority of those who voted supporting the proposal) and the SNP went into electoral decline during the 1980s. The introduction in 1989 by the Thatcher-led Conservative government of the Community Charge (widely known as the Poll Tax), one year before the rest of the United Kingdom, contributed to a growing movement for a return to direct Scottish control over domestic affairs. On 11 September 1997, the 700th anniversary of Battle of Stirling Bridge, the Blair led Labour government again held a referendum on the issue of devolution which led to the establishment of a devolved Scottish Parliament in 1999. A coalition government, which would last until 2007, was formed between Labour and the Liberal Democrats, with Donald Dewar as First Minister until his death in 2000. 

The new Scottish Parliament Building, adjacent to Holyrood House in Edinburgh, opened in 2004. Although not initially reaching its 1970s peak in Westminster elections, the SNP had more success in the Scottish Parliamentary elections with their system of mixed member proportional representation. It became the official opposition in 1999, a minority government in 2007 and a majority government in 2011. A national referendum to decide on Scottish independence was held on 18 September 2014. Voters were asked to answer either &quot;Yes&quot; or &quot;No&quot; to the question: &quot;Should Scotland be an independent country?&quot; 55.3% of voters answered &quot;No&quot; and 44.7% answered &quot;Yes&quot;, with a voter turnout of 84.5%. In the 2015 Westminster election, the SNP won 56 out of 59 Scottish seats, making them the third largest party in Westminster.

===Economic reorientation===
Following World War II, Scotland&#x27;s economic situation became progressively worse due to overseas competition, inefficient industry, and industrial disputes. This only began to change in the 1970s, partly due to the discovery and development of North Sea oil and gas and partly as Scotland moved towards a more service-based economy. The discovery of the giant Forties oilfield in October 1970 signalled that Scotland was about to become a major oil producing nation, a view confirmed when Shell Expro discovered the giant Brent oilfield in the northern North Sea east of Shetland in 1971. Oil production started from the Argyll field (now Ardmore) in June 1975, followed by Forties in November of that year. Deindustrialisation took place rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s, as most of the traditional industries drastically shrank or were completely closed down. A new service-oriented economy emerged to replace traditional heavy industries. This included a resurgent financial services industry and the electronics manufacturing of Silicon Glen.

===Religious diversity and decline===
In the 20th century existing Christian denominations were joined by other organisations, including the Brethren and Pentecostal churches. Although some denominations thrived, after World War II there was a steady overall decline in church attendance and resulting church closures for most denominations. Talks began in the 1950s aiming at a grand merger of the main Presbyterian, Episcopal and Methodist bodies in Scotland. The talks were ended in 2003, when the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland rejected the proposals. In the 2011 census, 53.8% of the Scottish population identified as Christian (declining from 65.1% in 2001). The Church of Scotland is the largest religious grouping in Scotland, with 32.4% of the population. The Roman Catholic Church accounted for 15.9% of the population and is especially important in West Central Scotland and the Highlands. In recent years other religions have established a presence in Scotland, mainly through immigration and higher birth rates among ethnic minorities, with a small number of converts. Those with the most adherents in the 2011 census are Islam (1.4%, mainly among immigrants from South Asia), Hinduism (0.3%), Buddhism (0.2%) and Sikhism (0.2%). Other minority faiths include the Bahá&#x27;í Faith and small Neopagan groups. There are also various organisations which actively promote humanism and secularism, included within the 43.6% who either indicated no religion or did not state a religion in the 2011 census.

===Educational reforms===

Although plans to raise the school leaving age to 15 in the 1940s were never ratified, increasing numbers stayed on beyond elementary education and it was eventually raised to 16 in 1973. As a result, secondary education was the major area of growth in the second half of the 20th century. New qualifications were developed to cope with changing aspirations and economics, with the Leaving Certificate being replaced by the Scottish Certificate of Education Ordinary Grade (&#x27;O-Grade&#x27;) and Higher Grade (&#x27;Higher&#x27;) qualifications in 1962, which became the basic entry qualification for university study. The higher education sector expanded in the second half of the 20th century, with four institutions being given university status in the 1960s (Dundee, Heriot-Watt, Stirling and Strathclyde) and five in the 1990s (Abertay, Glasgow Caledonian, Napier, Paisley and Robert Gordon). After devolution, in 1999 the new Scottish Executive set up an Education Department and an Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department. One of the major diversions from practice in England, possible because of devolution, was the abolition of student tuition fees in 1999, instead retaining a system of means-tested student grants.

===New literature===
Some writers that emerged after the Second World War followed Hugh MacDiarmid by writing in Scots, including Robert Garioch and Sydney Goodsir Smith. Others demonstrated a greater interest in English language poetry, among them Norman MacCaig, George Bruce and Maurice Lindsay. George Mackay Brown from Orkney, and Iain Crichton Smith from Lewis, wrote both poetry and prose fiction shaped by their distinctive island backgrounds. The Glaswegian poet Edwin Morgan became known for translations of works from a wide range of European languages. He was also the first Scots Makar (the official national poet), appointed by the inaugural Scottish government in 2004. Many major Scottish post-war novelists, such as Muriel Spark, with &quot;The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie&quot; (1961) spent much or most of their lives outside Scotland, but often dealt with Scottish themes. Successful mass-market works included the action novels of Alistair MacLean, and the historical fiction of Dorothy Dunnett. A younger generation of novelists that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s included Shena Mackay, Alan Spence, Allan Massie and the work of William McIlvanney. From the 1980s Scottish literature enjoyed another major revival, this time led by a group of Glasgow writers associated with critic, poet and teacher Philip Hobsbaum and editor Peter Kravitz. In the 1990s major, prize winning, Scottish novels, often overtly political, that emerged from this movement included Irvine Welsh&#x27;s &quot;Trainspotting&quot; (1993), Warner&#x27;s &quot;Morvern Callar&quot; (1995), Gray&#x27;s &quot;Poor Things&quot; (1992) and Kelman&#x27;s &quot;How Late It Was, How Late&quot; (1994). Scottish crime fiction has been a major area of growth, particularly the success of Edinburgh&#x27;s Ian Rankin and his Inspector Rebus novels. This period also saw the emergence of a new generation of Scottish poets that became leading figures on the UK stage, including Carol Ann Duffy, who was named as Poet Laureate in May 2009, the first woman, the first Scot and the first openly gay poet to take the post.

==Historiography==
==See also==

* Economic history of Scotland
*History of the Outer Hebrides
*Historic Sites in Scotland
*History of the United Kingdom
*Kings of Scotland
*List of years in Scotland
*Scottish clan
*Timeline of Scottish history

==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===

====Surveys and reference books====

* &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot; (2004) online; short scholarly biographies of all the major people
* 
* Donnachie, Ian and George Hewitt. &quot;Dictionary of Scottish History.&quot; (2001). 384 pp.
* Houston, R.A. and W. Knox, eds. &quot;New Penguin History of Scotland&quot;, (2001). 
* Keay, John, and Julia Keay. &quot;Collins Encyclopedia of Scotland&quot; (2nd ed. 2001), 1101 pp; 4000 articles; emphasis on history
* Lenman, Bruce P. &quot;Enlightenment and Change: Scotland 1746–1832&quot; (2nd ed. The New History of Scotland Series. Edinburgh University Press, 2009). 280 pp. ; 1st edition also published under the titles &quot;Integration, Enlightenment, and Industrialization: Scotland, 1746–1832&quot; (1981) and &quot;Integration and Enlightenment: Scotland, 1746–1832&quot; (1992).
* 
* Maclean, Fitzroy, and Magnus Linklater, &quot;Scotland: A Concise History&quot; (2nd ed. 2001) excerpt and text search
* McNeill, Peter G. B. and Hector L. MacQueen, eds, &quot;Atlas of Scottish History to 1707&quot; (The Scottish Medievalists and Department of Geography, 1996).
* Magnusson, Magnus. &quot;Scotland: The Story of a Nation&quot; (2000), popular history focused on royalty and warfare
* 
* Panton, Kenneth J. and Keith A. Cowlard, &quot;Historical Dictionary of the United Kingdom. Vol. 2: Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland.&quot; (1998). 465 pp.
* Paterson, Judy, and Sally J. Collins. &quot;The History of Scotland for Children&quot; (2000)
* Pittock, Murray, &quot;A New History of Scotland&quot; (2003) 352 pp; 
* Smout, T. C., &quot;A History of the Scottish People, 1560–1830&quot; (1969, Fontana, 1998).
* Tabraham, Chris, and Colin Baxter. &quot;The Illustrated History of Scotland&quot; (2004) excerpt and text search
* Watson, Fiona, &quot;Scotland; From Prehistory to the Present.&quot; Tempus, 2003. 286 pp.
* Wormald, Jenny, &quot;The New History of Scotland&quot; (2005) excerpt and text search
====Specialized studies====

* Buchan, James, &quot;Capital of the Mind: How Edinburgh Changed the World&quot; (John Murray, 2003).
* Colley, Linda, &quot;Britons: Forging the Nation 1707–1837&quot; (Yale University Press, 1992).
* Cooke, Anthony. &quot;The Rise and Fall of the Scottish Cotton Industry, 1778–1914&quot; (Manchester University Press, 2010).
* 
* 
* Hamilton, David. &quot;The healers: a history of medicine in Scotland&quot; (Pelican, 1981).
* Harvie, Christopher &quot;Scotland and Nationalism: Scottish Society and Politics 1707–1977&quot; (4th edn., Routledge, 2004).
* 
* Pittock, Murray. &quot;The Road to Independence? Scotland since the Sixties&quot; (2008) excerpt and text search.
* Smout, T. C., &quot;Scottish Trade on the Eve of the Union, 1660–1707&quot; (Oliver &amp; Boyd, 1963).
* Smout, T. C., &quot;Scotland Since Prehistory: Natural History and Human Impact&quot; (Scottish Cultural Press, 1993).
====Culture and religion====
* Browen, Ian, ed., &quot;The Edinburgh History of Scottish Literature&quot; (3 vol 2006).
* Brown, Callum G. &quot;Religion and Society in Scotland since 1707.&quot; (1997). 219 pp.
* Burleigh, J.H.S. &quot;A Church History of Scotland&quot; (1962), short and impartial.
* Daiches, David. &quot;A Companion to Scottish Culture&quot; (1982) online edition.
* Dingwall, Helen M. &quot;Famous and flourishing society: the history of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, 1505–2005.&quot; (2005) 350 pp. .
* Glendinning, Miles, Ranald MacInnes, Aonghus MacKechnie. &quot;A History of Scottish Architecture: From the Renaissance to the Present Day&quot; (1996) online edition.
* Hardy, Forsyth. &quot;Scotland in Film&quot; 1990 online edition.
* Harris, Nathaniel. &quot;Heritage of Scotland: A Cultural History of Scotland and Its People.&quot; Facts on File, 2000. 159 pp.
* Lawrence, Christopher. &quot;Rockefeller money, the laboratory, and medicine in Edinburgh, 1919–1930: new science in an old country.&quot; (2005) 373 pp. 
* Levack, Brian. &quot;Scottish Witch Hunting: Law, Politics and Religion&quot; (2007).
* McDonald, R. A., ed. &quot;History, Literature and Music in Scotland, 700–1560.&quot; (2002). 243 pp.
* Mackenzie, D. A. &quot;Scottish Folklore and Folklife.&quot; (1935).
* McEwan, Peter J. M. &quot;Dictionary of Scottish Art and Architecture.&quot; Wappingers Falls, N.Y.: Antique Collectors Club, 1995. 626 pp.
* McNeill, F. Marion, &quot;The Silver Bough&quot; (volume 1: Scottish Folk-Lore and Folk-Belief), 1989. .
* Menikoff, Barry. &quot;Narrating Scotland: the Imagination of Robert Louis Stevenson.&quot; (2005) 233 pp. .
* Pelling, Margaret, ed., &quot;Practice of Reform in Health, Medicine, and Science, 1500–2000&quot; (2005).
* Petrie, Duncan, &quot;Screening Scotland.&quot; BFI, 2000. 250 pp. on films.
* Porter, James. &quot;The Folklore of Northern Scotland: Five Discourses on Cultural Representation.&quot; &quot;Folklore&quot; vol. 109. 1998. pp 1+ online edition.
* Ritchie, Anna and Graham Ritchie. &quot;Scotland: An Oxford Archaeological Guide&quot; (1998) online edition.
* Schoene, Berthold. &quot;The Edinburgh Companion to Contemporary Scottish Literature&quot; (2007), 560 pp.
* Smith, Bill and Skipwith, Selina. &quot;A History of Scottish Art.&quot; Merrell, 2003. 288 pp.
* Todd, Margo. &quot;The Culture of Protestantism in Early Modern Scotland.&quot; (2002). 450 pp.
* Walker, Marshall, &quot;Scottish Literature since 1707.&quot; (1997). 443 pp.
* Whatley, Christopher A. &quot;Scottish Society, 1707–1830: Beyond Jacobitism, toward Industrialisation.&quot; (2000). 354 pp.
* 
* Withers, Charles W. J., &quot;Geography, Science, and National Identity: Scotland since 1520.&quot; (2001). 312 pp.
====Prehistory and archaeology====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


====Medieval====
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Taylor, S., ed., &quot;Picts, Kings, Saints and Chronicles: A Festschrift for Marjorie O. Anderson&quot; (Four Courts, 2000).
* 
* Woods, J. D., and Pelteret, D. A. E., eds, &quot;The Anglo-Saxons, Synthesis and Achievement&quot; (Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1985).
** 
====Early modern====
* Ryrie, Alec (2006). &quot;The Origins of the Scottish Reformation&quot; (Manchester: Manchester University Press).


====Enlightenment, 18th century====

* Berry, Christopher J., &quot;The Social Theory of the Scottish Enlightenment&quot; (1997) excerpt and text search.
* Broadie, Alexander. &quot;The Cambridge Companion to the Scottish Enlightenment&quot; (2003) complete online edition; also excerpt and text search.
* Broadie, Alexander, ed. &quot;The Scottish Enlightenment: An Anthology&quot; (1998), primary sources. excerpt and text search
* Buchan, James, &quot;Crowded with Genius: the Scottish Enlightenment; Edinburgh&#x27;s Moment of the Mind&quot; (HarperCollins, 2003). excerpt and text search.
* Campbell, R. H. and Andrew S. Skinner, eds. &quot;The Origins and Nature of the Scottish Enlightenment&quot; (1982), 12 essays by scholars, esp. on history of science.
* Daiches, David, Peter Jones and Jean Jones. &quot;A Hotbed of Genius: The Scottish Enlightenment, 1730–1790&quot; (1986), 170 pp; well-illustrated introduction.
* Davidson, Neil, &quot;Discovering the Scottish Revolution, 1692–1746&quot;, Pluto Press, London, England (2003). .
* Devine, T. M., &quot;Clanship to Crofters&#x27; War: the Social Transformation of the Scottish Highlands&quot;, (1994). .
* Dwyer, John, &quot;The Age of the Passions: An Interpretation of Adam Smith and Scottish Enlightenment Culture.&quot; (1998). 205 pp.
* Goldie, Mark, &quot;The Scottish Catholic Enlightenment,&quot; &quot;The Journal of British Studies&quot; Vol. 30, No. 1 (January 1991), pp. 20–62 in JSTOR
* Graham, Gordon. &quot;Morality and Feeling in the Scottish Enlightenment,&quot; &quot;Philosophy&quot; Vol. 76, No. 296 (April 2001), pp. 271–282 in JSTOR.
* Hamilton, H. &quot;An Economic History of Scotland in the Eighteenth Century&quot; (1963).
* Hamilton, Douglas J. &quot;Scotland, the Caribbean and the Atlantic World, 1750-–1820.&quot; (2005) 249 pp. .
* Harvie, Christopher. &quot;Scotland and Nationalism: Scottish Society and Politics 1707 to the Present&quot; (2004) excerpt and text search online edition.
* Hemingway, Andrew. &quot;The &#x27;Sociology&#x27; of Taste in the Scottish Enlightenment,&quot; &quot;Oxford Art Journal,&quot; Vol. 12, No. 2 (1989), pp. 3–35 in JSTOR.
* Herman, Arthur, &quot;How the Scots Invented the Modern World: The True Story of How Western Europe&#x27;s Poorest Nation Created Our World &amp; Everything in It&quot; (Crown, 2001), and text search.
* Hont, Istvan, and Michael Ignatieff. &quot;Wealth and Virtue: The Shaping of Political Economy in the Scottish Enlightenment&quot; (1986) excerpt and text search
* Hopfl, H. M. &quot;From Savage to Scotsman: Conjectural History in the Scottish Enlightenment,&quot; &quot;The Journal of British Studies,&quot; Vol. 17, No. 2 (Spring, 1978), pp. 19–40 in JSTOR.
* Howe, Daniel Walker. &quot;Why the Scottish Enlightenment Was Useful to the Framers of the American Constitution,&quot; &quot;Comparative Studies in Society and History,&quot; Vol. 31, No. 3 (July 1989), pp. 572–587 in JSTOR.
* Lenman, Bruce P. &quot;Integration and Enlightenment: Scotland, 1746–1832&quot; (1993) New History of Scotland excerpt and text search.
* Ottenberg, June C. &quot;Musical Currents of the Scottish Enlightenment,&quot; &quot;International Review of the Aesthetics and Sociology of Music&quot; Vol. 9, No. 1 (June 1978), pp. 99–109 in JSTOR.
* Phillipson, N.T. and Mitchison, Rosalind, eds. &quot;Scotland in the Age of Improvement&quot;, (1996). .
* Robertson, John. &quot;The Case for the Enlightenment: Scotland and Naples 1680–1760&quot; (2005).
* Swingewood, Alan. &quot;Origins of Sociology: The Case of the Scottish Enlightenment,&quot; &quot;The British Journal of Sociology,&quot; Vol. 21, No. 2 (June 1970), pp. 164–180 in JSTOR.
* Withers, Charles W. J. and Wood, Paul, eds. &quot;Science and Medicine in the Scottish Enlightenment.&quot; (2002). 364 pp.
* Wood, P., ed. &quot;The Scottish Enlightenment: Essays in Reinterpretation&quot; (2000).
====Union and Jacobites====

* Fremont-Barnes, Gregory. &quot;The Jacobite Rebellion 1745–46&quot; (Essential Histories) (2011).
* Fry, Michael. &quot;The Union: England, Scotland and the Treaty of 1707&quot; (2006).
* 
* Macinnes, Allan I. &quot;Jacobitism in Scotland: Episodic Cause or National Movement?&quot; &quot;Scottish Historical Review,&quot; Oct 2007, Vol. 86,2 Issue 222, pp 225–252; emphasises its traditionalism.
* Macinnes, Allan I. &quot;Union and Empire: The Making of the United Kingdom in 1707&quot; (Cambridge Studies in Early Modern British History) (2007) excerpt and text search.
* Oates, Jonathan. &quot;Jacobite Campaigns: The British State at War&quot; (Warfare, Society and Culture) (2011).
* Pittock, Murray. &quot;The Myth of the Jacobite Clans: The Jacobite Army in 1745&quot; (2nd ed. 2009).
* Plank, Geoffrey. &quot;Rebellion and Savagery: The Jacobite Rising of 1745 and the British Empire&quot; (2005).
* Scott, P. H. &quot;1707: The Union of Scotland and England: In Contemporary Documents&quot; (1979), primary sources.
* Trevor-Roper, Hugh. &quot;From Counter-Reformation to Glorious Revolution&quot; (1992) pp. 282–303 on Union.
====Women====

* Abrams, Lynn, et al. &quot;Gender in Scottish History Since 1700&quot; (2006) excerpt and text search.
* Breitenbach, Esther, and Eleanor Gordon. &quot;Women in Scottish Society 1800–1945&quot; (1992) online edition.
* Browne, Sarah. &quot;The women&#x27;s liberation movement in Scotland&quot; (2016). online review
* Ewan, Elisabeth &quot;et al.&quot; eds. &quot;The Biographical Dictionary of Scottish Women: From the Earliest Times to 2004&quot; (2006).
* Ewan, Elisabeth &quot;A New Trumpet? The History of Women in Scotland 1300–1700&quot;, &quot;History Compass,&quot; March 2009, vol. 7, issue 2, pp. 431–446; a new field since the 1980s; favourite topics are work, family, religion, crime, and images of women; scholars are using women&#x27;s letters, memoirs, poetry, and court records.


====Historiography====
* 
* 
* Bowie, Karin. &quot;Cultural, British and Global Turns in the History of Early Modern Scotland,&quot; &quot;Scottish Historical Review&quot; (April 2013 Supplement), Vol. 92, pp. 38–48.
* .
* Dingwall, Helen M. &quot;A history of Scottish medicine: themes and influences&quot; (Edinburgh UP, 2003).
* Elton, G. R. &quot;Modern Historians on British History 1485–1945: A Critical Bibliography 1945–1969&quot; (1969), annotated guide to 1000 history books on every major topic, plus book reviews and major scholarly articles. online pp 198–205
* Kidd, C. &quot;Subverting Scotland&#x27;s Past: Scottish Whig Historians and the Creation of an Anglo-British Identity 1689–1830&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2003)
* Linklater, Eric. &quot;The Matter of Scotland.&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (Jan 1951) 1#1 pp. 43–52, online
* Lee Jr., Maurice. &quot;Scottish History since 1966,&quot; in Richard Schlatter, ed., &quot;Recent Views on British History: Essays on Historical Writing since 1966&quot; (Rutgers UP, 1984), pp. 377 – 400.
* Morton, Graeme, and Trevor Griffiths. &quot;Closing the Door on Modern Scotland&#x27;s Gilded Cage,&quot; &quot;Scottish Historical Review&quot; (2013) Supplement, Vol. 92, pp. 49–69; on nationalism
* 


====Primary sources====
* Broadie, Alexander, ed. (1997), &quot;The Scottish Enlightenment: An Anthology&quot;.
* Cooke, Anthony, et al. eds (1998). &quot;Modern Scottish History, 1707 To the Present: vol 5: Major Documents&quot; (Tuckwell Press) online edition.
* &quot;Statistical Accounts of Scotland&quot; (1791–1845) online, detailed local descriptions.
==External links==

*&quot;History of Scotland: Primary Documents&quot; from Brigham Young University
*Scottish Timeline: Part of the Gazetteer for Scotland
*Scottish History in 33 Chapters by Andrew Lang</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q471148" start="13" end="36" title="History of Scotland" label="history of [[Scotland]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398962" start="53" end="60" title="Scotland during the Roman Empire" label="arrival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="68" end="80" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88" end="99" title="1st century" label="1st century"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="110" end="118" title="Roman province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="122" end="131" title="Roman Britain" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="160" end="173" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048625" start="193" end="202" title="Caledonia" label="Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="291" end="310" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632793" start="328" end="349" title="Roman withdrawal from Britain" label="withdrew from Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="353" end="359" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="371" end="378" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292989" start="396" end="401" title="Scoti" label="Scoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249814" start="473" end="493" title="prehistoric Scotland" label="prehistoric Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="506" end="519" title="Neolithic Era" label="Neolithic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="539" end="549" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="573" end="581" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="620" end="629" title="Dál Riata" label="Dál Riata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578813" start="679" end="690" title="Scotland in the Early Middle Ages" label="6th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866237" start="718" end="723" title="History of Christianity in Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="763" end="774" title="Pictish religion" label="pagan Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="778" end="797" title="Celtic Christianity" label="Celtic Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="809" end="816" title="Saxon England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044905" start="824" end="841" title="Gregorian mission" label="Gregorian mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665455" start="860" end="867" title="Nechtan mac Der-Ilei" label="Nechtan"/>
<link wikidata="Q730757" start="924" end="934" title="Roman rite" label="Roman rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="1002" end="1009" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="1010" end="1021" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429971" start="1063" end="1079" title="Viking invasions of Scotland" label="Viking invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986730" start="1183" end="1194" title="Scotland in the High Middle Ages" label="9th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="1208" end="1227" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356167" start="1275" end="1289" title="House of Alpin" label="House of Alpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332136" start="1388" end="1398" title="Malcolm II" label="Malcolm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590107" start="1514" end="1530" title="House of Dunkeld" label="House of Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="1566" end="1579" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q229159" start="1634" end="1642" title="Margaret, Maid of Norway" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1703" end="1711" title="Edward I" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="1814" end="1843" title="Wars of Scottish Independence" label="Wars of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589976" start="1891" end="1907" title="House of Balliol" label="House of Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q845196" start="1916" end="1930" title="House of Bruce" label="House of Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435677" start="1943" end="1959" title="Scotland in the Late Middle Ages" label="late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2109" end="2127" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="2159" end="2183" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="2207" end="2222" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="2228" end="2250" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="2287" end="2314" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2336" end="2342" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="2454" end="2473" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="2495" end="2514" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="2553" end="2570" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q333158" start="2577" end="2589" title="Donald Dewar" label="Donald Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="2678" end="2701" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="2749" end="2762" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="2007 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="2769" end="2783" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="first minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="2784" end="2796" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="2807" end="2856" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="referendum on Scotland regaining its independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063038" start="3026" end="3048" title="Scottish Enlightenment" label="Scottish Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="3053" end="3074" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435679" start="3085" end="3091" title="Scotland in the modern era" label="became"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="3177" end="3195" title="industrial decline" label="industrial decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q654216" start="3390" end="3393" title="Ayr" label="Ayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="3395" end="3404" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="3406" end="3413" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q211870" start="3415" end="3422" title="Paisley, Renfrewshire" label="Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q576562" start="3427" end="3437" title="Kilmarnock" label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="3458" end="3466" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="3468" end="3474" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="3479" end="3488" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175225" start="3522" end="3529" title="Economy of Scotland" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="3646" end="3668" title="Gross Domestic Product" label="Gross Domestic Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="3755" end="3768" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="3870" end="3886" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="3913" end="3932" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="interglacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="4089" end="4096" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="4105" end="4111" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="4277" end="4294" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250089" start="4408" end="4414" title="Biggar, South Lanarkshire" label="Biggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q767798" start="4678" end="4695" title="South Queensferry" label="South Queensferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="4705" end="4719" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="4737" end="4747" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111509" start="4841" end="4845" title="Jura, Scotland" label="Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="4872" end="4881" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776885" start="4982" end="4995" title="Knap of Howar" label="Knap of Howar"/>
<link wikidata="Q931770" start="4999" end="5011" title="Papa Westray" label="Papa Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q816437" start="5077" end="5087" title="Skara Brae" label="Skara Brae"/>
<link wikidata="Q148749" start="5096" end="5104" title="Mainland, Orkney" label="Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q585490" start="5165" end="5180" title="chambered cairn" label="chambered cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q507076" start="5214" end="5222" title="Maeshowe" label="Maeshowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478558" start="5301" end="5309" title="Standing Stones of Stenness" label="Stenness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5585" end="5595" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="5660" end="5670" title="hill forts" label="hill forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049397" start="5737" end="5748" title="Eildon Hill" label="Eildon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="5769" end="5785" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5883" end="5888" title="Early Bronze Age" label="Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5893" end="5910" title="Middle Bronze Age" label="Middle Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683532" start="5970" end="5978" title="Jarlshof" label="Jarlshof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637052" start="5983" end="5991" title="Sumburgh" label="Sumburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q91759" start="6049" end="6056" title="crannog" label="crannog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6183" end="6191" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982611" start="6291" end="6310" title="Atlantic roundhouse" label="Atlantic roundhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q923327" start="6470" end="6479" title="Crosskirk Broch" label="Crosskirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q82137" start="6564" end="6569" title="broch" label="broch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188014" start="6644" end="6655" title="wheelhouse (archaeology)" label="wheelhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623232" start="6900" end="6922" title="List of hill forts in Scotland" label="hill forts in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="7222" end="7227" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q189971" start="7228" end="7235" title="Pytheas" label="Pytheas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="7239" end="7247" title="Marseille" label="Massalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="7282" end="7295" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q674040" start="7299" end="7305" title="Albion" label="Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="7307" end="7314" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306909" start="7320" end="7325" title="Ierne (placename)" label="Ierne"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="7450" end="7465" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="7572" end="7584" title="The Hebrides" label="The Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="7619" end="7633" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663355" start="7640" end="7657" title="Caledonian Forest" label="Caledonian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q379394" start="7680" end="7689" title="Caledonii" label="Caledonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048625" start="7752" end="7761" title="Caledonia" label="Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="7763" end="7770" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="7870" end="7879" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Agricolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="7926" end="7951" title="Ptolemy&amp;#x27;s Geography" label="his &amp;quot;Geography&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="8146" end="8171" title="Roman invasion of Britain" label="Roman invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q138396" start="8253" end="8262" title="Britannia" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269118" start="8297" end="8311" title="List of Roman governors of Britain" label="Roman governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q348926" start="8312" end="8338" title="Quintus Petillius Cerialis" label="Quintus Petillius Cerialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="8405" end="8427" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Gnaeus Julius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q19719" start="8643" end="8652" title="River Tay" label="River Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309575" start="8717" end="8727" title="Inchtuthil" label="Inchtuthil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127337" start="8775" end="8788" title="Mons Graupius" label="Mons Graupius"/>
<link wikidata="Q569139" start="8852" end="8862" title="Gask Ridge" label="Gask Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549065" start="9141" end="9157" title="Southern Uplands" label="Southern Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="9261" end="9265" title="River Tyne" label="Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q195413" start="9270" end="9282" title="Solway Firth" label="Solway Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="9394" end="9413" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q146924" start="9541" end="9546" title="limes (Roman)" label="limes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35654" start="9588" end="9602" title="Firth of Clyde" label="Firth of Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="9621" end="9634" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q525728" start="9714" end="9718" title="turf" label="turf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="10087" end="10104" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651744" start="10111" end="10122" title="Roman invasion of Caledonia 208–210" label="major force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355110" start="10282" end="10298" title="Great Conspiracy" label="Great Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292989" start="10447" end="10452" title="Scoti" label="Scoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="10497" end="10502" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q537126" start="10543" end="10571" title="Comes Theodosius" label="&amp;quot;comes&amp;quot; Theodosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="10692" end="10725" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="10753" end="10759" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="10918" end="10923" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="10997" end="11006" title="Britons (historical)" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q567986" start="11462" end="11469" title="Fortriu" label="Fortriu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993016" start="11499" end="11509" title="Strathearn" label="Strathearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817526" start="11514" end="11522" title="Menteith" label="Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="11612" end="11620" title="Goidelic" label="Goidelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="11641" end="11650" title="Dál Riata" label="Dál Riata"/>
<link wikidata="Q233579" start="11680" end="11686" title="Dunadd" label="Dunadd"/>
<link wikidata="Q225890" start="11816" end="11838" title="Kingdom of Strathclyde" label="Kingdom of Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q547241" start="11909" end="11919" title="Hen Ogledd" label="Hen Ogledd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="12001" end="12015" title="Dumbarton Rock" label="Dumbarton Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="12155" end="12163" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q437743" start="12235" end="12238" title="Ida of Bernicia" label="Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="12364" end="12369" title="Deira" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q336016" start="12533" end="12539" title="Oswald of Northumbria" label="Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q236326" start="12658" end="12668" title="St Columba" label="St Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="12742" end="12750" title="monastery" label="monastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="12902" end="12921" title="Celtic Christianity" label="Celtic Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="12932" end="12937" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094637" start="12988" end="13005" title="clerical celibacy" label="clerical celibacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273761" start="13130" end="13137" title="tonsure" label="tonsure"/>
<link wikidata="Q56318457" start="13156" end="13174" title="Computus" label="calculating Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q298263" start="13617" end="13634" title="Cínaed mac Ailpín" label="Cínaed mac Ailpín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356167" start="13694" end="13708" title="House of Alpin" label="House of Alpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q889970" start="13785" end="13800" title="Kingdom of York" label="Kingdom of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q378081" start="14079" end="14089" title="Domnall II" label="Domnall II"/>
<link wikidata="Q333748" start="14400" end="14409" title="Constantine II of Scotland" label="Causantín"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246615" start="14636" end="14646" title="Brunanburh" label="Brunanburh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143385" start="14683" end="14689" title="Culdee" label="Culdee"/>
<link wikidata="Q333730" start="14761" end="14774" title="Malcolm I of Scotland" label="Máel Coluim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="14866" end="14872" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q82850" start="14873" end="14890" title="rulers of England" label="rulers of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q190166" start="15046" end="15063" title="Edmund I of England" label="Edmund of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q26326" start="15228" end="15238" title="Donnchad I" label="Donnchad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q244403" start="15336" end="15343" title="Macbeth, King of Scotland" label="MacBeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q606844" start="15349" end="15365" title="mormaer of Moray" label="mormaer of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q68508" start="15454" end="15465" title="Malcolm III of Scotland" label="Máel Coluim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590107" start="15795" end="15810" title="Dunkeld dynasty" label="Dunkeld dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q230507" start="15943" end="15951" title="Saint Margaret of Scotland" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="16008" end="16029" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16192" end="16203" title="Domnall III" label="Domnall III"/>
<link wikidata="Q102005" start="16241" end="16262" title="William II of England" label="William II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q366745" start="16316" end="16324" title="Duncan II" label="Donnchad"/>
<link wikidata="Q729517" start="16481" end="16487" title="Edmund of Scotland" label="Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q332140" start="16650" end="16655" title="Edgar of Scotland" label="Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q311996" start="16752" end="16767" title="Magnus Barefoot" label="Magnus Barefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q60843" start="16983" end="16992" title="Alexander I of Scotland" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="17093" end="17100" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310910" start="17221" end="17240" title="Davidian Revolution" label="Davidian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="17578" end="17584" title="feudal" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422187" start="17613" end="17627" title="knight service" label="knight service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714329" start="17784" end="17792" title="justicar" label="justicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="17834" end="17842" title="sheriffs" label="sheriffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928458" start="17894" end="17905" title="royal burgh" label="royal burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q220301" start="18291" end="18296" title="Cluny Abbey" label="Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q122479" start="18463" end="18485" title="Malcolm IV of Scotland" label="Malcolm IV of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q312594" start="18490" end="18499" title="William I of Scotland" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q237889" start="18697" end="18709" title="Alexander II of Scotland" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="18722" end="18735" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q316039" start="18970" end="18988" title="Haakon Haakonarson" label="Haakon Haakonarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097266" start="19040" end="19055" title="Battle of Largs" label="Battle of Largs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456646" start="19065" end="19080" title="Treaty of Perth" label="Treaty of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q229159" start="19207" end="19231" title="Margaret, Maid of Norway" label="Margaret, Maid of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="19322" end="19341" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="19497" end="19509" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526281" start="19570" end="19605" title="Robert Bruce, 5th Lord of Annandale" label="Robert Bruce, 5th Lord of Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="19944" end="19957" title="Auld Alliance" label="Auld Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="20032" end="20047" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q472725" start="20052" end="20067" title="Andrew de Moray" label="Andrew de Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q499626" start="20176" end="20201" title="Battle of Stirling Bridge" label="Battle of Stirling Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q589318" start="20353" end="20370" title="Battle of Falkirk" label="Battle of Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351307" start="20584" end="20594" title="John Comyn" label="John Comyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="20599" end="20615" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q652035" start="20777" end="20785" title="Dumfries" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968883" start="20953" end="20970" title="Battle of Methven" label="Battle of Methven"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="21030" end="21044" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q648516" start="21135" end="21148" title="James Douglas, Lord of Douglas" label="James Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685918" start="21153" end="21168" title="Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray" label="Thomas Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="21279" end="21288" title="Edward II" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="21331" end="21346" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q222520" start="21402" end="21423" title="Battle of Bannockburn" label="Battle of Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q598496" start="21490" end="21513" title="Declaration of Arbroath" label="Declaration of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="21587" end="21601" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="21978" end="22000" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="22177" end="22182" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="22236" end="22249" title="Three Estates" label="Three Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="22260" end="22270" title="Edward III" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q321886" start="22282" end="22313" title="Treaty of Edinburgh–Northampton" label="Treaty of Edinburgh–Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="22328" end="22349" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q471796" start="22495" end="22509" title="Edward Balliol" label="Edward Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q281648" start="22623" end="22635" title="Dupplin Moor" label="Dupplin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887057" start="22640" end="22652" title="Battle of Halidon Hill" label="Halidon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q506425" start="22702" end="22719" title="Andrew Murray (soldier)" label="Sir Andrew Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="22902" end="22925" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="22948" end="22956" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q312592" start="23210" end="23219" title="Robert II of Scotland" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200976" start="23342" end="23353" title="regnal name" label="regnal name"/>
<link wikidata="Q294671" start="23354" end="23364" title="Robert III of Scotland" label="Robert III"/>
<link wikidata="Q665161" start="23467" end="23497" title="Robert Stewart, Duke of Albany" label="Robert Stewart, Duke of Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q235234" start="23686" end="23693" title="James I of Scotland" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q335804" start="23941" end="23948" title="Murdoch Stewart, Duke of Albany" label="Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q272864" start="24271" end="24279" title="James II of Scotland" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167776" start="24440" end="24460" title="House of Douglas" label="Black Douglas family"/>
<link wikidata="Q222616" start="24594" end="24603" title="James III of Scotland" label="James III"/>
<link wikidata="Q233804" start="24619" end="24638" title="Margaret of Denmark, Queen of Scotland" label="Margaret of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="24654" end="24668" title="Orkney Islands" label="Orkney Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="24677" end="24693" title="Shetland Islands" label="Shetland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="24719" end="24737" title="Berwick upon Tweed" label="Berwick upon Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036989" start="24742" end="24769" title="capture of Berwick (1482)" label="captured by England in 1482"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775989" start="24814" end="24835" title="Battle of Sauchieburn" label="Battle of Sauchieburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="24851" end="24859" title="James IV" label="James IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869930" start="24913" end="24930" title="Lord of the Isles" label="Lord of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q523140" start="25029" end="25043" title="Margaret Tudor" label="Margaret Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="25057" end="25077" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="25127" end="25146" title="Union of the Crowns" label="Union of the Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="25246" end="25270" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="25284" end="25305" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="25322" end="25344" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340862" start="25382" end="25400" title="Education Act 1496" label="Education Act 1496"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="25623" end="25634" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="25747" end="25757" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300742" start="25839" end="25862" title="Battle of Flodden Field" label="Battle of Flodden Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074452" start="25988" end="26009" title="Flowers of the Forest" label="Flowers of the Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="26109" end="26116" title="James V" label="James V"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="26259" end="26268" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q231074" start="26402" end="26421" title="Madeleine of Valois" label="Madeleine of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q229846" start="26447" end="26461" title="Marie of Guise" label="Marie of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890025" start="26607" end="26628" title="Battle of Solway Moss" label="Battle of Solway Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="26833" end="26853" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443265" start="26929" end="26941" title="Rough Wooing" label="Rough Wooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="27030" end="27036" title="Edward VI of England" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q163936" start="27196" end="27232" title="Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset" label="Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368123" start="27256" end="27279" title="Battle of Pinkie Cleugh" label="Battle of Pinkie Cleugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510065" start="27350" end="27360" title="Siege of Haddington" label="Haddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680516" start="27581" end="27594" title="James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran" label="Earl of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="28004" end="28009" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="28067" end="28077" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510186" start="28159" end="28173" title="siege of Leith" label="siege of Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q947050" start="28278" end="28297" title="Treaty of Edinburgh" label="Treaty of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="28378" end="28398" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Scottish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437930" start="28435" end="28454" title="Scottish Reformation Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="28469" end="28483" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="28510" end="28514" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q192883" start="28598" end="28605" title="Dauphin of France" label="Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132548" start="28626" end="28636" title="Francis II of France" label="Francis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q769549" start="29083" end="29095" title="David Riccio" label="David Riccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q312381" start="29150" end="29162" title="Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley" label="Lord Darnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q361184" start="29205" end="29221" title="James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell" label="Earl of Bothwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870653" start="29310" end="29323" title="Carberry Hill" label="Carberry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q514388" start="29439" end="29455" title="Lochleven Castle" label="Lochleven Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="29526" end="29534" title="James VI" label="James VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087439" start="29629" end="29647" title="Battle of Langside" label="Battle of Langside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762017" start="29765" end="29774" title="Marian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="30067" end="30089" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="30284" end="30297" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="30307" end="30318" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q708980" start="30487" end="30503" title="Patrick Hamilton (martyr)" label="Patrick Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207736" start="30531" end="30542" title="St. Andrews" label="St. Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="30592" end="30599" title="Zwingli" label="Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367426" start="30611" end="30625" title="George Wishart" label="George Wishart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173680" start="30671" end="30686" title="Cardinal Beaton" label="Cardinal Beaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q189937" start="30924" end="30933" title="John Knox" label="John Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446391" start="31234" end="31259" title="Lords of the Congregation" label="Lords of the Congregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437930" start="31600" end="31618" title="Scottish Reformation Parliament" label="Parliament in 1560"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="32164" end="32174" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="33169" end="33191" title="James VI of Scotland" label="James VI King of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="33220" end="33238" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="33283" end="33292" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="33373" end="33381" title="Personal union" label="personal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102202" start="33385" end="33399" title="dynastic union" label="dynastic union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="33410" end="33416" title="The Crown" label="Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="33734" end="33740" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965672" start="34036" end="34052" title="Statutes of Iona" label="Statutes of Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="34198" end="34209" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="34548" end="34557" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179279" start="34754" end="34766" title="Jenny Geddes" label="Jenny Geddes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="34788" end="34806" title="St Giles Cathedral" label="St Giles Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315013" start="34877" end="34894" title="National Covenant" label="National Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35340" end="35363" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed#English town" label="Pacification of Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q976820" start="35504" end="35521" title="Battle of Newburn" label="Battle of Newburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="35765" end="35785" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="rebellion in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="35931" end="35948" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="36080" end="36106" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="36112" end="36123" title="Covenanters" label="Covenanters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="36259" end="36272" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Episcopalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="36277" end="36292" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="36498" end="36514" title="roundhead" label="Parliamentarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500894" start="36586" end="36612" title="Solemn League and Covenant" label="Solemn League and Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q326417" start="36795" end="36817" title="battle of Marston Moor" label="battle of Marston Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q979180" start="36993" end="37031" title="James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose" label="James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407718" start="37175" end="37193" title="Irish Confederates" label="Irish Confederates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387945" start="37200" end="37229" title="Alasdair Mac Colla" label="Alasdair MacDonald (MacColla)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508780" start="37309" end="37327" title="Scotland in the Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Scottish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087469" start="37372" end="37392" title="battle of Tippermuir" label="battle of Tippermuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087476" start="37714" end="37735" title="Battle of Philiphaugh" label="Battle of Philiphaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341726" start="38119" end="38129" title="Engagers" label="Engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q336106" start="38282" end="38298" title="James Hamilton, 1st Duke of Hamilton" label="Duke of Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="38367" end="38382" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088700" start="38477" end="38499" title="execution of Charles I" label="execution of Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="38626" end="38636" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540197" start="38667" end="38702" title="Anglo-Scottish war (1650–1652)" label="led an invasion of Scotland in 1650"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605977" start="38738" end="38744" title="battle of Dunbar (1650)" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116626" start="38827" end="38836" title="battle of Worcester" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q335106" start="38955" end="38967" title="George Monck" label="George Monck"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="39024" end="39036" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699619" start="39557" end="39572" title="Tender of Union" label="Tender of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="39793" end="39814" title="Lords of the Articles" label="Lords of the Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292811" start="40008" end="40031" title="John Middleton, 1st Earl of Middleton" label="John, Earl of Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="40081" end="40100" title="James, Duke of York" label="James, Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q318785" start="40148" end="40171" title="English Navigation Acts" label="English Navigation Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466789" start="40527" end="40538" title="conventicle" label="conventicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q140235" start="40614" end="40637" title="James, Duke of Monmouth" label="James, Duke of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888187" start="40680" end="40705" title="Battle of Bothwell Bridge" label="Battle of Bothwell Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521478" start="40794" end="40810" title="the Killing Time" label="the Killing Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="40896" end="40937" title="James II of England" label="James VII of Scotland (and II of England)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="41179" end="41199" title="religious toleration" label="religious toleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="41356" end="41373" title="William III of England" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="41453" end="41480" title="James Francis Edward Stuart" label="James Francis Edward Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="41676" end="41695" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407381" start="41730" end="41744" title="Claim of Right" label="Claim of Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="42420" end="42430" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q892818" start="42556" end="42584" title="John Graham, Viscount Dundee" label="John Graham, Viscount Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888946" start="42660" end="42683" title="Battle of Killiecrankie" label="Battle of Killiecrankie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572804" start="42824" end="42841" title="Battle of Dunkeld" label="Battle of Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254804" start="42938" end="42957" title="Massacre of Glencoe" label="Massacre of Glencoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721843" start="42977" end="43002" title="Clan MacDonald of Glencoe" label="Clan MacDonald of Glencoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q627381" start="43802" end="43818" title="Bank of Scotland" label="Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990278" start="43824" end="43888" title="Company of Scotland" label="&amp;quot;Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166080" start="44064" end="44077" title="Darien scheme" label="Darien scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381719" start="44108" end="44124" title="William Paterson (banker)" label="William Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="44154" end="44171" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="44736" end="44761" title="War of the Grand Alliance" label="War of the Grand Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077264" start="44868" end="44879" title="New Kingdom of Granada" label="New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="45185" end="45194" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="45234" end="45245" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063038" start="45592" end="45614" title="Scottish Enlightenment" label="Scottish Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="45713" end="45723" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101078" start="45953" end="45968" title="Jonathan Israel" label="Jonathan Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864678" start="46470" end="46477" title="History of Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811467" start="46503" end="46515" title="Tobacco Lords" label="the base for"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775999" start="46579" end="46588" title="History of Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140229" start="46751" end="46766" title="political union" label="political union"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="47247" end="47262" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="48325" end="48350" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277359" start="48559" end="48570" title="Earl of Mar" label="Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q335974" start="48772" end="48786" title="John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll" label="Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636587" start="48979" end="48996" title="Battle of Preston (1715)" label="Battle of Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744242" start="49087" end="49108" title="Battle of Sheriffmuir" label="Battle of Sheriffmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485365" start="49359" end="49379" title="Battle of Glen Shiel" label="Battle of Glen Shiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q312581" start="49460" end="49481" title="Charles Edward Stuart" label="Charles Edward Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q602689" start="49636" end="49643" title="Eriskay" label="Eriskay"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="49651" end="49665" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="49720" end="49725" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="50148" end="50162" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q112493533" start="50174" end="50187" title="Neil Davidson (historian)" label="Neil Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q333127" start="50892" end="50903" title="John Wilkes" label="John Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="51014" end="51028" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="51398" end="51402" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q335347" start="51435" end="51473" title="Archibald Campbell, 3rd Duke of Argyll" label="Archibald Campbell, 3rd Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="51646" end="51665" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q335351" start="51667" end="51679" title="Henry Dundas" label="Henry Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="51894" end="51918" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="52610" end="52625" title="James VI and I" label="James VI&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965672" start="52673" end="52689" title="Statutes of Iona" label="Statutes of Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842696" start="54535" end="54578" title="Heritable Jurisdictions (Scotland) Act 1746" label="Heritable Jurisdictions (Scotland) Act 1746"/>
<link wikidata="Q131286434" start="54580" end="54589" title="20 Geo. 2" label="20 Geo. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815571" start="54687" end="54699" title="T. M. Devine" label="T. M. Devine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945303" start="54889" end="54900" title="W. A. Speck" label="W. A. Speck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="55356" end="55375" title="Highland clearances" label="Highland clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066269" start="55468" end="55490" title="Highland potato famine" label="Highland potato famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874181" start="55961" end="55999" title="Highland and Island Emigration Society" label="Highland and Island Emigration Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q113003037" start="56144" end="56183" title="Colonial Land and Emigration Commission" label="Colonial Land and Emigration Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="57012" end="57028" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101078" start="57061" end="57076" title="Jonathan Israel" label="Jonathan Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="57525" end="57533" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q316367" start="57859" end="57876" title="Francis Hutcheson (philosopher)" label="Francis Hutcheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="58021" end="58034" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="58092" end="58103" title="utilitarian" label="utilitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q646102" start="58108" end="58124" title="consequentialist" label="consequentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="58282" end="58299" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="58474" end="58484" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="58489" end="58499" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="58535" end="58558" title="Philosophical skepticism" label="skeptical philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="58563" end="58573" title="empiricist" label="empiricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451675" start="58678" end="58692" title="science of man" label="science of man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680084" start="58763" end="58776" title="James Burnett, Lord Monboddo" label="James Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q183094" start="58778" end="58791" title="Adam Ferguson" label="Adam Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q711508" start="58793" end="58804" title="John Millar (philosopher)" label="John Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113461" start="58809" end="58826" title="William Robertson (historian)" label="William Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="58974" end="58983" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="59104" end="59117" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="59132" end="59158" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q218254" start="59184" end="59198" title="Dugald Stewart" label="Dugald Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="59271" end="59292" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="59459" end="59472" title="globalisation" label="globalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q462762" start="59649" end="59663" title="William Cullen" label="William Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q617109" start="59699" end="59713" title="James Anderson of Hermiston" label="James Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q272512" start="59737" end="59749" title="Joseph Black" label="Joseph Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588306" start="59769" end="59780" title="John Walker (natural historian)" label="John Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192927" start="59785" end="59797" title="James Hutton" label="James Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811467" start="60337" end="60350" title="Tobacco Lords" label="Tobacco Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="61057" end="61063" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211" start="61065" end="61069" title="jute" label="jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q160126" start="62153" end="62175" title="Royal Bank of Scotland" label="Royal Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="62642" end="62651" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q392937" start="62690" end="62739" title="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism" label="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="63836" end="63854" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="63978" end="63990" title="Evangelicals" label="Evangelicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888496" start="64027" end="64041" title="Moderate Party (Scotland)" label="Moderate Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116660" start="64157" end="64175" title="Patronage Act 1711" label="Patronage Act 1711"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563371" start="64394" end="64409" title="First Secession" label="First Secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655901" start="64438" end="64454" title="Ebenezer Erskine" label="Ebenezer Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311079" start="64524" end="64537" title="Relief Church" label="Relief Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344888" start="64577" end="64596" title="Evangelical Revival" label="Evangelical Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q123266260" start="65164" end="65169" title="SSPCK" label="SSPCK"/>
<link wikidata="Q654775" start="65982" end="65994" title="Allan Ramsay (poet)" label="Allan Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000107" start="66160" end="66173" title="Habbie stanza" label="Habbie stanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="66179" end="66190" title="poetic form" label="poetic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q312562" start="66192" end="66208" title="James Macpherson" label="James Macpherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15837802" start="66315" end="66321" title="Ossian" label="Ossian"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="66436" end="66445" title="Classical antiquity" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="66446" end="66451" title="Epic poetry" label="epics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="66704" end="66721" title="Romantic movement" label="Romantic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="66785" end="66791" title="Johann Gottfried von Herder" label="Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="66796" end="66802" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="67031" end="67043" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q381062" start="67174" end="67187" title="national poet" label="national poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="67307" end="67317" title="folk songs" label="folk songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q352425" start="67358" end="67366" title="Literary adaptation" label="adapting"/>
<link wikidata="Q211939" start="67399" end="67413" title="Auld Lang Syne" label="Auld Lang Syne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623403" start="67437" end="67445" title="Hogmanay" label="Hogmanay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575019" start="67484" end="67497" title="Scots Wha Hae" label="Scots Wha Hae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="67544" end="67559" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="67906" end="67918" title="Presbyterian polity" label="presbyteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="69679" end="69688" title="Edinburgh University" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="69690" end="69697" title="Glasgow University" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="69699" end="69710" title="St. Andrews University" label="St. Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410877" start="69715" end="69726" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Aberdeen" label="King&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838975" start="69731" end="69741" title="Marischal College" label="Marischial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437929" start="70999" end="71023" title="Scottish Reform Act 1832" label="Scottish Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="71234" end="71247" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24631" start="71464" end="71477" title="Lord Aberdeen" label="Lord Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="71699" end="71713" title="Lord Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="71793" end="71824" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q333488" start="71882" end="71898" title="Charles Gordon-Lennox, 6th Duke of Richmond" label="Duke of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633397" start="72083" end="72090" title="Peelite" label="Peelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="72103" end="72120" title="William Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q244620" start="72232" end="72252" title="the Earl of Rosebery" label="the Earl of Rosebery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="72380" end="72395" title="Irish Home Rule" label="Irish Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="72473" end="72490" title="Liberal Unionists" label="Liberal Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q332460" start="72560" end="72571" title="Keir Hardie" label="Keir Hardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931917" start="72594" end="72626" title="1888 Mid Lanarkshire by-election" label="1888 Mid Lanarkshire by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437828" start="72661" end="72682" title="Scottish Labour Party (1888)" label="Scottish Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="72712" end="72736" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="72975" end="72993" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900913" start="74130" end="74138" title="Monklands (district)" label="Monkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422689" start="74143" end="74156" title="Kirkintilloch" label="Kirkintilloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q212348" start="74483" end="74497" title="Aberdeen Angus" label="Aberdeen Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600557" start="75138" end="75147" title="Clydeside" label="Clydeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549757" start="75259" end="75278" title="Scotts Shipbuilding and Engineering Company" label="Scott family&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="76727" end="76746" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="76748" end="76759" title="Lord Kelvin" label="Lord Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="76793" end="76803" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q451444" start="76808" end="76823" title="William Murdoch" label="William Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="77008" end="77020" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q678251" start="77115" end="77123" title="Waverley (novel)" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="77403" end="77425" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899913" start="77451" end="77463" title="urban Gothic" label="urban Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217352" start="77478" end="77515" title="Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde" label="Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349094" start="77613" end="77622" title="Kidnapped (novel)" label="Kidnapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q185118" start="77639" end="77654" title="Treasure Island" label="Treasure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="77662" end="77680" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="77694" end="77709" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326476" start="77783" end="77801" title="Kailyard school" label="kailyard tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="77867" end="77875" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="77937" end="77949" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q107190" start="77983" end="77992" title="Peter Pan" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q368519" start="77998" end="78014" title="George MacDonald" label="George MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180508" start="78045" end="78055" title="Phantasies" label="Phantasies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255562" start="78204" end="78218" title="Glasgow School" label="Glasgow School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672822" start="78361" end="78375" title="Celtic Revival" label="Celtic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="78380" end="78404" title="Arts and Crafts Movement" label="Arts and Crafts Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q751880" start="78410" end="78419" title="Japonisme" label="Japonisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="78455" end="78465" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="78516" end="78527" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q220703" start="78627" end="78652" title="Charles Rennie Mackintosh" label="Charles Rennie Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089246" start="78679" end="78691" title="glass artist" label="glass artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q508344" start="78692" end="78710" title="Margaret MacDonald (artist)" label="Margaret MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q458827" start="78734" end="78741" title="Frances MacDonald" label="Frances"/>
<link wikidata="Q745714" start="78783" end="78798" title="Herbert MacNair" label="Herbert MacNair"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="79058" end="79073" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="79190" end="79206" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110884" start="79937" end="79972" title="Visit of King George IV to Scotland" label="Visit of King George IV to Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="80316" end="80330" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42049" start="80401" end="80416" title="Balmoral Castle" label="Balmoral Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264472" start="80750" end="80756" title="Duke of Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q331292" start="80758" end="80764" title="Duke of Atholl" label="Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264482" start="80766" end="80775" title="Duke of Buccleuch" label="Buccleuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090129" start="80781" end="80791" title="Duke of Sutherland" label="Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="80935" end="80948" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="Revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q149072" start="81248" end="81261" title="Potato blight" label="Potato blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066269" start="81314" end="81328" title="Highland potato famine" label="faced disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="81539" end="81546" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="81809" end="81822" title="refrigeration" label="refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="82242" end="82254" title="Hunting" label="field sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249440" start="82260" end="82273" title="deer stalking" label="deer stalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307967" start="82278" end="82293" title="grouse shooting" label="grouse shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q42049" start="82361" end="82376" title="Balmoral estate" label="Balmoral estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484102" start="82955" end="82986" title="concentration of land ownership" label="concentration of land ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146522" start="83184" end="83191" title="Christian revival" label="revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q78912871" start="83589" end="83609" title="Highland Land League" label="Highland Land League"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="83633" end="83645" title="Isle of Skye" label="Isle of Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140769" start="83774" end="83818" title="Crofters&amp;#x27; Holdings (Scotland) Act, 1886" label="Crofters&amp;#x27; Holdings (Scotland) Act, 1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187485" start="84130" end="84149" title="Crofting Commission" label="Crofting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822899" start="84777" end="84793" title="natural increase" label="natural increase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246390" start="85174" end="85190" title="John Witherspoon" label="John Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q314333" start="85199" end="85214" title="John Paul Jones" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="85249" end="85264" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="85293" end="85314" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668150" start="85371" end="85383" title="James Murray (Quebec governor)" label="James Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="85400" end="85417" title="John A. Macdonald" label="John A. Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q359653" start="85453" end="85466" title="Tommy Douglas" label="Tommy Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q467694" start="85517" end="85534" title="Lachlan Macquarie" label="Lachlan Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q376367" start="85559" end="85574" title="Thomas Brisbane" label="Thomas Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q314016" start="85594" end="85607" title="Andrew Fisher" label="Andrew Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400226" start="85650" end="85662" title="Peter Fraser" label="Peter Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139582" start="85674" end="85688" title="James Mckenzie (outlaw)" label="James Mckenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437641" start="85756" end="85774" title="Scottish Canadians" label="Scottish Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="85779" end="85796" title="Scottish American" label="Scottish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135340" start="85956" end="85972" title="General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q563069" start="86334" end="86349" title="Thomas Chalmers" label="Thomas Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475344" start="86369" end="86387" title="Disruption of 1843" label="Disruption of 1843"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046878" start="86477" end="86500" title="Free Church of Scotland (1843–1900)" label="Free Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453422" start="87688" end="87712" title="Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland" label="Free Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889127" start="87841" end="87864" title="United Secession Church" label="United Secession Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q286926" start="87930" end="87956" title="United Presbyterian Church of Scotland" label="United Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495176" start="88020" end="88050" title="United Free Church of Scotland" label="United Free Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453422" start="88229" end="88247" title="Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland" label="Free Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453390" start="88297" end="88308" title="Free Church of Scotland (post 1900)" label="Free Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="88311" end="88332" title="Catholic Emancipation" label="Catholic Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="88842" end="88870" title="Episcopal Church in Scotland" label="Episcopal Church in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="88932" end="88949" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857696" start="88951" end="88958" title="Baptist Union of Scotland" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80119172" start="88960" end="88977" title="Congregational Union of Scotland" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="88982" end="88991" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="89296" end="89310" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740482" start="92340" end="92354" title="Khaki Election" label="Khaki Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="92393" end="92401" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886824" start="92718" end="92732" title="Unionist Party (Scotland)" label="Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="92857" end="92871" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Arthur Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q106618" start="92905" end="92929" title="Henry Campbell-Bannerman" label="Henry Campbell-Bannerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="93025" end="93045" title="British Labour Party" label="British Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330508" start="93415" end="93458" title="Singer Corporation" label="the Singer Clydebank sewing machine factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245157" start="94638" end="94652" title="Battle of Loos" label="Battle of Loos"/>
<link wikidata="Q363778" start="94950" end="94966" title="Lewis and Harris" label="Lewis and Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q699527" start="95293" end="95341" title="Scuttling of the German fleet at Scapa Flow" label="German fleet interned at Scapa Flow was scuttled"/>
<link wikidata="Q15270928" start="95491" end="95503" title="RAF Montrose" label="RAF Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="95539" end="95557" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="95569" end="95592" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="95642" end="95650" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328385" start="95655" end="95667" title="East Fortune" label="East Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797631" start="95672" end="95681" title="Inchinnan" label="Inchinnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956391" start="95861" end="95876" title="Rosyth Dockyard" label="Rosyth Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="95880" end="95884" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000458" start="95957" end="95974" title="Beardmore W.B.III" label="Beardmore W.B.III"/>
<link wikidata="Q623503" start="96018" end="96047" title="William Beardmore and Company" label="William Beardmore and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="96067" end="96077" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="97726" end="97735" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q671246" start="97970" end="97982" title="John Maclean (Scottish socialist)" label="John MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4239467" start="98041" end="98054" title="Red Clydeside" label="Red Clydeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q166663" start="98700" end="98709" title="Bonar Law" label="Bonar Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="98776" end="98792" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974819" start="99019" end="99045" title="National Party of Scotland" label="National Party of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437896" start="99058" end="99072" title="Scottish Party" label="Scottish Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="99106" end="99129" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="99174" end="99194" title="independent Scotland" label="independent Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="99318" end="99328" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="99362" end="99372" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q376329" start="99405" end="99411" title="Rosyth" label="Rosyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="99475" end="99489" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q207257" start="99494" end="99506" title="East Lothian" label="East Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="99557" end="99564" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="99646" end="99655" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="99832" end="99840" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="99879" end="99885" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427618" start="99902" end="99914" title="Shetland Bus" label="Shetland Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="99965" end="99970" title="Nazis" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="99999" end="100008" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q342591" start="100130" end="100148" title="Robert Watson-Watt" label="Robert Watson-Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="100178" end="100195" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q657723" start="100222" end="100241" title="RAF Fighter Command" label="RAF Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="100263" end="100275" title="Hugh Dowding" label="Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="100472" end="100481" title="Squadron (aviation)" label="squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="100497" end="100505" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="100510" end="100514" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012502" start="100615" end="100619" title="Wick, Caithness" label="Wick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374318" start="100621" end="100625" title="Dyce" label="Dyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016944" start="100627" end="100636" title="Peterhead" label="Peterhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q420303" start="100638" end="100646" title="Montrose, Angus" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011960" start="100648" end="100656" title="Leuchars" label="Leuchars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306907" start="100658" end="100662" title="Drem" label="Drem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328385" start="100664" end="100676" title="East Fortune" label="East Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876000" start="100678" end="100685" title="RAF Kinloss" label="Kinloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q617845" start="100690" end="100701" title="Grangemouth" label="Grangemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q954113" start="100709" end="100724" title="RAF Coastal Command" label="Coastal Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q502034" start="100899" end="100919" title="Handley Page Halifax" label="Handley Page Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="100924" end="100938" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="100986" end="100998" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="102621" end="102637" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="102987" end="102996" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q981981" start="103098" end="103113" title="Hugh MacDiarmid" label="Hugh MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656606" start="103277" end="103309" title="A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle" label="A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197377" start="103345" end="103360" title="Synthetic Scots" label="Synthetic Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q304752" start="103530" end="103540" title="Edwin Muir" label="Edwin Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018623" start="103545" end="103559" title="William Soutar" label="William Soutar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988888" start="103575" end="103584" title="Neil Gunn" label="Neil Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506997" start="103586" end="103598" title="George Blake (novelist)" label="George Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511896" start="103600" end="103612" title="Nan Shepherd" label="Nan Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q179059" start="103614" end="103626" title="A. J. Cronin" label="A. J. Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q461571" start="103628" end="103643" title="Naomi Mitchison" label="Naomi Mitchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q919835" start="103645" end="103659" title="Eric Linklater" label="Eric Linklater"/>
<link wikidata="Q650800" start="103664" end="103684" title="Lewis Grassic Gibbon" label="Lewis Grassic Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11270727" start="103705" end="103717" title="James Bridie" label="James Bridie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="104429" end="104443" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="105201" end="105211" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="105238" end="105248" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="105277" end="105285" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="105334" end="105359" title="Polaris ballistic missile" label="Polaris ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q35654" start="105385" end="105399" title="Firth of Clyde" label="Firth of Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625344" start="105407" end="105416" title="Holy Loch" label="Holy Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="105439" end="105442" title="CND" label="CND"/>
<link wikidata="Q628776" start="105706" end="105724" title="Faslane Naval Base" label="Faslane Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624860" start="105732" end="105741" title="Gare Loch" label="Gare Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073517" start="105765" end="105772" title="Trident missile" label="Trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q570401" start="105921" end="105948" title="Anstruther" label="secret bunker at Anstruther"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="106018" end="106033" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="106152" end="106166" title="nuclear attack" label="nuclear attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739397" start="106426" end="106434" title="Dounreay" label="Dounreay"/>
<link wikidata="Q208279" start="106442" end="106467" title="Highland (council area)" label="Highland area of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="106515" end="106527" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="106828" end="106837" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="107038" end="107061" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="107085" end="107106" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="107126" end="107136" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="107325" end="107344" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866421" start="107384" end="107403" title="Scottish devolution" label="Scottish devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="107431" end="107454" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886824" start="107728" end="107737" title="Unionist Party (Scotland)" label="Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="108007" end="108020" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="108259" end="108275" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="108326" end="108343" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="108368" end="108391" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="108821" end="108829" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="108834" end="108846" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395309" start="108865" end="108881" title="Community Charge" label="Community Charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q499626" start="109106" end="109131" title="Battle of Stirling Bridge" label="Battle of Stirling Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="109137" end="109142" title="Tony Blair" label="Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="109147" end="109153" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="109261" end="109280" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="109292" end="109301" title="coalition" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q333158" start="109401" end="109413" title="Donald Dewar" label="Donald Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="109417" end="109431" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746031" start="109467" end="109495" title="Scottish Parliament Building" label="Scottish Parliament Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q505950" start="109509" end="109523" title="Holyrood House" label="Holyrood House"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="109713" end="109753" title="mixed member proportional representation" label="mixed member proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="109865" end="109884" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="national referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="109898" end="109919" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="110175" end="110188" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="110605" end="110614" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810530" start="110721" end="110737" title="Forties oilfield" label="Forties oilfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q909690" start="110883" end="110897" title="Brent oilfield" label="Brent oilfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358497" start="111363" end="111388" title="electronics manufacturing" label="electronics manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514959" start="111392" end="111404" title="Silicon Glen" label="Silicon Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q685812" start="111548" end="111556" title="Plymouth Brethren" label="Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="111561" end="111572" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135340" start="111908" end="111950" title="General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="111982" end="111993" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="112088" end="112106" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051653" start="112188" end="112209" title="Catholic Church in Scotland" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600557" start="112279" end="112300" title="West Central Scotland" label="West Central Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="112309" end="112318" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005196" start="112408" end="112419" title="Immigration to the United Kingdom" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q814997" start="112491" end="112499" title="converts" label="converts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082001" start="112554" end="112559" title="Islam in Scotland" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200884" start="112609" end="112617" title="Hinduism in Scotland" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984231" start="112626" end="112634" title="Buddhism in Scotland" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056555" start="112646" end="112653" title="Sikhism in Scotland" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843036" start="112696" end="112713" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;í Faith in Scotland" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;í Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="112724" end="112732" title="Neopagan" label="Neopagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="112801" end="112809" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="112814" end="112824" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437651" start="113385" end="113418" title="Scottish Certificate of Education" label="Scottish Certificate of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072035" start="113419" end="113433" title="Ordinary Grade" label="Ordinary Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310977" start="113460" end="113472" title="Higher Grade" label="Higher Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="113727" end="113733" title="University of Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610024" start="113735" end="113746" title="Heriot-Watt" label="Heriot-Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q963530" start="113748" end="113756" title="University of Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859178" start="113761" end="113772" title="University of Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505925" start="113797" end="113804" title="Abertay" label="Abertay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353139" start="113806" end="113824" title="Glasgow Caledonian University" label="Glasgow Caledonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277357" start="113826" end="113832" title="Napier University" label="Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296153" start="113834" end="113841" title="University of Paisley" label="Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788342" start="113846" end="113859" title="The Robert Gordon University" label="Robert Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="113896" end="113914" title="Scottish Executive" label="Scottish Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380267" start="113953" end="114007" title="Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department" label="Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851778" start="114116" end="114136" title="Tuition fees in the United Kingdom" label="student tuition fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157241" start="114336" end="114350" title="Robert Garioch" label="Robert Garioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659945" start="114355" end="114375" title="Sydney Goodsir Smith" label="Sydney Goodsir Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343801" start="114455" end="114469" title="Norman MacCaig" label="Norman MacCaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793301" start="114488" end="114503" title="Maurice Lindsay (broadcaster)" label="Maurice Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q639647" start="114505" end="114524" title="George Mackay Brown" label="George Mackay Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396459" start="114542" end="114561" title="Iain Crichton Smith" label="Iain Crichton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q638783" start="114678" end="114690" title="Edwin Morgan (poet)" label="Edwin Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125354" start="114793" end="114804" title="Scots Makar" label="Scots Makar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237928" start="114819" end="114832" title="Poet laureate" label="national poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q233956" start="114939" end="114951" title="Muriel Spark" label="Muriel Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074335" start="114964" end="114993" title="The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie (novel)" label="The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q333713" start="115156" end="115172" title="Alistair MacLean" label="Alistair MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q273799" start="115204" end="115219" title="Dorothy Dunnett" label="Dorothy Dunnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494144" start="115300" end="115312" title="Shena Mackay" label="Shena Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707810" start="115314" end="115325" title="Alan Spence" label="Alan Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q530321" start="115327" end="115339" title="Allan Massie" label="Allan Massie"/>
<link wikidata="Q320327" start="115356" end="115374" title="William McIlvanney" label="William McIlvanney"/>
<link wikidata="Q634967" start="115527" end="115542" title="Philip Hobsbaum" label="Philip Hobsbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175281" start="115554" end="115567" title="Peter Kravitz" label="Peter Kravitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q178403" start="115687" end="115699" title="Irvine Welsh" label="Irvine Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11279562" start="115713" end="115726" title="Trainspotting (novel)" label="Trainspotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915172" start="115761" end="115775" title="Morvern Callar" label="Morvern Callar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228828" start="115808" end="115819" title="Poor Things" label="Poor Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076441" start="115857" end="115882" title="How Late It Was, How Late" label="How Late It Was, How Late"/>
<link wikidata="Q318431" start="115998" end="116008" title="Ian Rankin" label="Ian Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038449" start="116017" end="116032" title="Inspector Rebus" label="Inspector Rebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q237994" start="116169" end="116184" title="Carol Ann Duffy" label="Carol Ann Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237928" start="116203" end="116216" title="Poet Laureate" label="Poet Laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333490" start="116346" end="116374" title="Economic history of Scotland" label="Economic history of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870150" start="116376" end="116405" title="History of the Outer Hebrides" label="History of the Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773804" start="116407" end="116433" title="Historic Sites in Scotland" label="Historic Sites in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q113162" start="116435" end="116464" title="History of the United Kingdom" label="History of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q214188" start="116466" end="116483" title="Kings of Scotland" label="Kings of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645909" start="116485" end="116510" title="List of years in Scotland" label="List of years in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="116512" end="116525" title="Scottish clan" label="Scottish clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966996" start="116527" end="116555" title="Timeline of Scottish history" label="Timeline of Scottish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q15060500" start="116952" end="116962" title="Keay, John" label="Keay, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263302" start="117465" end="117481" title="Sir Fitzroy Maclean, 1st Baronet" label="Maclean, Fitzroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045098" start="117747" end="117764" title="Magnusson, Magnus" label="Magnusson, Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57529097" start="121889" end="121900" title="Todd, Margo" label="Todd, Margo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294876" start="124192" end="124222" title="The Journal of British Studies" label="The Journal of British Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799415" start="124975" end="124989" title="Arthur L. Herman" label="Herman, Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="" start="124997" end="125137" title="How the Scots Invented the Modern World: The True Story of How Western Europe&amp;#x27;s Poorest Nation Created Our World &amp;amp; Everything in It" label="How the Scots Invented the Modern World: The True Story of How Western Europe&amp;#x27;s Poorest Nation Created Our World &amp;amp; Everything in It"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155627" start="125666" end="125708" title="Comparative Studies in Society and History" label="Comparative Studies in Society and History"/>
<link wikidata="Q919628" start="126415" end="126447" title="The British Journal of Sociology" label="The British Journal of Sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762641" start="127042" end="127068" title="Scottish Historical Review" label="Scottish Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q335087" start="127781" end="127799" title="Trevor-Roper, Hugh" label="Trevor-Roper, Hugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q56486717" start="127907" end="127919" title="Abrams, Lynn" label="Abrams, Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774685" start="128460" end="128475" title="History Compass" label="History Compass"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13621" wikidata="Q1427" url="?curid=13621" title="Hadrian">
<text>Hadrian ( ; ; 24 January 76 – 10 July 138) was Roman emperor from 117 to 138. Hadrian was born in Italica, close to modern Seville in Spain, an Italic settlement in Hispania Baetica; his branch of the Aelia &quot;gens&quot;, the &quot;Aeli Hadriani&quot;, came from the town of Hadria in eastern Italy. He was a member of the Nerva–Antonine dynasty.

Early in his political career, Hadrian married Vibia Sabina, grandniece of the ruling emperor, Trajan. The marriage and Hadrian&#x27;s later succession as emperor were probably promoted by Trajan&#x27;s wife Pompeia Plotina. Soon after his own succession, Hadrian had four leading senators unlawfully put to death, probably because they seemed to threaten the security of his reign; this earned him the senate&#x27;s lifelong enmity. He earned further disapproval by abandoning Trajan&#x27;s expansionist policies and territorial gains in Mesopotamia, Assyria, Armenia, and parts of Dacia. Hadrian preferred to invest in the development of stable, defensible borders and the unification of the empire&#x27;s disparate peoples as subjects of a panhellenic empire, led by Rome.

Hadrian energetically pursued his own Imperial ideals and personal interests. He visited almost every province of the Empire, and indulged a preference for direct intervention in imperial and provincial affairs, especially building projects. He is particularly known for building Hadrian&#x27;s Wall, which marked the northern limit of Britannia. In Rome itself, he rebuilt the Pantheon and constructed the vast Temple of Venus and Roma. In Egypt, he may have rebuilt the Serapeum of Alexandria. As an ardent admirer of Greek culture, he promoted Athens as the cultural capital of the Empire. His intense relationship with Greek youth Antinous and the latter&#x27;s untimely death led Hadrian to establish a widespread, popular cult. Late in Hadrian&#x27;s reign, he suppressed the Bar Kokhba revolt; he saw this rebellion as a failure of his panhellenic ideal.

Hadrian&#x27;s last years were marred by chronic illness. His marriage had been both unhappy and childless. In 138 he adopted Antoninus Pius and nominated him as a successor, on condition that Antoninus adopt Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus as his own heirs. Hadrian died the same year at Baiae, and Antoninus had him deified, despite opposition from the Senate. Later historians counted him as one of Rome&#x27;s so-called &quot;Five Good Emperors&quot;, and as a &quot;benevolent dictator&quot;. His own Senate found him remote and authoritarian. He has been described as enigmatic and contradictory, with a capacity for both great personal generosity and extreme cruelty and driven by insatiable curiosity, conceit, and ambition.

==Early life==

Publius Aelius Hadrianus was born on 24 January 76, in Italica (modern Santiponce, near Seville), a Roman town founded by Italic settlers in the province of Hispania Baetica during the Second Punic War at the initiative of Scipio Africanus; Hadrian&#x27;s branch of the gens Aelia came from Hadria (modern Atri), an ancient town in the Picenum region of Italia, the source of the name &quot;Hadrianus&quot;. One Roman biographer claims instead that Hadrian was born in Rome, but this view is held by a minority of scholars.

Hadrian&#x27;s father was Publius Aelius Hadrianus Afer, a senator of praetorian rank, born and raised in Italica. Hadrian&#x27;s mother was Domitia Paulina, daughter of a distinguished Roman senatorial family based in Gades (Cádiz). His only sibling was an elder sister, Aelia Domitia Paulina. His wet nurse was the slave Germana, probably of Germanic origin, to whom he was devoted throughout his life. She was later freed by him and ultimately outlived him, as shown by her funerary inscription, which was found at Hadrian&#x27;s Villa at Tivoli. Hadrian&#x27;s great-nephew, Gnaeus Pedanius Fuscus Salinator, from Barcino (Barcelona) would become Hadrian&#x27;s colleague as co-consul in 118. As a senator, Hadrian&#x27;s father would have spent much of his time in Rome. In terms of his later career, Hadrian&#x27;s most significant family connection was to Trajan, his father&#x27;s first cousin, who was also of senatorial stock and a native of Italica. Although they were considered to be, in the words of Aurelius Victor, &quot;advenae&quot; (&quot;aliens&quot;, people &quot;from the outside&quot;), both Trajan and Hadrian were of Italic lineage and belonged to the upper class of Roman society. One author has proposed to consider them part of the &quot;Ulpio-Aelian dynasty&quot;.

Hadrian&#x27;s parents died in 86 when he was ten years old. He and his sister became wards of Trajan and Publius Acilius Attianus (who later became Trajan&#x27;s Praetorian prefect). Hadrian was physically active and enjoyed hunting; when he was 14, Trajan called him to Rome and arranged his further education in subjects appropriate to a young Roman aristocrat. Hadrian&#x27;s enthusiasm for Greek literature and culture earned him the nickname &quot;Graeculus&quot; (&quot;Greekling&quot;), intended as a form of &quot;mild mockery&quot;.

==Public service==
Hadrian&#x27;s first official post in Rome was as a member of the &quot;decemviri stlitibus judicandis&quot;, one among many vigintivirate offices at the lowest level of the &quot;cursus honorum&quot; (&quot;course of honours&quot;) that could lead to higher office and a senatorial career. He then served as a military tribune, first with the LegioII &quot;Adiutrix&quot; in 95, then with the Legio V Macedonica. During Hadrian&#x27;s second stint as tribune, the frail and aged reigning emperor Nerva adopted Trajan as his heir; Hadrian was dispatched to give Trajan the news – or most probably was one of many emissaries charged with this same commission. Then Hadrian was transferred to Legio XXII Primigenia and a third tribunate. Hadrian&#x27;s three tribunates gave him some career advantage. Most scions of the older senatorial families might serve one, or at most two, military tribunates as a prerequisite to higher office. When Nerva died in 98, Hadrian is said to have hastened to Trajan, to inform him ahead of the official envoy sent by the governor, Hadrian&#x27;s brother-in-law and rival Lucius Julius Ursus Servianus.

In 101, Hadrian was back in Rome; he was elected quaestor, then &quot;quaestor imperatoris Traiani&quot;, liaison officer between Emperor and the assembled Senate, to whom he read the Emperor&#x27;s communiqués and speeches – which he possibly composed on the emperor&#x27;s behalf. In his role as imperial ghostwriter, Hadrian took the place of the recently deceased Licinius Sura, Trajan&#x27;s all-powerful friend and kingmaker. His next post was as &quot;ab actis senatus&quot;, keeping the Senate&#x27;s records. During the First Dacian War, Hadrian took the field as a member of Trajan&#x27;s personal entourage, but was excused from his military post to take office in Rome as tribune of the plebs, in 105. After the war, he was probably elected praetor. During the Second Dacian War, Hadrian was in Trajan&#x27;s personal service again. He was released to serve as legate of Legio I Minervia, then as governor of Lower Pannonia in 107, tasked with &quot;holding back the Sarmatians&quot;. Between 107 and 108, Hadrian defeated an invasion of Roman-controlled Banat and Oltenia by the Iazyges. The exact terms of the peace treaty are not known. It is believed the Romans kept Oltenia in exchange for some form of concession, likely involving a one-time tribute payment. The Iazyges also took possession of Banat around this time, which may have been part of the treaty.

Now in his mid-thirties, Hadrian travelled to Greece; he was granted Athenian citizenship and was appointed eponymous archon of Athens for a brief time (in 112). The Athenians awarded him a statue with an inscription in the Theatre of Dionysus (IG II2 3286) offering a detailed account of his &quot;cursus honorum&quot; thus far. Thereafter, no more is heard of him until Trajan&#x27;s Parthian campaign. It is possible that he remained in Greece until his recall to the imperial retinue, when he joined Trajan&#x27;s expedition against Parthia as a legate. When the governor of Syria was sent to deal with renewed troubles in Dacia, Hadrian was appointed his replacement, with independent command. Trajan became seriously ill, and took ship for Rome, while Hadrian remained in Syria, &quot;de facto&quot; general commander of the Eastern Roman army. Trajan got as far as the coastal city of Selinus, in Cilicia, and died there on 8 August 117; he would be regarded as one of Rome&#x27;s most admired, popular and best emperors.

===Relationship with Trajan and his family===

Around the time of his quaestorship, in 100 or 101, Hadrian had married Trajan&#x27;s seventeen- or eighteen-year-old grandniece, Vibia Sabina. Trajan himself seems to have been less than enthusiastic about the marriage, and with good reason, as the couple&#x27;s relationship would prove to be scandalously poor. The marriage might have been arranged by Trajan&#x27;s empress, Plotina. This highly cultured, influential woman shared many of Hadrian&#x27;s values and interests, including the idea of the Roman Empire as a commonwealth with an underlying Hellenic culture. If Hadrian were to be appointed Trajan&#x27;s successor, Plotina and her extended family could retain their social profile and political influence after Trajan&#x27;s death. Hadrian could also count on the support of his mother-in-law, Salonia Matidia, who was the daughter of Trajan&#x27;s beloved sister Ulpia Marciana. When Ulpia Marciana died in 112, Trajan had her deified, and made Salonia Matidia an &quot;Augusta&quot;.
Hadrian&#x27;s personal relationship with Trajan was complex and may have been difficult. Hadrian seems to have sought influence over Trajan, or Trajan&#x27;s decisions, through cultivation of the latter&#x27;s boy favourites; this gave rise to some unexplained quarrel, around the time of Hadrian&#x27;s marriage to Sabina. Late in Trajan&#x27;s reign, Hadrian failed to achieve a senior consulship, being only suffect consul for 108; this gave him parity of status with other members of the senatorial nobility, but no particular distinction befitting an heir designate. Had Trajan wished it, he could have promoted his protege to patrician rank and its privileges, which included opportunities for a fast track to consulship without prior experience as tribune; he chose not to. While Hadrian seems to have been granted the office of tribune of the plebs a year or so younger than was customary, he had to leave Dacia, and Trajan, to take up the appointment; Trajan might simply have wanted him out of the way. The &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; describes Trajan&#x27;s gift to Hadrian of a diamond ring that Trajan himself had received from Nerva, which &quot;encouraged [Hadrian&#x27;s] hopes of succeeding to the throne&quot;. While Trajan actively promoted Hadrian&#x27;s advancement, he did so with caution.

===Succession===
Failure to nominate an heir could invite chaotic, destructive wresting of power by a succession of competing claimants – a civil war. Too early a nomination could be seen as an abdication and reduce the chance for an orderly transmission of power. As Trajan lay dying, nursed by his wife, Plotina, and closely watched by Prefect Attianus, he could have lawfully adopted Hadrian as heir by means of a simple deathbed wish, expressed before witnesses; but when an adoption document was eventually presented, it was signed not by Trajan but by Plotina. That Hadrian was still in Syria was a further irregularity, as Roman adoption law required the presence of both parties at the adoption ceremony. Rumours, doubts, and speculation attended Hadrian&#x27;s adoption and succession. It has been suggested that Trajan&#x27;s young manservant Phaedimus, who died very soon after Trajan, was killed (or killed himself) rather than face awkward questions. Ancient sources are divided on the legitimacy of Hadrian&#x27;s adoption: Cassius Dio saw it as bogus and the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; writer as genuine. An aureus minted early in Hadrian&#x27;s reign represents the official position; it presents Hadrian as Trajan&#x27;s &quot;Caesar&quot; (Trajan&#x27;s heir designate).

==Emperor (117)==
===Securing power===

According to the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, Hadrian informed the Senate of his accession in a letter as a &quot;fait accompli&quot;, explaining that &quot;the unseemly haste of the troops in acclaiming him emperor was due to the belief that the state could not be without an emperor&quot;. The new emperor rewarded the legions&#x27; loyalty with the customary bonus, and the Senate endorsed the acclamation. Various public ceremonies were organised on Hadrian&#x27;s behalf, celebrating his &quot;divine election&quot; by all the gods, whose community now included Trajan, deified at Hadrian&#x27;s request.

Hadrian remained in the east for a while, suppressing the Jewish revolt that had broken out under Trajan. He relieved Judea&#x27;s governor, the outstanding Moorish general Lusius Quietus, of his personal guard of Moorish auxiliaries; 
then he moved on to quell disturbances along the Danube frontier. In Rome, Hadrian&#x27;s former guardian and current praetorian prefect, Attianus, claimed to have uncovered a conspiracy involving Lusius Quietus and three other leading senators, Lucius Publilius Celsus, Aulus Cornelius Palma Frontonianus and Gaius Avidius Nigrinus. There was no public trial for the four – they were tried &quot;in absentia&quot;, hunted down and killed. Hadrian claimed that Attianus had acted on his own initiative, and rewarded him with senatorial status and consular rank; then pensioned him off, no later than 120. Hadrian assured the senate that henceforth their ancient right to prosecute and judge their own would be respected.

The reasons for these four executions remain obscure. Official recognition of Hadrian as a legitimate heir may have come too late to dissuade other potential claimants. Hadrian&#x27;s greatest rivals were Trajan&#x27;s closest friends, the most experienced and senior members of the imperial council; any of them might have been a legitimate competitor for the imperial office (&quot;capaces imperii&quot;); and any of them might have supported Trajan&#x27;s expansionist policies, which Hadrian intended to change. One of their number was Aulus Cornelius Palma who as a former conqueror of Arabia Nabatea would have retained a stake in the East. The &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; describes Palma and a third executed senator, Lucius Publilius Celsus (consul for the second time in 113), as Hadrian&#x27;s personal enemies, who had spoken in public against him. The fourth was Gaius Avidius Nigrinus, an ex-consul, intellectual, friend of Pliny the Younger and (briefly) Governor of Dacia at the start of Hadrian&#x27;s reign. He was probably Hadrian&#x27;s chief rival for the throne; a senator of the highest rank, breeding, and connections; according to the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, Hadrian had considered making Nigrinus his heir apparent before deciding to get rid of him.

Soon after, in 125, Hadrian appointed Quintus Marcius Turbo as his Praetorian Prefect. Turbo was his close friend, a leading figure of the equestrian order, a senior court judge and a procurator. As Hadrian also forbade equestrians to try cases against senators, the Senate retained full legal authority over its members; it also remained the highest court of appeal, and formal appeals to the emperor regarding its decisions were forbidden. If this was an attempt to repair the damage done by Attianus, with or without Hadrian&#x27;s full knowledge, it was not enough; Hadrian&#x27;s reputation and relationship with his Senate were irredeemably soured, for the rest of his reign. Some sources describe Hadrian&#x27;s occasional recourse to a network of informers, the &quot;frumentarii&quot;, to discreetly investigate persons of high social standing, including senators and his close friends.

==Travels==

Hadrian was to spend more than half his reign outside Italy. Whereas previous emperors had, for the most part, relied on the reports of their imperial representatives around the Empire, Hadrian wished to see things for himself. Previous emperors had often left Rome for long periods, but mostly to go to war, returning once the conflict was settled. Hadrian&#x27;s near-incessant travels may represent a calculated break with traditions and attitudes in which the empire was a purely Roman hegemony. Hadrian sought to include provincials in a commonwealth of civilised peoples and a common Hellenic culture under Roman supervision. He supported the creation of provincial towns (municipia), semi-autonomous urban communities with their own customs and laws, rather than the imposition of new Roman colonies with Roman constitutions.

A cosmopolitan, ecumenical intent is evident in coin issues of Hadrian&#x27;s later reign, showing the emperor &quot;raising up&quot; the personifications of various provinces. Aelius Aristides would later write that Hadrian &quot;extended over his subjects a protecting hand, raising them as one helps fallen men on their feet&quot;. All this did not go well with Roman traditionalists. The self-indulgent emperor Nero had enjoyed a prolonged and peaceful tour of Greece and had been criticised by the Roman elite for abandoning his fundamental responsibilities as emperor. In the eastern provinces, and to some extent in the west, Nero had enjoyed popular support; claims of his imminent return or rebirth emerged almost immediately after his death. Hadrian may have consciously exploited these positive, popular connections during his own travels. In the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, Hadrian is described as &quot;a little too much Greek&quot;, too cosmopolitan for a Roman emperor.

===Britannia and the West (122)===
Prior to Hadrian&#x27;s arrival in Britannia, the province had suffered a major rebellion from 119 to 121. Inscriptions tell of an &quot;expeditio Britannica&quot; that involved major troop movements, including the dispatch of a detachment (vexillatio), comprising some 3,000 soldiers. Fronto writes about military losses in Britannia at the time. Coin legends of 119–120 attest that Quintus Pompeius Falco was sent to restore order. In 122 Hadrian initiated the construction of a wall &quot;to separate Romans from barbarians&quot;. The idea that the wall was built in order to deal with an actual threat or its resurgence, however, is probable but nevertheless conjectural. A general desire to cease the Empire&#x27;s extension may have been the determining motive. Reduction of defence costs may also have played a role, as the Wall deterred attacks on Roman territory at a lower cost than a massed border army, and controlled cross-border trade and immigration. A shrine was erected in York to Britannia as the divine personification of Britain; coins were struck, bearing her image, identified as Britannia. By the end of 122, Hadrian had concluded his visit to Britannia. He never saw the finished wall that bears his name.

Hadrian appears to have continued through southern Gaul. At Nemausus, he may have overseen the building of a basilica dedicated to his patroness Plotina, who had recently died in Rome and had been deified at Hadrian&#x27;s request. At around this time, Hadrian dismissed his secretary &quot;ab epistulis&quot;, the biographer Suetonius, for &quot;excessive familiarity&quot; towards the empress. Marcius Turbo&#x27;s colleague as praetorian prefect, Gaius Septicius Clarus, was dismissed for the same alleged reason, perhaps a pretext to remove him from office. Hadrian spent the winter of 122/123 at Tarraco, in Spain, where he restored the Temple of Augustus.

===Africa, Parthia (123)===
In 123, Hadrian crossed the Mediterranean to Mauretania, where he personally led a minor campaign against local rebels. The visit was cut short by reports of war preparations by Parthia; Hadrian quickly headed eastwards. At some point, he visited Cyrene, where he personally funded the training of young men from well-bred families for the Roman military. Cyrene had benefited earlier in Hadrian&#x27;s reign (in 119) from his restoration of public buildings destroyed during the earlier, Trajanic Jewish revolt. Birley describes this kind of investment as &quot;characteristic of Hadrian&quot;.

=== Anatolia; Antinous (123–124)===
When Hadrian arrived on the Euphrates, he personally negotiated a settlement with the Parthian King Osroes I, inspected the Roman defences, then set off westwards, along the Black Sea coast. He probably wintered in Nicomedia, the main city of Bithynia. Nicomedia had been hit by an earthquake only shortly before his stay; Hadrian provided funds for its rebuilding and was acclaimed as restorer of the province.

It is possible that Hadrian visited Claudiopolis and saw the beautiful Antinous, a young man of humble birth who became Hadrian&#x27;s lover. Literary and epigraphic sources say nothing of when or where they met; depictions of Antinous show him aged 20 or so, shortly before his death in 130. In 123, he would most likely have been a youth of 13 or 14. It is also possible that Antinous was sent to Rome to be trained as a page to serve the emperor and only gradually rose to the status of imperial favourite. The actual historical detail of their relationship is mostly unknown.

With or without Antinous, Hadrian travelled through Anatolia. Various traditions suggest his presence at particular locations and allege his foundation of a city within Mysia, Hadrianutherae, after a successful boar hunt. At about this time, plans to complete the Temple of Zeus in Cyzicus, begun by the kings of Pergamon, were put into practice. The temple received a colossal statue of Hadrian. Cyzicus, Pergamon, Smyrna, Ephesus and Sardes were promoted as regional centres for the imperial cult (&quot;neocoros&quot;).

===Greece (124–125)===

Hadrian arrived in Greece during the autumn of 124 and participated in the Eleusinian Mysteries. He had a particular commitment to Athens, which had previously granted him citizenship and an ; at the Athenians&#x27; request, he revised their constitution – among other things, he added a new phyle (tribe), which was named after him. Hadrian combined active, hands-on interventions with cautious restraint. He refused to intervene in a local dispute between producers of olive oil and the Athenian Assembly and Council, who had imposed production quotas on oil producers; yet he granted an imperial subsidy for the Athenian grain supply. Hadrian created two foundations to fund Athens&#x27; public games, festivals and competitions if no citizen proved wealthy or willing enough to sponsor them as a Gymnasiarch or Agonothetes. Generally Hadrian preferred that Greek notables, including priests of the imperial cult, focus on more essential and durable provisions, especially &quot;munera&quot; such as aqueducts and public fountains (&quot;nymphaea&quot;). Athens was given two &quot;nymphaea&quot;; one brought water from Mount Parnes to the Athenia Agora via a complex, challenging and ambitious system of aqueduct tunnels and reservoirs, to be constructed over several years. Several were given to Argos, to remedy a water-shortage so severe and so long-standing that &quot;thirsty Argos&quot; featured in Homeric epic.
During that winter, Hadrian toured the Peloponnese. His exact route is uncertain, but it took in Epidaurus; Pausanias describes temples built there by Hadrian, and his statue – in heroic nudity – erected by its citizens in thanks to their &quot;restorer&quot;. Antinous and Hadrian may have already been lovers at this time; Hadrian showed particular generosity to Mantinea, which shared ancient, mythic, politically useful links with Antinous&#x27; home at Bithynia. He restored Mantinea&#x27;s Temple of Poseidon Hippios, and according to Pausanias, restored the city&#x27;s original, classical name. It had been renamed Antigoneia since Hellenistic times, after the Macedonian King Antigonus III Doson. Hadrian also rebuilt the ancient shrines of Abae and Megara, and the Heraion of Argos.

During his tour of the Peloponnese, Hadrian persuaded the Spartan grandee Eurycles Herculanus – leader of the Euryclid family that had ruled Sparta since Augustus&#x27; day – to enter the Senate, alongside the Athenian grandee Herodes Atticus the Elder. The two aristocrats would be the first from &quot;Old Greece&quot; to enter the Roman Senate, as representatives of Sparta and Athens, traditional rivals and &quot;great powers&quot; of the Classical Age. This was an important step in overcoming Greek notables&#x27; reluctance to take part in Roman political life. In March 125, Hadrian presided at the Athenian festival of Dionysia, wearing Athenian dress. The Temple of Olympian Zeus had been under construction for more than five centuries; Hadrian committed the vast resources at his command to ensure that the job would be finished.

===Return to Italy and trip to Africa (126–128)===
On his return to Italy, Hadrian made a detour to Sicily. Coins celebrate him as the restorer of the island. Back in Rome, he saw the rebuilt Pantheon and his completed villa at nearby Tibur, among the Sabine Hills. In early March 127 Hadrian set off on a tour of Italy; his route has been reconstructed through the evidence of his gifts and donations. He restored the shrine of Cupra in Cupra Maritima and improved the drainage of the Fucine lake. Less welcome than such largesse was his decision in 127 to divide Italy into four regions under imperial legates with consular rank, acting as governors. They were given jurisdiction over all of Italy, excluding Rome itself, therefore shifting Italian cases from the courts of Rome. Having Italy effectively reduced to the status of a group of mere provinces did not go down well with the Roman Senate, and the innovation did not long outlive Hadrian&#x27;s reign.

Hadrian fell ill around this time; whatever the nature of his illness, it did not stop him from setting off in the spring of 128 to visit Africa. His arrival coincided with the good omen of rain, which ended a drought. Along with his usual role as benefactor and restorer, he found time to inspect the troops; his speech to them survives. Hadrian returned to Italy in the summer of 128, but his stay was brief, as he set off on another tour that would last three years.

===Greece, Asia, and Egypt (128–130); Antinous&#x27;s death===
In September 128, Hadrian attended the Eleusinian Mysteries again. This time his visit to Greece seems to have concentrated on Athens and Sparta – the two ancient rivals for dominance of Greece. Hadrian had played with the idea of focusing his Greek revival around the Amphictyonic League based in Delphi, but by now he had decided on something far grander. His new Panhellenion was going to be a council that would bring Greek cities together. Having set in motion the preparations – deciding whose claim to be a Greek city was genuine would take time – Hadrian set off for Ephesus. From Greece, Hadrian proceeded by way of Asia to Egypt, probably conveyed across the Aegean with his entourage by an Ephesian merchant, Lucius Erastus. Hadrian later sent a letter to the Council of Ephesus, supporting Erastus as a worthy candidate for town councillor and offering to pay the requisite fee.

Hadrian arrived in Egypt before the Egyptian New Year on 29 August 130. He opened his stay in Egypt by restoring Pompey the Great&#x27;s tomb at Pelusium, offering sacrifice to him as a hero and composing an epigraph for the tomb. As Pompey was universally acknowledged as responsible for establishing Rome&#x27;s power in the east, this restoration was probably linked to a need to reaffirm Roman Eastern hegemony following social unrest there during Trajan&#x27;s late reign. Hadrian and Antinous held a lion hunt in the Libyan desert; a poem on the subject by the Greek Pankrates is the earliest evidence that they travelled together.

While Hadrian and his entourage were sailing on the Nile, Antinous drowned. The exact circumstances surrounding his death are unknown, and accident, suicide, murder and religious sacrifice have all been postulated. &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; offers the following account:
Hadrian founded the city of Antinoöpolis in Antinous&#x27; honour on 30 October 130. He then continued down the Nile to Thebes, where his visit to the Colossi of Memnon on 20 and 21 November was commemorated by four epigrams inscribed by Julia Balbilla. After that, he headed north, reaching the Fayyum at the beginning of December.

=== Greece and the East (130–132) ===

Hadrian&#x27;s movements after his journey down the Nile are uncertain. Whether or not he returned to Rome, he travelled in the East during 130–131, to organise and inaugurate his new Panhellenion, which was to be focused on the Athenian Temple to Olympian Zeus. As local conflicts had led to the failure of the previous scheme for a Hellenic association centered on Delphi, Hadrian decided instead for a grand league of all Greek cities. Successful applications for membership involved mythologised or fabricated claims to Greek origins, and affirmations of loyalty to imperial Rome, to satisfy Hadrian&#x27;s personal, idealised notions of Hellenism. Hadrian saw himself as protector of Greek culture and the &quot;liberties&quot; of Greece – in this case, urban self-government. It allowed Hadrian to appear as the fictive heir to Pericles, who supposedly had convened a previous Panhellenic Congress – such a Congress is mentioned only in Pericles&#x27; biography by Plutarch, who respected Rome&#x27;s imperial order.

Epigraphical evidence suggests that the prospect of applying to the Panhellenion held little attraction to the wealthier, Hellenised cities of Asia Minor, which were jealous of Athenian and European Greek preeminence within Hadrian&#x27;s scheme. Hadrian&#x27;s notion of Hellenism was narrow and deliberately archaising; he defined &quot;Greekness&quot; in terms of classical roots, rather than a broader, Hellenistic culture. Some cities with a dubious claim to Greekness, however – such as Side – were acknowledged as fully Hellenic. The German sociologist Georg Simmel remarked that the Panhellenion was based on &quot;games, commemorations, preservation of an ideal, an entirely non-political Hellenism&quot;.

Hadrian bestowed honorific titles on many regional centres. Palmyra received a state visit and was given the civic name Hadriana Palmyra. Hadrian also bestowed honours on various Palmyrene magnates, among them one Soados, who had done much to protect Palmyrene trade between the Roman Empire and Parthia.

Hadrian had spent the winter of 131–32 in Athens, where he dedicated the now-completed Temple of Olympian Zeus, At some time in 132, he headed East, to Judaea.

===Third Roman–Jewish War (132–136)===

====Background, causes====
In Roman Judaea, Hadrian visited Jerusalem, which was still in ruins after the First Roman–Jewish War of 66–73. He may have planned to rebuild Jerusalem as a Roman colony – as Vespasian had done with Caesarea Maritima – with various honorific and fiscal privileges. The non-Roman population would have no obligation to participate in Roman religious rituals but were expected to support the Roman imperial order; this is attested in Caesarea, where some Jews served in the Roman army during both the 66 and 132 rebellions. It has been speculated that Hadrian intended to assimilate the Jewish Temple to the traditional Roman civic-religious imperial cult; such assimilations had long been commonplace practice in Greece and in other provinces, and on the whole, had been successful. The neighbouring Samaritans had already integrated their religious rites with Hellenistic ones. Strict Jewish monotheism proved more resistant to imperial cajoling, and then to imperial demands.

A tradition based on the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; suggests that the revolt was spurred by Hadrian&#x27;s abolition of circumcision (&quot;brit milah&quot;); which as a Hellenist he viewed as mutilation. The scholar Peter Schäfer maintains that there is no evidence for this claim, given the notoriously problematical nature of the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; as a source, the &quot;tomfoolery&quot; shown by the writer in the relevant passage, and the fact that contemporary Roman legislation on &quot;genital mutilation&quot; seems to address the general issue of castration of slaves by their masters. Other issues could have contributed to the outbreak: a heavy-handed, culturally insensitive Roman administration; tensions between the landless poor and incoming Roman colonists privileged with land-grants; and a strong undercurrent of messianism, predicated on Jeremiah&#x27;s prophecy that the Temple would be rebuilt seventy years after its destruction, as the First Temple had been after the Babylonian exile.

====Revolt====
A massive anti-Hellenistic and anti-Roman Jewish uprising broke out, led by Simon bar Kokhba. Given the fragmentary nature of the existing evidence, it is impossible to ascertain an exact date for the beginning of the uprising. It probably began between summer and fall of 132.

The Roman governor Tineius (Tynius) Rufus asked for an army to crush the resistance; bar Kokhba punished any Jew who refused to join his ranks. According to Justin Martyr and Eusebius, that had to do mostly with Christian converts, who opposed bar Kokhba&#x27;s messianic claims.

The Romans were overwhelmed by the organised ferocity of the uprising. Hadrian called his general Sextus Julius Severus from Britain and brought troops in from as far as the Danube. Roman losses were heavy; an entire legion or its numeric equivalent of around 4,000. Hadrian&#x27;s report on the war to the Roman Senate omitted the customary salutation, &quot;If you and your children are in health, it is well; I and the legions are in health.&quot;

The rebellion was quashed by 135. According to Cassius Dio. Beitar, a fortified city southwest of Jerusalem, fell after a three-and-a-half-year siege.

====Aftermath; persecutions====
Roman war operations in Judea left some 580,000 Jews dead and 50 fortified towns and 985 villages razed.

An unknown proportion of the population was enslaved. The extent of punitive measures against the Jewish population remains a matter of debate.

Hadrian renamed Judea province Syria Palaestina. He renamed Jerusalem Aelia Capitolina after himself and Jupiter Capitolinus and had the city rebuilt in Greek style. According to Epiphanius, Hadrian appointed Aquila from Sinope in Pontus as &quot;overseer of the work of building the city&quot;, since he was related to him by marriage. Hadrian is said to have placed the city&#x27;s main Forum at the junction of the main Cardo and Decumanus Maximus, now the location for the (smaller) Muristan. After the suppression of the Jewish revolt, Hadrian provided the Samaritans with a temple dedicated to Zeus Hypsistos (&quot;Highest Zeus&quot;) on Mount Gerizim. The bloody repression of the revolt ended Jewish political independence from the Roman imperial order.

====Hadrian&#x27;s itinerary====
Inscriptions make it clear that in 133, Hadrian took to the field with his armies against the rebels. He then returned to Rome, probably in that year and almost certainly – judging from inscriptions – via Illyricum.

==Final years==

Hadrian spent the final years of his life in Rome. In 134, he took an imperial salutation for the end of the Third Jewish War (which was not actually concluded until the following year). Commemorations and achievement awards were kept to a minimum, as Hadrian came to see the war &quot;as a cruel and sudden disappointment to his aspirations&quot; towards a cosmopolitan empire.

Empress Sabina died, probably in 136, after an unhappy marriage with which Hadrian had coped as a political necessity. The &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; biography states that Hadrian himself declared that his wife&#x27;s &quot;ill-temper and irritability&quot; would be reason enough for a divorce, were he a private citizen. That gave credence, after Sabina&#x27;s death, to the common belief that Hadrian had her poisoned. In keeping with well-established imperial propriety, Sabina – who had been made an &quot;Augusta&quot; sometime around 128 – was deified not long after her death.

===Arranging the succession===

Hadrian&#x27;s marriage to Sabina had been childless. Suffering from poor health, Hadrian turned to the issue of succession. In 136, he adopted one of the ordinary consuls of that year, Lucius Ceionius Commodus, who, as an emperor-in-waiting, took the name Lucius Aelius Caesar. He was the son-in-law of Gaius Avidius Nigrinus, one of the &quot;four consulars&quot; executed in 118. His health was delicate, and his reputation apparently more that &quot;of a voluptuous, well-educated great lord than that of a leader&quot;. Various modern attempts have been made to explain Hadrian&#x27;s choice: Jerome Carcopino proposes that Aelius was Hadrian&#x27;s natural son. It has also been speculated that his adoption was Hadrian&#x27;s belated attempt to reconcile with one of the most important of the four senatorial families whose leading members had been executed soon after Hadrian&#x27;s succession. Aelius acquitted himself honourably as joint governor of Pannonia Superior and Pannonia Inferior; he held a further consulship in 137 but died on 1 January 138.

Hadrian next adopted Titus Aurelius Fulvus Boionius Arrius Antoninus (the future emperor Antoninus Pius), who had served Hadrian as one of the five imperial legates of Italy, and as proconsul of Asia. In the interests of dynastic stability, Hadrian required that Antoninus adopt both Lucius Ceionius Commodus (son of the deceased Aelius Caesar) and Marcus Annius Verus (grandson of an influential senator of the same name who had been Hadrian&#x27;s close friend); Annius was already betrothed to Aelius Caesar&#x27;s daughter Ceionia Fabia. It may not have been Hadrian, but rather Antoninus Pius – Annius Verus&#x27;s uncle – who supported Annius Verus&#x27; advancement; the latter&#x27;s divorce of Ceionia Fabia and subsequent marriage to Antoninus&#x27; daughter Annia Faustina points in the same direction. When he eventually became Emperor, Marcus Aurelius would co-opt Ceionius Commodus as his co-Emperor, under the name of Lucius Verus, on his own initiative.

Hadrian&#x27;s last few years were marked by conflict and unhappiness. His adoption of Aelius Caesar proved unpopular, not least with Hadrian&#x27;s brother-in-law Lucius Julius Ursus Servianus and Servianus&#x27;s grandson Gnaeus Pedanius Fuscus Salinator. Servianus, though now far too old, had stood in the line of succession at the beginning of Hadrian&#x27;s reign; Fuscus is said to have had designs on the imperial power for himself. In 137, he may have attempted a coup in which his grandfather was implicated; Hadrian ordered that both be put to death. Servianus is reported to have prayed before his execution that Hadrian would &quot;long for death but be unable to die&quot;. During his final, protracted illness, Hadrian was prevented from suicide on several occasions.

===Death===

Hadrian died in the year 138 on 10 July, in his villa at Baiae at the age of 62, having reigned for 21 years. Dio Cassius and the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; record details of his failing health; some modern sources interpret the ear-creases on later portrayals (such as the Townley Hadrian) as signs of coronary artery disease.

He was buried at Puteoli, near Baiae, on an estate that had once belonged to Cicero. Soon after, his remains were transferred to Rome and buried in the Gardens of Domitia, close to the almost-complete mausoleum. Upon completion of the Mausoleum of Hadrian in Rome in 139 by his successor Antoninus Pius, his body was cremated. His ashes were placed there together with those of his wife Vibia Sabina and his first adopted son, Lucius Aelius Caesar, who also died in 138. The Senate had been reluctant to grant Hadrian divine honours; but Antoninus persuaded them by threatening to refuse the position of Emperor. Hadrian was given a temple on the Campus Martius, ornamented with reliefs representing the provinces. The Senate awarded Antoninus the title of &quot;Pius&quot;, in recognition of his filial piety in pressing for the deification of Hadrian, his adoptive father. At the same time, perhaps in reflection of the senate&#x27;s ill will towards Hadrian, commemorative coinage honouring his deification was kept to a minimum.

== Military activities ==
Most of Hadrian&#x27;s military activities were consistent with his ideology of empire as a community of mutual interest and support. He focused on protection from external and internal threats; on &quot;raising&quot; existing provinces rather than the aggressive acquisition of wealth and territory through subjugation of &quot;foreign&quot; peoples that had characterised the early empire. Hadrian&#x27;s policy shift was part of a trend towards the slowing down of the empire&#x27;s expansion, such expansion being not closed after him (the empire&#x27;s greatest extent being achieved only during the Severan dynasty), but a significant step in that direction, given the empire&#x27;s overstretching. While the empire as a whole benefited from this, military careerists resented the loss of opportunities.

The 4th-century historian Aurelius Victor saw Hadrian&#x27;s withdrawal from Trajan&#x27;s territorial gains in Mesopotamia as a jealous belittlement of Trajan&#x27;s achievements (&quot;Traiani gloriae invidens&quot;). More likely, an expansionist policy was no longer sustainable; the empire had lost two legions, the Legio XXII Deiotariana and the &quot;lost legion&quot; IX Hispania, possibly destroyed in a late Trajanic uprising by the Brigantes in Britain. Trajan himself may have thought his gains in Mesopotamia indefensible and abandoned them shortly before his death. Hadrian granted parts of Dacia to the Roxolani Sarmatians; their king, Rasparaganus, received Roman citizenship, client king status, and possibly an increased subsidy. Hadrian&#x27;s presence on the Dacian front is mere conjecture, but Dacia was included in his coin series with allegories of the provinces. A controlled partial withdrawal of troops from the Dacian plains would have been less costly than maintaining several Roman cavalry units and a supporting network of fortifications.

Hadrian retained control over Osroene through the client king Parthamaspates, who had once served as Trajan&#x27;s client king of Parthia; and around 123, Hadrian negotiated a peace treaty with the now-independent Parthia (according to the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, disputed). Late in his reign (135), the Alani attacked Roman Cappadocia with the covert support of Pharasmanes, the king of Caucasian Iberia. The attack was repulsed by Hadrian&#x27;s governor, the historian Arrian, who subsequently installed a Roman &quot;adviser&quot; in Iberia. Arrian kept Hadrian well-informed on matters related to the Black Sea and the Caucasus. Between 131 and 132, he sent Hadrian a lengthy letter (&quot;Periplus of the Euxine&quot;) on a maritime trip around the Black Sea that was intended to offer relevant information in case a Roman intervention was needed.

Hadrian also developed permanent fortifications and military posts along the empire&#x27;s borders (&quot;limites&quot;, sl. &quot;limes&quot;) to support his policy of stability, peace and preparedness. That helped keep the military usefully occupied in times of peace; his wall across Britannia was built by ordinary troops. A series of mostly wooden fortifications, forts, outposts and watchtowers strengthened the Danube and Rhine borders. Troops practised intensive, regular drill routines. Although his coins showed military images almost as often as peaceful ones, Hadrian&#x27;s policy was peace through strength, even threat, with an emphasis on &quot;disciplina&quot; (discipline), which was the subject of two monetary series. Cassius Dio praised Hadrian&#x27;s emphasis on &quot;spit and polish&quot; as cause for the generally peaceful character of his reign. Fronto, by contrast, claimed that Hadrian preferred war games to actual war and enjoyed &quot;giving eloquent speeches to the armies&quot; – like the inscribed series of addresses he made while on an inspection tour, during 128, at the new headquarters of Legio III Augusta in Lambaesis.

Faced with a shortage of legionary recruits from Italy and other Romanised provinces, Hadrian systematised the use of less costly &quot;numeri&quot; – ethnic non-citizen troops with special weapons, such as Eastern mounted archers, in low-intensity, mobile defensive tasks such as dealing with border infiltrators and skirmishers. Hadrian is also credited with introducing units of heavy cavalry (cataphracts) into the Roman army. Fronto later blamed Hadrian for declining standards in the Roman army of his own time.

==Legal and social reforms==

Hadrian enacted, through the jurist Salvius Julianus, the first attempt to codify Roman law. This was the Perpetual Edict, according to which the legal actions of praetors became fixed statutes and, as such, could no longer be subjected to personal interpretation or change by any magistrate other than the Emperor. At the same time, following a procedure initiated by Domitian, Hadrian made the Emperor&#x27;s legal advisory board, the &quot;consilia principis&quot; (&quot;council of the princeps&quot;) into a permanent body, staffed by salaried legal aides. Its members were mostly drawn from the equestrian class, replacing the earlier freedmen of the imperial household. This innovation marked the superseding of surviving Republican institutions by an openly autocratic political system. The reformed bureaucracy was supposed to exercise administrative functions independently of traditional magistracies; objectively it did not detract from the Senate&#x27;s position. The new civil servants were free men and as such supposed to act on behalf of the interests of the &quot;Crown&quot;, not of the Emperor as an individual. However, the Senate never accepted the loss of its prestige caused by the emergence of a new aristocracy alongside it, placing more strain on the already troubled relationship between the Senate and the Emperor.

Hadrian codified the customary legal privileges of the wealthiest, most influential, highest-status citizens (described as &quot;splendidiores personae&quot; or &quot;honestiores&quot;), who held a traditional right to pay fines when found guilty of relatively minor, non-treasonous offences. Low-ranking persons – &quot;alii&quot; (&quot;the others&quot;), including low-ranking citizens – were &quot;humiliores&quot; who for the same offences could be subject to extreme physical punishments, including forced labour in the mines or in public works, as a form of fixed-term servitude. While Republican citizenship had carried at least notional equality under law, and the right to justice, offences in imperial courts were judged and punished according to the relative prestige, rank, reputation and moral worth of both parties; senatorial courts were apt to be lenient when trying one of their peers, and to deal very harshly with offences committed against one of their number by low-ranking citizens or non-citizens. For treason (maiestas), beheading was the worst punishment that the law could inflict on &quot;honestiores&quot;; the &quot;humiliores&quot; might suffer crucifixion, burning, or condemnation to the beasts in the arena.

A great number of Roman citizens maintained a precarious social and economic advantage at the lower end of the hierarchy. Hadrian found it necessary to clarify that decurions, the usually middle-class, elected local officials responsible for running the ordinary, everyday official business of the provinces, counted as &quot;honestiores&quot;; so did soldiers, veterans and their families, as far as civil law was concerned; by implication, almost all citizens below those ranks – the vast majority of the Empire&#x27;s population – counted as &quot;humiliores&quot;, with low citizen status, high tax obligations and limited rights. Like most Romans, Hadrian seems to have accepted slavery as morally correct, an expression of the same natural order that rewarded &quot;the best men&quot; with wealth, power and respect. When confronted by a crowd demanding the freeing of a popular slave charioteer, Hadrian replied that he could not free a slave belonging to another person. However, he limited the punishments that slaves could suffer; they could be lawfully tortured to provide evidence, but they could not be lawfully killed unless guilty of a capital offence. Masters were forbidden to sell slaves to a gladiator trainer (lanista) or to a procurer, except as legally justified punishment. Hadrian also forbade torture of free defendants and witnesses. He abolished ergastula, private prisons for slaves in which kidnapped free men had sometimes been illegally detained.

Hadrian issued a general rescript, imposing a ban on castration, performed on freedman or slave, voluntarily or not, on pain of death for both the performer and the patient. Under the &quot;Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis&quot;, castration was placed on a par with conspiracy to murder and punished accordingly. Notwithstanding his philhellenism, Hadrian was also a traditionalist. He enforced dress-standards among the &quot;honestiores&quot;; senators and knights were expected to wear the toga when in public. He imposed strict separation between the sexes in theatres and public baths; to discourage idleness, the latter were not allowed to open until 2:00 in the afternoon, &quot;except for medical reasons.&quot;

==Religious activities==

One of Hadrian&#x27;s immediate duties on accession was to seek senatorial consent for the deification of his predecessor, Trajan, and any members of Trajan&#x27;s family to whom he owed a debt of gratitude. Matidia Augusta, Hadrian&#x27;s mother-in-law, died in December 119 and was duly deified. Hadrian may have stopped at Nemausus during his return from Britannia to oversee the completion or foundation of a basilica dedicated to his patroness Plotina. She had recently died in Rome and had been deified at Hadrian&#x27;s request.

As Emperor, Hadrian was also Rome&#x27;s &quot;pontifex maximus&quot;, responsible for all religious affairs and the proper functioning of official religious institutions throughout the empire. His Hispano-Roman origins and marked pro-Hellenism shifted the focus of the official imperial cult from Rome to the Provinces. While his standard coin issues identified him with the traditional &quot;genius populi Romani&quot;, other issues stressed his personal identification with &quot;Hercules Gaditanus&quot; (Hercules of Gades), and Rome&#x27;s imperial protection of Greek civilisation. He promoted Sagalassos in Greek Pisidia as the Empire&#x27;s leading imperial cult centre; his exclusively Greek &quot;Panhellenion&quot; extolled Athens as the spiritual centre of Greek culture.

Hadrian added several imperial cult centres to the existing roster, particularly in Greece, where traditional intercity rivalries were commonplace. Cities promoted as imperial cult centres drew imperial sponsorship of festivals and sacred games, and attracted tourism, trade and private investment. Local worthies and sponsors were encouraged to seek self-publicity as cult officials under the aegis of Roman rule and to foster reverence for imperial authority. Hadrian&#x27;s rebuilding of long-established religious centres would have further underlined his respect for the glories of classical Greece – something well in line with contemporary antiquarian tastes. During Hadrian&#x27;s third and last trip to the Greek East, there seems to have been an upwelling of religious fervour, focused on Hadrian himself. He was given personal cult as a deity, monuments and civic homage, according to the religious syncretism of the time. He may have had the great Serapeum of Alexandria rebuilt, following damage sustained in 116, during the Diaspora revolt.

In 136, just two years before his death, Hadrian dedicated his Temple of Venus and Roma. It was built on land he had set aside for the purpose in 121, formerly the site of Nero&#x27;s Golden House. The temple was the largest in Rome and was built in a Hellenising style, more Greek than Roman. Its dedication and statuary associated the &quot;cultus&quot; of the traditional Roman goddess Venus, divine ancestress and protector of the Roman people, with the &quot;cultus&quot; of the goddess Roma – herself a Greek invention, hitherto worshipped only in the provinces – to emphasise the universal nature of the empire.

===Antinous===

Hadrian had Antinous deified as Osiris-Antinous by an Egyptian priest at the ancient Temple of Ramesses II, very near the place of his death. Hadrian dedicated a new temple-city complex there, built in a Graeco-Roman style, and named it Antinoöpolis. It was a proper Greek polis; it was granted an imperially subsidised alimentary scheme similar to Trajan&#x27;s alimenta, and its citizens were allowed intermarriage with members of the native population without loss of citizen status. Hadrian thus identified an existing native cult (to Osiris) with Roman rule. The cult of Antinous was to become very popular in the Greek-speaking world and also found support in the West. In Hadrian&#x27;s villa, statues of the Tyrannicides, with a bearded Aristogeiton and a clean-shaven Harmodios, linked his favourite to the classical tradition of Greek love. In the west, Antinous was identified with the Celtic sun god Belenos.

Hadrian was criticised for the open intensity of his grief at Antinous&#x27;s death, particularly as he had delayed the apotheosis of his own sister Paulina after her death. Nevertheless, his recreation of the deceased youth as a cult figure found little opposition. Though not a subject of the state-sponsored, official Roman imperial cult, Antinous offered a common focus for the emperor and his subjects, emphasising their sense of community. Medals were struck with his effigy, and statues were erected to him in all parts of the empire, in all kinds of garb, including Egyptian dress. Temples were built for his worship in Bithynia and Mantineia in Arcadia. In Athens, festivals were celebrated in his honour and oracles delivered in his name. As an &quot;international&quot; cult figure, Antinous had enduring fame, far outlasting Hadrian&#x27;s reign. Local coins with his effigy were still being struck during Caracalla&#x27;s reign, and he was invoked in a poem to celebrate the accession of Diocletian.

===Christians===
Hadrian continued Trajan&#x27;s policy on Christians; they should not be sought out and should only be prosecuted for specific offences, such as refusal to swear oaths. In a rescript addressed to the proconsul of Asia, Gaius Minicius Fundanus, and preserved by Justin Martyr, Hadrian laid down that accusers of Christians had to bear the burden of proof for their denunciations or be punished for &quot;calumnia&quot; (defamation).

==Personal and cultural interests==

Hadrian had an abiding and enthusiastic interest in art, architecture and public works. As part of his imperial restoration program, he founded, re-founded or rebuilt many towns and cities throughout the Empire, supplying them with temples, stadiums and other public buildings. Examples in the Roman Province of Thrace include monumental developments to the Stadium and Odeon of Philippopolis (present-day Plovdiv), the provincial capital, and his rebuilding and enlargement of the city of Orestias, which he renamed Hadrianopolis (modern Edirne). Several other towns and cities – including Roman Carthage – were named or renamed &quot;Hadrianopolis&quot;. Rome&#x27;s Pantheon (temple &quot;to all the gods&quot;), originally built by Agrippa and destroyed by fire in 80, was partly restored under Trajan and completed under Hadrian in its familiar domed form. Hadrian&#x27;s Villa at Tibur (Tivoli) provides the greatest Roman equivalent of an Alexandrian garden, complete with domed Serapeum, recreating a sacred landscape.

An anecdote from Cassius Dio&#x27;s history suggests Hadrian had a high opinion of his own architectural tastes and talents and took their rejection as a personal offence: at some time before his reign, his predecessor Trajan was discussing an architectural problem with Apollodorus of Damascus – architect and designer of Trajan&#x27;s Forum, the Column commemorating his Dacian conquest, and his bridge across the Danube – when Hadrian interrupted to offer his advice. Apollodorus gave him a scathing response: &quot;Be off, and draw your gourds [a sarcastic reference to the domes which Hadrian apparently liked to draw]. You don&#x27;t understand any of these matters.&quot; Dio claims that once Hadrian became emperor, he showed Apollodorus drawings of the gigantic Temple of Venus and Roma, implying that great buildings could be created without his help. When Apollodorus pointed out the building&#x27;s various insoluble problems and faults, Hadrian was enraged, sent him into exile and later put him to death on trumped-up charges.

Hadrian was a passionate hunter from a young age. In northwest Asia, he founded and dedicated a city to commemorate a she-bear he killed. In Egypt he and his beloved Antinous killed a lion. In Rome, eight reliefs featuring Hadrian in different stages of hunting decorate a building that began as a monument celebrating a kill.

Hadrian&#x27;s philhellenism may have been one reason for his adoption, like Nero before him, of the beard as suited to Roman imperial dignity; Dio of Prusa had equated the growth of the beard with the Hellenic ethos. Hadrian&#x27;s beard may also have served to conceal his natural facial blemishes. Before Hadrian, all emperors except Nero (who occasionally wore sideburns) had been clean-shaven, according to the fashion introduced among the Romans by Scipio Africanus (236–183 BCE). After Hadrian until the reign of Constantine the Great (r. 306–337) all adult emperors were bearded. The wearing of the beard as an imperial fashion was subsequently revived by Phocas (r. 602–610) at the beginning of the 7th century and this fashion lasted until the end of the Byzantine Empire.

Hadrian was familiar with the rival philosophers Epictetus and Favorinus, and with their works, and held an interest in Roman philosophy. During his first stay in Greece, before he became emperor, he attended lectures by Epictetus at Nicopolis. Shortly before the death of Plotina, Hadrian had granted her wish that the leadership of the Epicurean School in Athens be open to a non-Roman candidate.During Hadrian&#x27;s time as tribune of the plebs, omens and portents supposedly announced his future imperial condition. According to the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, Hadrian had a great interest in astrology and divination and had been told of his future accession to the Empire by a granduncle who was himself a skilled astrologer.

Hadrian wrote poetry in both Latin and Greek; one of the few surviving examples is a Latin poem he reportedly composed on his deathbed (see below). Some of his Greek productions found their way into the &quot;Palatine Anthology&quot;. He also wrote an autobiography, which &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; says was published under the name of Hadrian&#x27;s freedman Phlegon of Tralles. It was not a work of great length or revelation but designed to scotch various rumours or explain Hadrian&#x27;s most controversial actions. It is possible that this autobiography had the form of a series of open letters to Antoninus Pius.

===Poem by Hadrian===
According to the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, Hadrian composed the following poem shortly before his death:
:
:

:::P. Aelius Hadrianus Imp.

:&quot;Roving amiable little soul,&quot;
:&quot;Body&#x27;s companion and guest,&quot;
:&quot;That now will leave to places&quot;
:&quot;Colourless, unbending, and bare&quot;
:&quot;Your usual distractions no more shall be there...&quot;

The poem has enjoyed remarkable popularity, but uneven critical acclaim. According to Aelius Spartianus, the alleged author of Hadrian&#x27;s biography in the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, Hadrian &quot;wrote also similar poems in Greek, not much better than this one&quot;. T. S. Eliot&#x27;s poem &quot;Animula&quot; may have been inspired by Hadrian&#x27;s, though the relationship is not unambiguous.

==Appraisals==
Hadrian has been described as the most versatile of all Roman emperors, who &quot;adroitly concealed a mind envious, melancholy, hedonistic, and excessive with respect to his own ostentation; he simulated restraint, affability, clemency, and conversely disguised the ardor for fame with which he burned.&quot; His successor Marcus Aurelius, in his &quot;Meditations&quot;, lists those to whom he owes a debt of gratitude; Hadrian is conspicuously absent. Hadrian&#x27;s tense, authoritarian relationship with his Senate was acknowledged a generation after his death by Fronto, himself a senator, who wrote in one of his letters to Marcus Aurelius that &quot;I praised the deified Hadrian, your grandfather, in the senate on a number of occasions with great enthusiasm, and I did this willingly, too [...] But, if it can be said – respectfully acknowledging your devotion towards your grandfather – I wanted to appease and assuage Hadrian as I would Mars Gradivus or Dis Pater, rather than to love him.&quot; Fronto adds, in another letter, that he kept some friendships, during Hadrian&#x27;s reign, &quot;under the risk of my life&quot; (&quot;cum periculo capitis&quot;). Hadrian underscored the autocratic character of his reign by counting his &quot;dies imperii&quot; from the day of his acclamation by the armies rather than the senate and legislating by frequent use of imperial decrees to bypass the need for the Senate&#x27;s approval. The veiled antagonism between Hadrian and the Senate never grew to overt confrontation as had happened during the reigns of overtly &quot;bad&quot; emperors because Hadrian knew how to remain aloof and avoid an open clash. That Hadrian spent half of his reign away from Rome in constant travel probably helped to mitigate the worst of this permanently strained relationship.

In 1503, Niccolò Machiavelli, though an avowed republican, esteemed Hadrian as an ideal &quot;princeps&quot;, one of Rome&#x27;s Five Good Emperors. Friedrich Schiller called Hadrian &quot;the Empire&#x27;s first servant&quot;. Edward Gibbon admired his &quot;vast and active genius&quot; and his &quot;equity and moderation&quot;, and considered Hadrian&#x27;s era as part of the &quot;happiest era of human history&quot;. In Ronald Syme&#x27;s view, Hadrian &quot;was a Führer, a Duce, a Caudillo&quot;. According to Syme, Tacitus&#x27; description of the rise and accession of Tiberius is a disguised account of Hadrian&#x27;s authoritarian Principate. According, again, to Syme, Tacitus&#x27; Annals would be a work of contemporary history, written &quot;during Hadrian&#x27;s reign and hating it&quot;.

While the balance of ancient literary opinion almost invariably compares Hadrian unfavourably to his predecessor, modern historians have sought to examine his motives, purposes and the consequences of his actions and policies. For M.A. Levi, a summing-up of Hadrian&#x27;s policies should stress the ecumenical character of the Empire, his development of an alternate bureaucracy disconnected from the Senate and adapted to the needs of an &quot;enlightened&quot; autocracy, and his overall defensive strategy; this would qualify him as a grand Roman political reformer, creator of an openly absolute monarchy to replace a sham senatorial republic. Robin Lane Fox credits Hadrian as creator of a unified Greco-Roman cultural tradition, and as the end of this same tradition; Hadrian&#x27;s attempted &quot;restoration&quot; of Classical culture within a non-democratic Empire drained it of substantive meaning, or, in Fox&#x27;s words, &quot;kill[ed] it with kindness&quot;.

==Portraits==

Hadrian&#x27;s portraiture shows him as the first Roman emperor with a beard. Most emperors after him followed his lead. 10 different portrait types are known of Hadrian. A juvenile type with curly hair, broad side burns and a light moustache (but a free chin) was shown on coins later in his life on rare aurei, but likely reflects an early portrait before he became emperor. His first portrait type as Caesar and Augustus used on coins in Mid 117AD shows again broad sideburns merging into a strong moustache and still a free chin. The beard thus resembles beard styles popular in the 19th century like emperor Franz Josef of Austria.

In Hadrian&#x27;s time, there was already a well-established convention that one could not write a contemporary Roman imperial history for fear of contradicting what the emperors wanted to say, read or hear about themselves. As an earlier Latin source, Fronto&#x27;s correspondence and works attest to Hadrian&#x27;s character and the internal politics of his rule. Greek authors such as Philostratus and Pausanias wrote shortly after Hadrian&#x27;s reign, but confined their scope to the general historical framework that shaped Hadrian&#x27;s decisions, especially those relating the Greek-speaking world, Greek cities and notables. Pausanias especially wrote a lot in praise of Hadrian&#x27;s benefactions to Greece in general and Athens in particular. Political histories of Hadrian&#x27;s reign come mostly from later sources, some of them written centuries after the reign itself. The early 3rd-century &quot;Roman History&quot; by Cassius Dio, written in Greek, gave a general account of Hadrian&#x27;s reign, but the original is lost, and what survives, aside from some fragments, is a brief, Byzantine-era abridgment by the 11th-century monk Xiphilinius, who focused on Hadrian&#x27;s religious interests, the Bar Kokhba war, and little elsemostly on Hadrian&#x27;s moral qualities and his fraught relationship with the Senate. There are various other sources referred to by later commentators, such as the encomium of Aspasius of Byblos, that are now completely lost. The principal source for Hadrian&#x27;s life and reign is, therefore, in Latin: one of several late 4th-century imperial biographies, collectively known as the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;. The collection as a whole is notorious for its unreliability (&quot;a mish mash of actual fact, cloak and dagger, sword and sandal, with a sprinkling of &quot;Ubu Roi&quot;&quot;), but most modern historians consider its account of Hadrian to be relatively free of outright fictions, and probably based on sound historical sources, principally one of a lost series of imperial biographies by the prominent 3rd-century senator Marius Maximus, who covered the reigns of Nerva through to Elagabalus.

The first modern historian to produce a chronological account of Hadrian&#x27;s life, supplementing the written sources with other epigraphical, numismatic, and archaeological evidence, was the German 19th-century medievalist Ferdinand Gregorovius. A 1907 biography by Weber, a German nationalist and later Nazi Party supporter, incorporates the same archaeological evidence to produce an account of Hadrian, and especially his Bar Kokhba war, that has been described as ideologically loaded. Epigraphical studies in the post-war period help support alternate views of Hadrian. Anthony Birley&#x27;s 1997 biography of Hadrian sums up and reflects these developments in Hadrian historiography. The French novelist Marguerite Yourcenar wrote a historical novel entitled &quot;Memoirs of Hadrian&quot; first published in French in 1951.

==See also==
* &quot;Memoirs of Hadrian&quot;, a 1951 semi-fictional autobiography of Hadrian, written by Marguerite Yourcenar.
* Phallos, a 2004 novella in which the narrator encounters Hadrian and Antinous just before Antinous&#x27;s murder and then, once more, minutes afterward, which changes the narrator&#x27;s life, written by Samuel R. Delany.
* &quot;Hadrian&quot;, a 2018 opera based on Hadrian&#x27;s life and death and his relationship with Antinous, composed by Rufus Wainwright.

==Citations==
==References==

===Primary sources===
* Cassius Dio or Dio Cassius &quot;Roman History&quot;. Greek Text and Translation by Earnest Cary at internet archive
* Scriptores Historiae Augustae, &quot;Augustan History&quot;. Latin Text Translated by David Magie
* Aurelius Victor, &quot;Caesares&quot;, XIV. Latin 
* Anon, &quot;Excerpta&quot; of Aurelius Victor: &quot;Epitome de Caesaribus&quot;, XIII. Latin 
Inscriptions:
* Eusebius of Caesarea, &quot;Church History (Book IV)&quot;, 
* Smallwood, E.M, &quot;Documents Illustrating the Principates of Nerva Trajan and Hadrian&quot;, Cambridge, 1966.

===Secondary sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Gibbon, Edward, &quot;The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire&quot;, vol. I, 1776. The Online Library of Liberty 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Reprinted in 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* Kouremenos, Anna (2022). &quot;The Province of Achaea in the 2nd century CE: The Past Present&quot;. Routledge. 
* 

==External links==

* Historia Augusta: Life of Hadrian
* Hadrian coinage
* Catholic Encyclopedia article
* Major scultoric find at Sagalassos (Turkey), 2 August 2007 (between 13 and 16 feet in height, four to five meters), with some splendid photos courtesy of the Sagalassos Archaeological Research Project
* Hadrian, in De Imperatoribus Romanis, Online Encyclopedia of Roman Emperors </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="0" end="7" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="47" end="60" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q658893" start="98" end="105" title="Italica" label="Italica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="123" end="130" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617880" start="144" end="161" title="Italic peoples" label="Italic settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q219415" start="165" end="181" title="Hispania Baetica" label="Hispania Baetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q380806" start="201" end="223" title="Aelia gens" label="Aelia &amp;quot;gens&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q51420" start="278" end="284" title="Atri, Abruzzo" label="Hadria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="326" end="348" title="Nerva–Antonine dynasty" label="Nerva–Antonine dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q232716" start="398" end="410" title="Vibia Sabina" label="Vibia Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q76477" start="412" end="422" title="grandniece" label="grandniece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="446" end="452" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q239448" start="559" end="574" title="Pompeia Plotina" label="Pompeia Plotina"/>
<link wikidata="Q765845" start="890" end="901" title="Mesopotamia (Roman province)" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40169" start="903" end="910" title="Assyria (Roman province)" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254480" start="912" end="919" title="Roman Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q971609" start="934" end="939" title="Roman Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555771" start="1094" end="1112" title="Panhellenism" label="panhellenic empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="1408" end="1427" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="1464" end="1473" title="Roman Britain" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="1506" end="1514" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q430792" start="1540" end="1564" title="Temple of Venus and Roma" label="Temple of Venus and Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q521646" start="1600" end="1622" title="Serapeum of Alexandria" label="Serapeum of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q171876" start="1763" end="1771" title="Antinous" label="Antinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="1910" end="1927" title="Bar Kokhba revolt" label="Bar Kokhba revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="2117" end="2131" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="2200" end="2215" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433" start="2220" end="2232" title="Lucius Verus" label="Lucius Verus"/>
<link wikidata="Q290097" start="2281" end="2286" title="Baiae" label="Baiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="2422" end="2440" title="Five Good Emperors" label="Five Good Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q446840" start="2463" end="2482" title="benevolent dictator" label="benevolent dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q658893" start="2797" end="2804" title="Italica" label="Italica"/>
<link wikidata="Q568278" start="2813" end="2823" title="Santiponce" label="Santiponce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="2830" end="2837" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q219415" start="2899" end="2915" title="Hispania Baetica" label="Hispania Baetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="2927" end="2943" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="2965" end="2981" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio Africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51420" start="3048" end="3052" title="Atri, Italy" label="Atri"/>
<link wikidata="Q510990" start="3078" end="3085" title="Picenum" label="Picenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3211" end="3215" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280800" start="3293" end="3322" title="Publius Aelius Hadrianus Afer" label="Publius Aelius Hadrianus Afer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="3326" end="3333" title="Roman Senate" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="3337" end="3344" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087777" start="3408" end="3423" title="Domitia Paulina" label="Domitia Paulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="3493" end="3498" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087777" start="3539" end="3560" title="Aelia Domitia Paulina" label="Aelia Domitia Paulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="3566" end="3575" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q272777" start="3785" end="3805" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159605" start="3809" end="3815" title="Tivoli, Lazio" label="Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q344282" start="3846" end="3878" title="Gnaeus Pedanius Fuscus Salinator (consul 118)" label="Gnaeus Pedanius Fuscus Salinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="3885" end="3892" title="Barcelona" label="Barcino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="4130" end="4136" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23009870" start="4156" end="4168" title="first cousin" label="first cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q275606" start="4281" end="4296" title="Aurelius Victor" label="Aurelius Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273993" start="4533" end="4538" title="gens Ulpia" label="Ulpio"/>
<link wikidata="Q380806" start="4539" end="4545" title="gens Aelia" label="Aelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q716720" start="4668" end="4692" title="Publius Acilius Attianus" label="Publius Acilius Attianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="4725" end="4743" title="Praetorian prefect" label="Praetorian prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153503" start="4864" end="4873" title="Education in ancient Rome" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="4915" end="4925" title="Aristocracy" label="aristocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q657246" start="4957" end="4973" title="Ancient Greek literature" label="Greek literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129554" start="5197" end="5227" title="decemviri stlitibus judicandis" label="decemviri stlitibus judicandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q536421" start="5250" end="5263" title="vigintisexviri" label="vigintivirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27518" start="5305" end="5319" title="cursus honorum" label="cursus honorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q849288" start="5436" end="5452" title="military tribune" label="military tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064291" start="5469" end="5497" title="Legio II Adiutrix" label="LegioII &amp;quot;Adiutrix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230666" start="5519" end="5537" title="Legio V Macedonica" label="Legio V Macedonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424" start="5622" end="5627" title="Nerva" label="Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q703896" start="5816" end="5837" title="Legio XXII Primigenia" label="Legio XXII Primigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="6311" end="6319" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="6569" end="6580" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349810" start="6791" end="6807" title="First Dacian War" label="First Dacian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704729" start="6946" end="6966" title="tribune of the plebs" label="tribune of the plebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="7015" end="7022" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078442" start="7035" end="7052" title="Second Dacian War" label="Second Dacian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q212624" start="7135" end="7141" title="legatus" label="legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263789" start="7145" end="7161" title="Legio I Minervia" label="Legio I Minervia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247297" start="7183" end="7197" title="Pannonia Inferior" label="Lower Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="7241" end="7251" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="7329" end="7334" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="7339" end="7346" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837791" start="7354" end="7361" title="Iazyges" label="Iazyges"/>
<link wikidata="Q357829" start="7748" end="7764" title="eponymous archon" label="eponymous archon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227044" start="7864" end="7883" title="Theatre of Dionysus" label="Theatre of Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q673341" start="7885" end="7887" title="Inscriptiones Graecae" label="IG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651751" start="8012" end="8043" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Parthian campaign" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Parthian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="8177" end="8184" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="8219" end="8224" title="Syria (Roman province)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q844779" start="8532" end="8539" title="Gazipaşa" label="Selinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="8544" end="8551" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232716" start="8847" end="8859" title="Vibia Sabina" label="Vibia Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q262368" start="9526" end="9541" title="Salonia Matidia" label="Salonia Matidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q237622" start="9596" end="9610" title="Ulpia Marciana" label="Ulpia Marciana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="9660" end="9667" title="Imperial cult (ancient Rome)" label="deified"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9703" end="9710" title="Augustus (title)#Feminine equivalent" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="9760" end="9766" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="10351" end="10360" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="10742" end="10758" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424" start="10861" end="10866" title="Nerva" label="Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="12071" end="12082" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="12113" end="12129" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q476078" start="12158" end="12164" title="aureus" label="aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="12279" end="12285" title="Caesar (title)" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240688" start="12728" end="12733" title="Donativum" label="bonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192091" start="13031" end="13081" title="Kitos War" label="the Jewish revolt that had broken out under Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q446659" start="13150" end="13164" title="Lusius Quietus" label="Lusius Quietus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="13262" end="13268" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="13331" end="13349" title="praetorian prefect" label="praetorian prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q772652" start="14475" end="14496" title="Aulus Cornelius Palma Frontonianus" label="Aulus Cornelius Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q221353" start="14526" end="14540" title="Arabia (province)" label="Arabia Nabatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215443" start="14811" end="14833" title="Gaius Avidius Nigrinus" label="Gaius Avidius Nigrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="14873" end="14890" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284490" start="15256" end="15277" title="Quintus Marcius Turbo" label="Quintus Marcius Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q499165" start="15402" end="15412" title="Procurator (Roman)" label="procurator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004124" start="15994" end="16005" title="frumentarii" label="frumentarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q213468" start="16807" end="16816" title="Municipium" label="municipia"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="16926" end="16934" title="Roman colony" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q354431" start="17139" end="17155" title="Aelius Aristides" label="Aelius Aristides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="17377" end="17381" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6996573" start="17652" end="17669" title="Nero Redivivus legend" label="return or rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="18020" end="18029" title="Roman Britain" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q593565" start="18226" end="18236" title="vexillatio" label="vexillatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q721898" start="18369" end="18391" title="Quintus Pompeius Falco" label="Quintus Pompeius Falco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142281" start="19007" end="19033" title="National personification" label="personification of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="19189" end="19213" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="wall that bears his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="19276" end="19284" title="Nîmes" label="Nemausus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="19325" end="19333" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q14526933" start="19507" end="19519" title="ab epistulis" label="ab epistulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="19542" end="19551" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q984483" start="19666" end="19688" title="Gaius Septicius Clarus" label="Gaius Septicius Clarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501940" start="19817" end="19824" title="Tarraco" label="Tarraco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="19868" end="19876" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="19952" end="19962" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="20154" end="20160" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="20568" end="20577" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q318162" start="20640" end="20648" title="Osroes I" label="Osroes I"/>
<link wikidata="Q209349" start="20755" end="20764" title="Nicomedia" label="Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="20783" end="20791" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088749" start="20989" end="21001" title="Claudiopolis (Bithynia)" label="Claudiopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171876" start="21024" end="21032" title="Antinous" label="Antinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="21586" end="21594" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199723" start="21710" end="21724" title="Balıkesir" label="Hadrianutherae"/>
<link wikidata="Q615449" start="21816" end="21823" title="Cyzicus" label="Cyzicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022162" start="21847" end="21855" title="Attalid dynasty" label="Pergamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18986" start="21940" end="21948" title="Pergamon" label="Pergamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="21950" end="21956" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="21958" end="21965" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q232615" start="21970" end="21976" title="Sardes" label="Sardes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="22019" end="22032" title="Imperial cult (ancient Rome)" label="imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553679" start="22034" end="22054" title="neocorate" label="&amp;quot;neocoros&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="22157" end="22177" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q607608" start="22374" end="22379" title="phyle" label="phyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="22553" end="22562" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q730392" start="22580" end="22588" title="Ecclesia (ancient Athens)" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q729128" start="22593" end="22600" title="Boule (ancient Greece)" label="Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q854022" start="22740" end="22751" title="Trust law" label="foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624186" start="22882" end="22893" title="Gymnasiarch" label="Gymnasiarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827063" start="22897" end="22908" title="Agonothetes" label="Agonothetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q851894" start="23058" end="23076" title="Munera (ancient Rome)" label="&amp;quot;munera&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q731966" start="23117" end="23137" title="Nymphaeum" label="&amp;quot;nymphaea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q395367" start="23226" end="23239" title="Ancient Agora of Athens" label="Athenia Agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="23545" end="23556" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q233576" start="23603" end="23612" title="Epidaurus" label="Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="23614" end="23623" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064465" start="23686" end="23699" title="heroic nudity" label="heroic nudity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160195" start="23871" end="23879" title="Mantinea" label="Mantinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="24012" end="24028" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon Hippios"/>
<link wikidata="Q108816" start="24191" end="24210" title="Antigonus III Doson" label="Antigonus III Doson"/>
<link wikidata="Q304823" start="24256" end="24260" title="Abae" label="Abae"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="24265" end="24271" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607754" start="24281" end="24297" title="Heraion of Argos" label="Heraion of Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="24358" end="24364" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413991" start="24410" end="24418" title="Euryclids" label="Euryclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q606409" start="24527" end="24552" title="Tiberius Claudius Atticus Herodes (suffect consul 133)" label="Herodes Atticus the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q574807" start="24929" end="24937" title="Dionysia" label="Dionysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123019" start="24967" end="24990" title="Temple of Olympian Zeus, Athens" label="Temple of Olympian Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="25244" end="25250" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q159605" start="25379" end="25384" title="Tibur" label="Tibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q779478" start="25396" end="25408" title="Sabine Hills" label="Sabine Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699563" start="25573" end="25578" title="Cupra (goddess)" label="Cupra"/>
<link wikidata="Q56055" start="25582" end="25596" title="Cupra Maritima" label="Cupra Maritima"/>
<link wikidata="Q914789" start="25630" end="25641" title="Fucine lake" label="Fucine lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="26682" end="26702" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="26781" end="26787" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q182875" start="26912" end="26931" title="Amphictyonic League" label="Amphictyonic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q587905" start="27009" end="27021" title="Panhellenion" label="Panhellenion"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="27648" end="27664" title="Pompey the Great" label="Pompey the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145715" start="27680" end="27688" title="Pelusium" label="Pelusium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878906" start="27721" end="27725" title="Greek hero cult" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q669777" start="27743" end="27751" title="epigraph (literature)" label="epigraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="28226" end="28230" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q124281" start="28476" end="28488" title="Antinopolis" label="Antinoöpolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="28568" end="28574" title="Thebes, Egypt" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q750209" start="28599" end="28616" title="Colossi of Memnon" label="Colossi of Memnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q441786" start="28686" end="28700" title="Julia Balbilla" label="Julia Balbilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q203299" start="28744" end="28750" title="Fayyum" label="Fayyum"/>
<link wikidata="Q587905" start="29005" end="29017" title="Panhellenion" label="Panhellenion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123019" start="29050" end="29082" title="Temple of Olympian Zeus, Athens" label="Athenian Temple to Olympian Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="29655" end="29663" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="29779" end="29788" title="Parallel Lives" label="biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="29792" end="29800" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152405" start="30338" end="30342" title="Side, Turkey" label="Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q76849" start="30405" end="30417" title="Georg Simmel" label="Georg Simmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747" start="30621" end="30628" title="Palmyra" label="Palmyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123019" start="30954" end="30977" title="Temple of Olympian Zeus, Athens" label="Temple of Olympian Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="31098" end="31110" title="Roman Judaea" label="Roman Judaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="31128" end="31137" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="31174" end="31196" title="First Roman–Jewish War" label="First Roman–Jewish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="31253" end="31265" title="Roman colony" label="Roman colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="31271" end="31280" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q319242" start="31295" end="31312" title="Caesarea Maritima" label="Caesarea Maritima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906600" start="31681" end="31694" title="Temple in Jerusalem" label="Jewish Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="31736" end="31749" title="Imperial cult (ancient Rome)" label="imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="31988" end="31998" title="monotheism" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32196" end="32208" title="History of male circumcision#Male circumcision in the Greco-Roman world" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q848599" start="32216" end="32226" title="brit milah" label="brit milah"/>
<link wikidata="Q695274" start="32246" end="32255" title="Philhellenism" label="Hellenist"/>
<link wikidata="Q767568" start="32269" end="32279" title="mutilation" label="mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q97091" start="32293" end="32306" title="Peter Schäfer" label="Peter Schäfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="32644" end="32654" title="castration" label="castration"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="32945" end="32953" title="Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="33047" end="33059" title="Solomon&amp;#x27;s Temple" label="First Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="33079" end="33095" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q273117" start="33189" end="33205" title="Simon bar Kokhba" label="Simon bar Kokhba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429935" start="33411" end="33433" title="Quintus Tineius Rufus (consul 127)" label="Tineius (Tynius) Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="33549" end="33562" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="33567" end="33575" title="Eusebius of Caesarea" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q666507" start="33771" end="33792" title="Sextus Julius Severus" label="Sextus Julius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="33798" end="33805" title="Roman Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="33980" end="33992" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="34172" end="34183" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q637954" start="34185" end="34191" title="Betar (fortress)" label="Beitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669578" start="34591" end="34607" title="Syria Palaestina" label="Syria Palaestina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250874" start="34630" end="34646" title="Aelia Capitolina" label="Aelia Capitolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246962" start="34665" end="34684" title="Jupiter Capitolinus" label="Jupiter Capitolinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q335117" start="34769" end="34787" title="Aquila of Sinope" label="Aquila from Sinope"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="34949" end="34954" title="Roman Forum" label="Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035793" start="34983" end="34988" title="Cardo" label="Cardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q959042" start="34993" end="35010" title="Decumanus Maximus" label="Decumanus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936208" start="35047" end="35055" title="Muristan" label="Muristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288751" start="35205" end="35218" title="Mount Gerizim" label="Mount Gerizim"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="35562" end="35571" title="Illyria" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q516766" start="35670" end="35680" title="salutation" label="salutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q232716" start="35971" end="35985" title="Vibia Sabina" label="Empress Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="36755" end="36762" title="Roman consul" label="consuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q455034" start="36848" end="36868" title="Lucius Aelius Caesar" label="Lucius Aelius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q122503" start="37189" end="37205" title="Jerome Carcopino" label="Jerome Carcopino"/>
<link wikidata="Q642188" start="37551" end="37568" title="Pannonia Superior" label="Pannonia Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247297" start="37573" end="37590" title="Pannonia Inferior" label="Pannonia Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="37745" end="37759" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="37838" end="37847" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q210718" start="37851" end="37855" title="Asia (Roman province)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q745241" start="38061" end="38077" title="Marcus Annius Verus (grandfather of Marcus Aurelius)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057381" start="38183" end="38196" title="Ceionia Fabia" label="Ceionia Fabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433" start="38589" end="38601" title="Lucius Verus" label="Lucius Verus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234508" start="38791" end="38820" title="Lucius Julius Ursus Servianus" label="Lucius Julius Ursus Servianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="39100" end="39104" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q355409" start="39219" end="39246" title="last words" label="prayed before his execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="39472" end="39477" title="Roman villa" label="villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q290097" start="39481" end="39486" title="Baiae" label="Baiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="39534" end="39545" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="39560" end="39576" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q98124983" start="39700" end="39715" title="Townley Hadrian" label="Townley Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="39729" end="39752" title="coronary artery disease" label="coronary artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q72425" start="39772" end="39779" title="Puteoli" label="Puteoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="39832" end="39838" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q14509054" start="39907" end="39925" title="Gardens of Domitia" label="Gardens of Domitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q486382" start="39990" end="40010" title="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Mausoleum of Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q232716" start="40142" end="40154" title="Vibia Sabina" label="Vibia Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q455034" start="40182" end="40202" title="Lucius Aelius Caesar" label="Lucius Aelius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q431062" start="40388" end="40394" title="temple of Hadrian" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q242839" start="40402" end="40416" title="Campus Martius" label="Campus Martius"/>
<link wikidata="Q580995" start="40585" end="40596" title="deification" label="deification"/>
<link wikidata="Q321219" start="41420" end="41435" title="Severan dynasty" label="Severan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="41738" end="41749" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q764987" start="41946" end="41968" title="Legio XXII Deiotariana" label="Legio XXII Deiotariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136315" start="42001" end="42012" title="IX Hispania" label="IX Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q500393" start="42068" end="42077" title="Brigantes" label="Brigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q383325" start="42243" end="42251" title="Roxolani" label="Roxolani"/>
<link wikidata="Q237234" start="42726" end="42733" title="Osroene" label="Osroene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269411" start="42758" end="42772" title="Parthamaspates of Parthia" label="Parthamaspates"/>
<link wikidata="Q178054" start="43006" end="43011" title="Alans" label="Alani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33490" start="43027" end="43037" title="Cappadocia (Roman province)" label="Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655106" start="43065" end="43076" title="Pharasmanes II of Iberia" label="Pharasmanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19083" start="43100" end="43106" title="Kingdom of Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31845" start="43174" end="43180" title="Arrian" label="Arrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="43678" end="43681" title="Grammatical number" label="sl."/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="43910" end="43924" title="fortifications" label="fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321241" start="43933" end="43941" title="outpost (military)" label="outposts"/>
<link wikidata="Q947103" start="43946" end="43957" title="watchtower (fortification)" label="watchtowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="43986" end="43991" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420223" start="44037" end="44042" title="Exhibition drill" label="drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174534" start="44155" end="44177" title="peace through strength" label="peace through strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434231" start="44686" end="44703" title="Legio III Augusta" label="Legio III Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309744" start="44707" end="44716" title="Lambaesis" label="Lambaesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q493289" start="44849" end="44867" title="Numerus (Roman military unit)" label="&amp;quot;numeri&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q204766" start="45116" end="45127" title="cataphracts" label="cataphracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q533755" start="45304" end="45320" title="Salvius Julianus" label="Salvius Julianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407439" start="45374" end="45389" title="Praetor&amp;#x27;s Edict" label="Perpetual Edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="45431" end="45438" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="45637" end="45645" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q396808" start="45758" end="45766" title="princeps" label="princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503456" start="47648" end="47656" title="Law of majestas" label="maiestas"/>
<link wikidata="Q606253" start="47814" end="47853" title="Damnatio ad bestias" label="condemnation to the beasts in the arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194738" start="48021" end="48029" title="decurion (administrative)" label="decurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10554048" start="49086" end="49093" title="lanista" label="lanista"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="49103" end="49111" title="Procuring (prostitution)" label="procurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989526" start="49229" end="49238" title="ergastula" label="ergastula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418386" start="49360" end="49368" title="rescript" label="rescript"/>
<link wikidata="Q10317764" start="49525" end="49562" title="Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis" label="Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183171" start="49833" end="49837" title="toga" label="toga"/>
<link wikidata="Q580995" start="50178" end="50189" title="Apotheosis" label="deification"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="50413" end="50421" title="Nîmes" label="Nemausus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="50445" end="50454" title="Roman Britain" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="50500" end="50508" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q212943" start="50671" end="50687" title="pontifex maximus" label="pontifex maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="51145" end="51150" title="Cádiz" label="Gades"/>
<link wikidata="Q279191" start="51224" end="51234" title="Sagalassos" label="Sagalassos"/>
<link wikidata="Q621805" start="51244" end="51251" title="Pisidia" label="Pisidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q587905" start="51331" end="51343" title="Panhellenion" label="Panhellenion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="52319" end="52329" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q521646" start="52369" end="52391" title="Serapeum of Alexandria" label="Serapeum of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254" start="52447" end="52462" title="Diaspora revolt" label="Diaspora revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q622438" start="52649" end="52661" title="Domus Aurea" label="Golden House"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="52808" end="52814" title="Cult (religious practice)" label="cultus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="52854" end="52859" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q953033" start="52957" end="52961" title="Roma (mythology)" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q171876" start="53113" end="53121" title="Antinous" label="Antinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="53133" end="53139" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q124281" start="53338" end="53350" title="Antinopolis" label="Antinoöpolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="53374" end="53379" title="polis" label="polis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799229" start="53464" end="53472" title="alimenta" label="alimenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250992" start="53817" end="53829" title="Harmodius and Aristogeiton (sculpture)" label="Tyrannicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602023" start="53940" end="53950" title="Greek love" label="Greek love"/>
<link wikidata="Q463956" start="54013" end="54020" title="Belenos" label="Belenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087777" start="54172" end="54179" title="Paulina (sister of Hadrian)" label="Paulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="54941" end="54957" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="55024" end="55034" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418386" start="55228" end="55236" title="rescript" label="rescript"/>
<link wikidata="Q783414" start="55273" end="55296" title="Gaius Minicius Fundanus" label="Gaius Minicius Fundanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="55315" end="55328" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="55473" end="55483" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="55836" end="55842" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205170" start="55882" end="55889" title="Stadium of Philippopolis" label="Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q26046109" start="55894" end="55899" title="Odeon of Philippopolis" label="Odeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27047924" start="55903" end="55916" title="Philippopolis (Thrace)" label="Philippopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q459" start="55930" end="55937" title="Plovdiv" label="Plovdiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="56063" end="56069" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23670612" start="56115" end="56129" title="Roman Carthage" label="Roman Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="56193" end="56201" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="56260" end="56267" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q272777" start="56386" end="56406" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159605" start="56417" end="56423" title="Tivoli, Italy" label="Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="56470" end="56480" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q281132" start="56510" end="56518" title="Serapeum" label="Serapeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="56569" end="56580" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q189375" start="56823" end="56846" title="Apollodorus of Damascus" label="Apollodorus of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q211295" start="56875" end="56894" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="56896" end="56940" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s column" label="the Column commemorating his Dacian conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q849786" start="56946" end="56974" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="his bridge across the Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q430792" start="57323" end="57347" title="Temple of Venus and Roma" label="Temple of Venus and Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q171876" start="57760" end="57768" title="Antinous" label="Antinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q695274" start="57937" end="57950" title="philhellenism" label="philhellenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="57999" end="58003" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58023" end="58028" title="beard#Rome" label="beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q334457" start="58066" end="58078" title="Dio of Prusa" label="Dio of Prusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="58377" end="58393" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio Africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="58442" end="58463" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q31556" start="58586" end="58592" title="Phocas" label="Phocas"/>
<link wikidata="Q183144" start="58755" end="58764" title="Epictetus" label="Epictetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q554387" start="58769" end="58778" title="Favorinus" label="Favorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745515" start="58826" end="58842" title="Roman philosophy" label="Roman philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q943637" start="58940" end="58949" title="Nicopolis" label="Nicopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="59044" end="59053" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicurean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="59306" end="59315" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="59320" end="59330" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59582" end="59587" title="#Poem by Hadrian" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247890" start="59651" end="59669" title="Palatine Anthology" label="Palatine Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q138531" start="59805" end="59823" title="Phlegon of Tralles" label="Phlegon of Tralles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="60049" end="60063" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="60111" end="60127" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="60745" end="60756" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="61215" end="61230" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152283" start="61245" end="61256" title="Meditations" label="Meditations"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="61840" end="61853" title="Mars Gradivus" label="Mars Gradivus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228338" start="61857" end="61866" title="Dis Pater" label="Dis Pater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695759" start="62268" end="62284" title="Constitution (Roman law)" label="imperial decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="62721" end="62740" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="62759" end="62769" title="republicanism" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="62841" end="62859" title="Five Good Emperors" label="Five Good Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="62861" end="62879" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="62940" end="62953" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q707856" start="63139" end="63157" title="Ronald Syme" label="Ronald Syme&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q484079" start="63184" end="63190" title="Führer" label="Führer"/>
<link wikidata="Q714189" start="63194" end="63198" title="Duce" label="Duce"/>
<link wikidata="Q973658" start="63202" end="63210" title="Caudillo" label="Caudillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="63237" end="63244" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="63292" end="63300" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q564358" start="63409" end="63415" title="Tacitus Annals" label="Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q838988" start="63821" end="63831" title="Ecumene" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="63985" end="63994" title="autocracy" label="autocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="64113" end="64130" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225832" start="64170" end="64184" title="Robin Lane Fox" label="Robin Lane Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="65125" end="65147" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Josef of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q317055" start="65403" end="65409" title="Marcus Cornelius Fronto" label="Fronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274948" start="65538" end="65550" title="Philostratus" label="Philostratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="65555" end="65564" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="66088" end="66099" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551978" start="66566" end="66574" title="encomium" label="encomium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11906926" start="66578" end="66596" title="Aspasius of Byblos" label="Aspasius of Byblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="66794" end="66810" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134752" start="66914" end="66930" title="cloak and dagger" label="cloak and dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="66932" end="66948" title="sword and sandal" label="sword and sandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215852" start="66977" end="66984" title="Ubu Roi" label="Ubu Roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q535137" start="67244" end="67258" title="Marius Maximus" label="Marius Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424" start="67286" end="67291" title="Nerva" label="Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="67303" end="67313" title="Elagabalus" label="Elagabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q61425" start="67542" end="67563" title="Ferdinand Gregorovius" label="Ferdinand Gregorovius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="67623" end="67633" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="67744" end="67758" title="Bar Kokhba revolt" label="Bar Kokhba war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201472" start="67837" end="67845" title="post-war" label="post-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q573849" start="67894" end="67908" title="Anthony Birley" label="Anthony Birley"/>
<link wikidata="Q163118" start="68029" end="68049" title="Marguerite Yourcenar" label="Marguerite Yourcenar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233795" start="68090" end="68108" title="Memoirs of Hadrian" label="Memoirs of Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233795" start="68172" end="68190" title="Memoirs of Hadrian" label="Memoirs of Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q163118" start="68257" end="68277" title="Marguerite Yourcenar" label="Marguerite Yourcenar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180327" start="68281" end="68288" title="Phallos (novella)" label="Phallos"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="68485" end="68501" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156624" start="68505" end="68524" title="Hadrian (opera)" label="&amp;quot;Hadrian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192402" start="68626" end="68642" title="Rufus Wainwright" label="Rufus Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="68699" end="68710" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="68855" end="68871" title="Augustan History" label="Augustan History"/>
<link wikidata="Q275606" start="68918" end="68933" title="Aurelius Victor" label="Aurelius Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q275606" start="69001" end="69016" title="Aurelius Victor" label="Aurelius Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q426008" start="69024" end="69045" title="Epitome de Caesaribus" label="Epitome de Caesaribus"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="69082" end="69102" title="Eusebius of Caesarea" label="Eusebius of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="69297" end="69311" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Gibbon, Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q313030" start="69319" end="69359" title="The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" label="The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13623" wikidata="Q4985" url="?curid=13623" title="Herman Melville">
<text>Herman Melville (born Melvill; August 1, 1819 – September 28, 1891) was an American novelist, short story writer, and poet of the American Renaissance period. Among his best-known works are &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; (1851); &quot;Typee&quot; (1846), a romanticized account of his experiences in Polynesia; and &quot;Billy Budd, Sailor&quot;, a posthumously published novella. At the time of his death Melville was not well known to the public, but 1919, the centennial of his birth, was the starting point of a Melville revival. &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; eventually would be considered one of the great American novels.

Melville was born in New York City, the third child of a prosperous merchant whose death in 1832 left the family in dire financial straits. He took to sea in 1839 as a common sailor on the merchant ship &quot;St. Lawrence&quot; and then, in 1841, on the whaler &quot;Acushnet&quot;, but he jumped ship in the Marquesas Islands. &quot;Typee&quot;, his first book, and its sequel, &quot;Omoo&quot; (1847), were travel-adventures based on his encounters with the peoples of the islands. Their success gave him the financial security to marry Elizabeth Shaw, the daughter of the Boston jurist Lemuel Shaw. &quot;Mardi&quot; (1849), a romance-adventure and his first book not based on his own experience, was not well received. &quot;Redburn&quot; (1849) and &quot;White-Jacket&quot; (1850), both tales based on his experience as a well-born young man at sea, were given respectable reviews, but did not sell well enough to support his expanding family.

Melville&#x27;s growing literary ambition showed in &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; (1851), which took nearly a year and a half to write, but it did not find an audience, and critics scorned his psychological novel &quot;&quot; (1852). From 1853 to 1856, Melville published short fiction in magazines, including &quot;Benito Cereno&quot; and &quot;Bartleby, the Scrivener&quot;. In 1857, he traveled to England, toured the Near East, and published his last work of prose, &quot;The Confidence-Man&quot; (1857). He moved to New York in 1863, eventually taking a position as a United States customs inspector.

From that point, Melville focused his creative powers on poetry. &quot;Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War&quot; (1866) was his poetic reflection on the moral questions of the American Civil War. In 1867, his eldest child Malcolm died at home from a self-inflicted gunshot. Melville&#x27;s metaphysical epic &quot;Clarel: A Poem and Pilgrimage in the Holy Land&quot; was published in 1876. In 1886, his other son Stanwix died of apparent tuberculosis, and Melville retired. During his last years, he privately published two volumes of poetry, and left one volume unpublished. The novella &quot;Billy Budd&quot; was left unfinished at the time of his death, but was published posthumously in 1924. Melville died from cardiovascular disease in 1891.

== Early life and education ==
Melville was born in New York City, on August 1, 1819, the third of eight children to Allan Melvill and Maria (Gansevoort) Melvill. His seven siblings, who played important roles in his career and emotional life, were Gansevoort, Helen Maria, Augusta, Allan, Catherine, Frances Priscilla, and Thomas, who eventually became a governor of Sailors&#x27; Snug Harbor. Part of a well-established and colorful Boston family, Allan Melvill spent considerable time away from New York City, travelling regularly to Europe as a commission merchant and an importer of French dry goods.

Both of Melville&#x27;s grandfathers played significant roles in the American Revolutionary War, and Melville later expressed satisfaction in his &quot;double revolutionary descent&quot;. Major Thomas Melvill participated in the Boston Tea Party, and Melville&#x27;s maternal grandfather, General Peter Gansevoort, commanded the defense of Fort Stanwix in New York in 1777.

At the turn of the 19th century, Major Melvill did not send his son Allan (Herman&#x27;s father) to college, but instead sent him to France, where he spent two years in Paris and learned to speak French fluently. In 1814, Allan, who subscribed to his father&#x27;s Unitarianism, married Maria Gansevoort, who was committed to her family&#x27;s more strict and biblically oriented Dutch Reformed version of the Calvinist creed. The Gansevoorts&#x27; severe Protestantism ensured that Maria was well versed in the Bible, in English as well as in Dutch, the language that the Gansevoorts spoke at home.

On August 19, almost three weeks after his birth, Melville was baptized at home by a minister of the South Reformed Dutch Church. During the 1820s, Melville lived a privileged and opulent life in a household supported by three or more servants at a time. Every four years, the family moved to more spacious and elegant quarters, finally settling on Broadway in 1828. Allan Melvill lived beyond his means, on large sums that he borrowed from his father and from his wife&#x27;s widowed mother. Although his wife&#x27;s opinion of his financial conduct is unknown, biographer Hershel Parker says that Maria &quot;thought her mother&#x27;s money was infinite and that she was entitled to much of her portion&quot; while her children were young. How well the parents managed to hide the truth from their children is &quot;impossible to know&quot;, according to biographer Andrew Delbanco.

In 1830, the Gansevoorts ended their financial support of the Melvilles, at which point Allan&#x27;s lack of financial responsibility had left him in debt to both the Melvill and Gansevoort families for a sum exceeding $20,000 (). But Melville biographer Newton Arvin writes that the relative happiness and comfort of Melville&#x27;s early childhood depended less on Allan&#x27;s wealth and profligate spending than on the &quot;exceptionally tender and affectionate spirit in all the family relationships, especially in the immediate circle&quot;. Arvin describes Allan as &quot;a man of real sensibility and a particularly warm and loving father,&quot; while Maria was &quot;warmly maternal, simple, robust, and affectionately devoted to her husband and her brood&quot;.

Melville&#x27;s education began when he was six. In 1824, the Melvills moved to a newly built house at 33 Bleecker Street in Manhattan. In 1825, Herman and his brother Gansevoort enrolled in New York Male High School. In 1826, the year that Herman contracted scarlet fever, Allan Melvill described him as &quot;very backwards in speech &amp; somewhat slow in comprehension&quot; at first, but his development increased its pace and Allan was surprised &quot;that Herman proved the best Speaker in the introductory Department&quot;. In 1829, both Gansevoort and Herman transferred to Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School, and Herman enrolled in the English Department on September 28. &quot;Herman I think is making more progress than formerly,&quot; Allan wrote in May 1830 to Major Melvill, &quot;and without being a bright Scholar, he maintains a respectable standing, and would proceed further, if he could only be induced to study more—being a most amiable and innocent child, I cannot find it in my heart to coerce him&quot;.

Emotionally unstable and behind on paying the rent for the house on Broadway, Herman&#x27;s father tried to recover by moving his family to Albany, New York, in 1830 and going into the fur business. Herman attended The Albany Academy from October 1830 to October 1831, where he took the standard preparatory course, including reading and spelling, penmanship, arithmetic, English grammar, geography, natural history, universal, Greek, Roman, and English history, classical biography, and Jewish antiquities. In early August 1831, Herman marched in the Albany city government procession of the year&#x27;s &quot;finest scholars&quot; and was presented with a copy of &quot;The London Carcanet&quot;, a collection of poems and prose, inscribed to him as &quot;first best in ciphering books&quot;. As Melville scholar Merton Sealts observed,

In October 1831, Melville left the Academy. While the precise reason is not known definitively, Parker speculates it was for financial reasons, since &quot;even the tiny tuition fee seemed too much to pay&quot;.

In December 1831, Allan Melvill returned from New York City by steamboat, but he had to travel the last 70 miles in an open carriage for two days and two nights in subfreezing temperatures. In early January, he began to show &quot;signs of delirium&quot;, and he grew worse until his wife felt that his suffering deprived him of his intellect. On January 28, 1832, he died, two months prior to reaching his 50th birthday. Since Herman was no longer attending school, he likely witnessed his father&#x27;s medical and mental deterioration. Twenty years later, Melville described a similar death in &quot;Pierre&quot;.

== Work as a clerk ==
The death of Allan caused many major shifts in the family&#x27;s material and spiritual circumstances. One result was the greater influence of his mother&#x27;s religious beliefs. Maria sought consolation in her faith and in April was admitted as a member of the First Reformed Dutch Church. Herman&#x27;s saturation in orthodox Calvinism was surely the most decisive intellectual and spiritual influence of his early life. 
Two months after his father&#x27;s death, Gansevoort entered the cap and fur business. Uncle Peter Gansevoort, a director of the New York State Bank, got Herman a job as clerk for $150 a year (). Biographers cite a passage from &quot;Redburn&quot; when trying to answer what Herman must have felt then: &quot;I had learned to think much and bitterly before my time,&quot; the narrator remarks, adding, &quot;I must not think of those delightful days, before my father became a bankrupt ... and we removed from the city; for when I think of those days, something rises up in my throat and almost strangles me&quot;. With Melville, Arvin argues, one has to reckon with &quot;psychology, the tormented psychology, of the decayed patrician&quot;.

When Melville&#x27;s paternal grandfather died on September 16, 1832, Maria and her children discovered Allan, somewhat unscrupulously, had borrowed more than his share of his inheritance, meaning Maria received only $20 (). His paternal grandmother died almost exactly seven months later. Melville did his job well at the bank; although he was only 14 in 1834, the bank considered him competent enough to be sent to Schenectady, New York, on an errand. Not much else is known from this period except that he was very fond of drawing. The visual arts became a lifelong interest. Around May 1834, the Melvilles moved to another house in Albany, a three-story brick house. That same month a fire destroyed Gansevoort&#x27;s skin-preparing factory, which left him with personnel he could neither employ nor afford. Instead he pulled Melville out of the bank to man the cap and fur store.

== Intermittent work and studies ==
In 1835, while still working in the store, Melville enrolled in Albany Classical School, perhaps using Maria&#x27;s part of the proceeds from the sale of the estate of his maternal grandmother in March 1835. In September of the following year, Herman was back at The Albany Academy, participating in the school&#x27;s Latin course. He also participated in debating societies, in an apparent effort to make up as much as he could for his missed years of schooling. During this time, he read Shakespeare, including &quot;Macbeth&quot;, whose witch scenes gave him the chance to teasingly scare his sisters. By March 1837, however, he again withdrew from The Albany Academy.

Gansevoort served as a role model and support for Melville throughout his life, particularly during this time trying to cobble together an education. In early 1834, Gansevoort became a member of Albany&#x27;s Young Men&#x27;s Association for Mutual Improvement, and in January 1835 Melville joined him there. Gansevoort also had copies of John Todd&#x27;s &quot;Index Rerum&quot;, a blank register for indexing remarkable passages from books one had read for easy retrieval. Among the sample entries that Gansevoort made showing his academic scrupulousness was &quot;Pequot, beautiful description of the war with,&quot; with a short title reference to the place in Benjamin Trumbull&#x27;s &quot;A Complete History of Connecticut&quot; (Volume I in 1797, and Volume II in 1818) in which the description could be found. The two surviving volumes of Gansevoort&#x27;s are the best evidence for Melville&#x27;s reading in this period. Gansevoort&#x27;s entries include books Melville used for &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; and &quot;Clarel&quot;, including &quot;Parsees—of India—an excellent description of their character, and religion and an account of their descent—East India Sketch Book p. 21&quot;. Other entries are on Panther, the pirate&#x27;s cabin, and storm at sea from James Fenimore Cooper&#x27;s &quot;The Red Rover&quot;.

== Work as a school teacher ==
The Panic of 1837 forced Gansevoort to file for bankruptcy in April. In June, Maria told the younger children they needed to leave Albany for somewhere cheaper. Gansevoort began studying law in New York City while Herman managed the farm before getting a teaching position at Sikes District School near Lenox, Massachusetts. He taught about 30 students of various ages, including some his own age.

The semester over, he returned to his mother in 1838. In February he was elected president of the Philo Logos Society, which Peter Gansevoort invited to move into Stanwix Hall for no rent. In the &quot;Albany Microscope&quot; in March, Melville published two polemical letters about issues in vogue in the debating societies. Historians Leon Howard and Hershel Parker suggest the motive behind the letters was a youthful desire to have his rhetorical skills publicly recognized. In May, the Melvilles moved to a rented house in Lansingburgh, almost 12 miles north of Albany. Nothing is known about what Melville did or where he went for several months after he finished teaching at Sikes. On November 12, five days after arriving in Lansingburgh, Melville paid for a term at Lansingburgh Academy to study surveying and engineering. In an April 1839 letter recommending Herman for a job in the Engineer Department of the Erie Canal, Peter Gansevoort says his nephew &quot;possesses the ambition to make himself useful in a business which he desires to make his profession,&quot; but no job resulted.

Just weeks after this failure, Melville&#x27;s first known published essay appeared. Using the initials &quot;L.A.V.&quot;, Herman contributed &quot;Fragments from a Writing Desk&quot; to the weekly newspaper &quot;Democratic Press and Lansingburgh Advertiser&quot;, which printed it in two installments, the first on May 4. According to Merton Sealts, his use of heavy-handed allusions reveals familiarity with the work of William Shakespeare, John Milton, Walter Scott, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Edmund Burke, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lord Byron, and Thomas Moore. Parker calls the piece &quot;characteristic Melvillean mood-stuff&quot; and considers its style &quot;excessive enough [...] to indulge his extravagances and just enough overdone to allow him to deny that he was taking his style seriously&quot;. For Delbanco, the style is &quot;overheated in the manner of Poe, with sexually charged echoes of Byron and &quot;The Arabian Nights&quot;&quot;.

== 1839–1844: Years at sea ==
On May 31, 1839, Gansevoort, then living in New York City, wrote that he was sure Herman could get a job on a whaler or merchant vessel. The next day, he signed aboard the merchant ship &quot;St. Lawrence&quot; as a &quot;boy&quot; (a green hand), which cruised from New York to Liverpool. &quot;Redburn: His First Voyage&quot; (1849) draws on his experiences in this journey; at least two of the nine guide-books listed in chapter 30 of the book had been part of Allan Melvill&#x27;s library. He arrived back in New York October 1, 1839 and resumed teaching, now at Greenbush, New York, but left after one term because he had not been paid. In the summer of 1840 he and his friend James Murdock Fly went to Galena, Illinois, to see if his Uncle Thomas could help them find work. Unsuccessful, he and his friend returned home in autumn, likely by way of St. Louis and up the Ohio River.

Inspired by contemporaneous popular cultural reading, including Richard Henry Dana Jr.&#x27;s new book &quot;Two Years Before the Mast&quot; and Jeremiah N. Reynolds&#x27;s account in the May 1839 issue of &quot;The Knickerbocker&quot; magazine of the hunt for a great white sperm whale named Mocha Dick, Herman and Gansevoort traveled to New Bedford, where Herman signed up for a whaling voyage aboard a new ship, the &quot;Acushnet&quot;. Built in 1840, the ship measured some 104 feet in length, almost in breadth, and almost 14 feet in depth. She measured slightly less than 360 tons and had two decks and three masts, but no quarter galleries. The &quot;Acushnet&quot; was owned by Melvin O. Bradford and Philemon Fuller of Fairhaven, Massachusetts, and was berthed near their office at the foot of Center Street in that town. Herman signed a contract on Christmas Day with the ship&#x27;s agent as a &quot;green hand&quot; for 1/175th of whatever profits the voyage would yield. On Sunday the 27th, the brothers heard Reverend Enoch Mudge preach at the Seamen&#x27;s Bethel on Johnnycake Hill, where white marble cenotaphs on the walls memorialized local sailors who had died at sea, often in battle with whales. When he signed the crew list the next day, Herman was advanced $84.

On January 3, 1841, the &quot;Acushnet&quot; set sail. Melville slept with some twenty others in the forecastle; Captain Valentine Pease, the mates, and the skilled men slept aft. Whales were found near The Bahamas, and in March 150 barrels of oil were sent home from Rio de Janeiro. Cutting in and trying-out (boiling) a single whale took about three days, and a whale yielded approximately one barrel of oil per foot of length and per ton of weight (the average whale weighed 40 to 60 tons). The oil was kept on deck for a day to cool off, and was then stowed down; scrubbing the deck completed the labor. An average voyage meant that some forty whales were killed to yield some 1600 barrels of oil.

On April 15, the &quot;Acushnet&quot; sailed around Cape Horn and traveled to the South Pacific, where the crew sighted whales without catching any. She then went up the coast of Chile to the region of Selkirk Island, and on May 7, near Juan Fernández Islands, she had 160 barrels. On June 23, the ship anchored for the first time since Rio, in Santa Harbor. The cruising grounds the &quot;Acushnet&quot; was sailing attracted much traffic, and Captain Pease not only paused to visit other whalers, but at times hunted in company with them. From July 23 into August, the &quot;Acushnet&quot; regularly gammed with the &quot;Lima&quot; from Nantucket, and Melville met William Henry Chase, the son of Owen Chase, who gave him a copy of his father&#x27;s account of his adventures aboard the &quot;Essex&quot;. Ten years later, Melville wrote in his other copy of the book: &quot;The reading of this wondrous story upon the landless sea, &amp; close to the very latitude of the shipwreck had a surprising effect upon me&quot;.

On September 25, the ship reported having 600 barrels of oil to another whaler, and in October 700 barrels. On October 24, the &quot;Acushnet&quot; crossed the equator to the north, and six or seven days later arrived at the Galápagos Islands. This short visit would be the basis for &quot;The Encantadas&quot;. On November 2, the &quot;Acushnet&quot; and three other American whalers were hunting together near the Galápagos Islands; Melville later exaggerated that number in Sketch Fourth of &quot;The Encantadas&quot;. From November 19 to 25, the ship anchored at Chatham&#x27;s Isle, and on December 2 reached the coast of Peru and anchored at Tombez near Paita, with 570 barrels of oil on board. On December 27, the &quot;Acushnet&quot; sighted Cape Blanco, off Ecuador. Point St. Elena was sighted the next day, and on January 6, 1842, the ship approached the Galápagos Islands from the southeast. From February 13 to May 7, seven sightings of sperm whales were recorded, but none were killed. From early May to early June, the &quot;Acushnet&quot; cooperatively set about its whaling endeavors several times with the &quot;Columbus&quot; of New Bedford, which also took letters from Melville&#x27;s ship; the two ships were in the same area just south of the Equator. On June 16, the &quot;Acushnet&quot; carried 750 barrels of oil and sent home 200 on the &quot;Herald the Second&quot;, and, on June 23, she reached the Marquesas Islands and anchored at Nuku Hiva.

In the summer of 1842, Melville and his shipmate Richard Tobias Greene (&quot;Toby&quot;) jumped ship at Nuku Hiva Bay. Melville&#x27;s first book, &quot;Typee&quot; (1846), is based on his stay in or near the Taipi Valley. By around mid-August, Melville had left the island aboard the Australian whaler &quot;Lucy Ann&quot;, bound for Tahiti, where he took part in a mutiny and was briefly jailed in the native &quot;Calabooza Beretanee&quot;. In October, he and crew mate John B. Troy escaped Tahiti for Eimeo. He then spent a month as beachcomber and island rover (&quot;omoo&quot; in Tahitian), eventually crossing over to Moorea. He drew on these experiences for &quot;Omoo&quot;, the sequel to &quot;Typee&quot;. In November, he contracted to be a seaman on the Nantucket whaler &quot;Charles &amp; Henry&quot; for a six-month cruise (November 1842 – April 1843), and was discharged at Lahaina, Maui, in the Hawaiian Islands, in May 1843.

After four months of working several jobs in Hawaii, including as a clerk, Melville joined the U.S. Navy on August 20, as an ordinary seaman on the frigate . During the next year, the homeward bound ship visited the Marquesas Islands, Tahiti, and Valparaiso, and then, from summer to fall 1844, Mazatlan, Lima, and Rio de Janeiro, before reaching Boston on October 3. Melville was discharged on October 14. This Navy experience is used in &quot;White-Jacket&quot; (1850), Melville&#x27;s fifth book.

Melville&#x27;s wander-years created what biographer Arvin calls &quot;a settled hatred of external authority, a lust for personal freedom&quot;, and a &quot;growing and intensifying sense of his own exceptionalism as a person&quot;, along with &quot;the resentful sense that circumstance and mankind together had already imposed their will upon him in a series of injurious ways&quot;. Scholar Robert Milder believes the encounter with the wide ocean, where he was seemingly abandoned by God, led Melville to experience a &quot;metaphysical estrangement&quot; and influenced his social views in two ways: first, that he belonged to the genteel classes, but sympathized with the &quot;disinherited commons&quot; he had been placed among and, second, that experiencing the cultures of Polynesia let him view the West from an outsider&#x27;s perspective.

== 1845–1850: Successful writer ==
Upon his return, Melville regaled his family and friends with his adventurous tales and romantic experiences, and they urged him to put them into writing. Melville completed &quot;Typee&quot;, his first book, in the summer of 1845 while living in Troy, New York. His brother Gansevoort found a publisher for it in London, where it was published in February 1846 by John Murray in his travel adventure series. It became an overnight bestseller in England, then in New York, when it was published on March 17 by Wiley &amp; Putnam.

In the narrative, Melville likely extended the period of time he had spent on the island and also incorporated material from source books he had assembled. Milder calls &quot;Typee&quot; &quot;an appealing mixture of adventure, anecdote, ethnography, and social criticism presented with a genial latitudinarianism that gave novelty to a South Sea idyll at once erotically suggestive and romantically chaste&quot;.

An unsigned review in the &quot;Salem Advertiser&quot; written by Nathaniel Hawthorne called the book a &quot;skilfully managed&quot; narrative by an author with &quot;that freedom of view ... which renders him tolerant of codes of morals that may be little in accordance with our own&quot;. Hawthorne continued: This book is lightly but vigorously written; and we are acquainted with no work that gives a freer and more effective picture of barbarian life, in that unadulterated state of which there are now so few specimens remaining. The gentleness of disposition that seems akin to the delicious climate, is shown in contrast with the traits of savage fierceness...He has that freedom of view—it would be too harsh to call it laxity of principle—which renders him tolerant of codes of morals that may be little in accordance with our own, a spirit proper enough to a young and adventurous sailor, and which makes his book the more wholesome to our staid landsmen.

Pleased but not overwhelmed by the adulation of his new public, Melville later expressed concern that he would &quot;go down to posterity ... as a &#x27;man who lived among the cannibals&#x27;!&quot; The writing of &quot;Typee&quot; brought Melville back into contact with his friend Greene—Toby in the book—who wrote confirming Melville&#x27;s account in newspapers. The two corresponded until 1863, and in his final years Melville &quot;traced and successfully located his old friend&quot; for a further meeting of the two. In March 1847, &quot;Omoo&quot;, a sequel to &quot;Typee&quot;, was published by Murray in London, and in May by Harper in New York. &quot;Omoo&quot; is &quot;a slighter but more professional book,&quot; according to Milder. &quot;Typee&quot; and &quot;Omoo&quot; gave Melville overnight renown as a writer and adventurer, and he often entertained by telling stories to his admirers. As the writer and editor Nathaniel Parker Willis wrote, &quot;With his cigar and his Spanish eyes, he &quot;talks&quot; Typee and Omoo, just as you find the flow of his delightful mind on paper&quot;.

In 1847, Melville tried unsuccessfully to find a &quot;government job&quot; in Washington.

In June 1847, Melville and Elizabeth &quot;Lizzie&quot; Knapp Shaw were engaged, after knowing each other for approximately three months. Melville had first asked her father, Lemuel Shaw, for her hand in March, but was at first turned down at the time. Shaw, Chief Justice of Massachusetts, had been a close friend of Melville&#x27;s father, and Shaw&#x27;s marriage with Melville&#x27;s aunt Nancy was prevented only by her death. His warmth and financial support for the family continued after Allan&#x27;s death. Melville dedicated his first book, &quot;Typee&quot;, to him. Lizzie was raised by her grandmother and an Irish nurse. Arvin suggests that Melville&#x27;s interest in Lizzie may have been stimulated by &quot;his need of Judge Shaw&#x27;s paternal presence&quot;. They were married on August 4, 1847. Lizzie described their marriage as &quot;very unexpected, and scarcely thought of until about two months before it actually took place&quot;. She wanted to be married in church, but they had a private wedding ceremony at home to avoid possible crowds hoping to see the celebrity. The couple honeymooned in the then-British Province of Canada, and traveled to Montreal. They settled in a house on Fourth Avenue in New York City (now called Park Avenue).

According to scholars Joyce Deveau Kennedy and Frederick James Kennedy, Lizzie brought to their marriage a sense of religious obligation, an intent to make a home with Melville regardless of place, a willingness to please her husband by performing such &quot;tasks of drudgery&quot; as mending stockings, an ability to hide her agitation, and a desire &quot;to shield Melville from unpleasantness&quot;. The Kennedys conclude that &quot;If the ensuing years did bring regrets to Melville&#x27;s life, it is impossible to believe he would have regretted marrying Elizabeth. In fact, he must have realized that he could not have borne the weight of those years unaided—that without her loyalty, intelligence, and affection, his own wild imagination would have had no &quot;port or haven&quot;.

Biographer Robertson-Lorant cites &quot;Lizzie&#x27;s adventurous spirit and abundant energy,&quot; and she suggests that &quot;her pluck and good humor might have been what attracted Melville to her, and vice versa&quot;. An example of such good humor appears in a letter about her not yet used to being married: &quot;It seems sometimes exactly as if I were here for a &quot;visit&quot;. The illusion is quite dispelled however when Herman stalks into my room without even the ceremony of knocking, bringing me perhaps a button to sew on, or some equally romantic occupation&quot;. On February 16, 1849, the Melvilles&#x27; first child, Malcolm, was born.

In March 1848, &quot;Mardi&quot; was published by Richard Bentley in London, and in April by Harper in New York. Nathaniel Hawthorne thought it a rich book &quot;with depths here and there that compel a man to swim for his life&quot;. According to Milder, the book began as another South Sea story but, as he wrote, Melville left that genre behind, first in favor of &quot;a romance of the narrator Taji and the lost maiden Yillah,&quot; and then &quot;to an allegorical voyage of the philosopher Babbalanja and his companions through the imaginary archipelago of Mardi&quot;.

In October 1849, &quot;Redburn&quot; was published by Bentley in London, and in November by Harper in New York. The bankruptcy and death of Allan Melvill, and Melville&#x27;s own youthful humiliations surface in this &quot;story of outward adaptation and inner impairment&quot;. Biographer Robertson-Lorant regards the work as a deliberate attempt for popular appeal: &quot;Melville modeled each episode almost systematically on every genre that was popular with some group of antebellum readers,&quot; combining elements of &quot;the picaresque novel, the travelogue, the nautical adventure, the sentimental novel, the sensational French romance, the gothic thriller, temperance tracts, urban reform literature, and the English pastoral&quot;. His next novel, &quot;White-Jacket&quot;, was published by Bentley in London in January 1850, and in March by Harper in New York.

== 1850–1851: Hawthorne and &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; ==
The earliest surviving mention of &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; is from a May 1, 1850, letter in which Melville told fellow sea author Richard Henry Dana Jr. &quot;I am half way in the work.&quot; In June, he described the book to his English publisher as &quot;a romance of adventure, founded upon certain wild legends in the Southern Sperm Whale Fisheries,&quot; and promised it would be done by the fall. The original manuscript has not survived. That summer, Melville read Thomas Carlyle, borrowing copies of &quot;Sartor Resartus&quot; (1833–34) and &quot;On Heroes, Hero-Worship, &amp; the Heroic in History&quot; (1841) from the library of his friend Evert Duyckinck. These readings proved significant, occurring as Melville radically transformed his initial plan for the novel over the next several months, conceiving what Delbanco described in 2005 as &quot;the most ambitious book ever conceived by an American writer&quot;.

From August 4 to 12, 1850, the Melvilles, Sarah Morewood, Duyckinck, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and other literary figures from New York City and Boston came to Pittsfield, Massachusetts, to enjoy a period of parties, picnics, and dinners. Nathaniel Hawthorne and his publisher James T. Fields joined the group while Hawthorne&#x27;s wife stayed at home to look after the children. On one picnic outing organized by Duyckinck, Hawthorne and Melville sought shelter from the rain together and had a deep, private conversation. Melville had been given a copy of Hawthorne&#x27;s short story collection &quot;Mosses from an Old Manse&quot;, though he had not yet read it. Melville then avidly read it and wrote a review, &quot;Hawthorne and His Mosses&quot;, which appeared in two installments, on August 17 and 24, in &quot;The Literary World&quot;. Melville wrote that these stories revealed a dark side to Hawthorne, &quot;shrouded in blackness, ten times black&quot;. He repeatedly compared Hawthorne to Shakespeare, and urged that &quot;men not very much inferior to Shakespeare are this day being born on the banks of the Ohio.&quot; The critic Walter Bezanson finds the essay &quot;so deeply related to Melville&#x27;s imaginative and intellectual world while writing &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;&quot; that it could be regarded as a virtual preface and should be &quot;everybody&#x27;s prime piece of contextual reading&quot;. Later that summer, Duyckinck sent Hawthorne copies of Melville&#x27;s three most recent books. Hawthorne read them, as he wrote to Duyckinck on August 29 that Melville in &quot;Redburn&quot; and &quot;White-Jacket&quot; put the reality &quot;more unflinchingly&quot; before his reader than any writer, and he thought &quot;Mardi&quot; was &quot;a rich book, with depths here and there that compel a man to swim for his life&quot;. But he cautioned, &quot;It is so good that one scarcely pardons the writer for not having brooded long over it, so as to make it a great deal better&quot;.

In September 1850, Melville borrowed three thousand dollars from his father-in-law Lemuel Shaw to buy a 160-acre farm in Pittsfield. Melville called his new home Arrowhead because of the arrowheads that were dug up around the property during planting season. That winter, Melville paid Hawthorne an unexpected visit, only to discover he was working and &quot;not in the mood for company&quot;. Hawthorne&#x27;s wife Sophia gave him copies of &quot;Twice-Told Tales&quot; and, for Malcolm, &quot;The Grandfather&#x27;s Chair&quot;. Melville invited them to visit Arrowhead soon, hoping to &quot;[discuss] the Universe with a bottle of brandy &amp; cigars&quot; with Hawthorne, but Hawthorne would not stop working on his new book for more than one day and they did not come. After a second visit from Melville, Hawthorne surprised him by arriving at Arrowhead with his daughter Una. According to Robertson-Lorant, &quot;The handsome Hawthorne made quite an impression on the Melville women, especially Augusta, who was a great fan of his books&quot;. They spent the day mostly &quot;smoking and talking metaphysics&quot;.

Robertson-Lorant writes that Melville was &quot;infatuated with Hawthorne&#x27;s intellect, captivated by his artistry, and charmed by his elusive personality,&quot; but &quot;the friendship meant something different to each of them,&quot; with Hawthorne offering Melville &quot;the kind of intellectual stimulation he needed&quot;. They may have been &quot;natural allies and friends,&quot; yet they were also &quot;fifteen years apart in age and temperamentally quite different&quot; and Hawthorne &quot;found Melville&#x27;s manic intensity exhausting at times&quot;. Bezanson identifies &quot;sexual excitement&quot; in all the ten letters Melville wrote to the older man. In the essay on Hawthorne&#x27;s &quot;Mosses&quot;, Melville wrote: &quot;I feel that this Hawthorne has dropped germinous seeds into my soul. He expands and deepens down, the more I contemplate him; and further, and further, shoots his strong New-England roots into the hot soil of my Southern soul.&quot; Melville dedicated his book to Hawthorne: &quot;In token of my admiration for his genius, this book is inscribed to Nathaniel Hawthorne&quot;.

On October 18, 1851, &quot;The Whale&quot; was published in Britain in three volumes, and on November 14 &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; appeared in the United States as a single volume. In between these dates, on October 22, 1851, the Melvilles&#x27; second child, Stanwix, was born. In December, Hawthorne told Duyckinck, &quot;What a book Melville has written! It gives me an idea of much greater power than his preceding ones.&quot; Unlike other contemporaneous reviewers of Melville, Hawthorne had seen the uniqueness of Melville&#x27;s new novel and acknowledged it. In early December 1852, Melville visited the Hawthornes in Concord and discussed the idea of the &quot;Agatha&quot; story he had talked of with Hawthorne. This was the last contact between the two writers before Melville visited Hawthorne in Liverpool four years later when Hawthorne had relocated to England.

== 1852–1857: Unsuccessful writer ==
After having borrowed three thousand dollars from his father-in-law in September 1850 to buy a 160-acre farm in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, Melville had high hopes that his next book would please the public and restore his finances. In April 1851 he told his British publisher, Richard Bentley, that his new book had &quot;unquestionable novelty&quot; and was calculated to have wide appeal with elements of romance and mystery. In fact, &quot;&quot; was heavily psychological, though drawing on the conventions of the romance, and difficult in style. It was not well received. The New York &quot;Day Book&quot; published a venomous attack on September 8, 1852, headlined &quot;HERMAN MELVILLE CRAZY&quot;. The item, offered as a news story, reported, 

On May 22, 1853, Melville&#x27;s third child and first daughter Elizabeth (Bessie) was born, and on or about that day Herman finished work on the Agatha story, &quot;Isle of the Cross&quot;. Melville traveled to New York to discuss a book, presumably &quot;Isle of the Cross&quot;, with his publisher, but later wrote that Harper &amp; Brothers was &quot;prevented&quot; from publishing his manuscript because it was lost.

After the commercial and critical failure of &quot;Pierre&quot;, Melville had difficulty finding a publisher for his follow-up novel &quot;Israel Potter&quot;. Instead, this narrative of a Revolutionary War veteran was serialized in &quot;Putnam&#x27;s Monthly Magazine&quot; in 1853. From November 1853 to 1856, Melville published fourteen tales and sketches in &quot;Putnam&#x27;s&quot; and &quot;Harper&#x27;s&quot; magazines. In December 1855 he proposed to Dix &amp; Edwards, the new owners of &quot;Putnam&#x27;s&quot;, that they publish a selective collection of the short fiction. The collection, titled &quot;The Piazza Tales&quot;, was named after a new introductory story Melville wrote for it, &quot;The Piazza&quot;. It also contained five previously published stories, including &quot;Bartleby, the Scrivener&quot; and &quot;Benito Cereno&quot;. On March 2, 1855, the Melvilles&#x27; fourth child, Frances (Fanny), was born. In this period, his book &quot;Israel Potter&quot; was published.

The writing of &quot;The Confidence-Man&quot; put great strain on Melville, leading Sam Shaw, a nephew of Lizzie, to write to his uncle Lemuel Shaw: &quot;Herman I hope has had no more of those ugly attacks&quot;—a reference to what Robertson-Lorant calls &quot;the bouts of rheumatism and sciatica that plagued Melville&quot;. Melville&#x27;s father-in-law apparently shared his daughter&#x27;s &quot;great anxiety about him&quot; when he wrote a letter to a cousin, in which he described Melville&#x27;s working habits: &quot;When he is deeply engaged in one of his literary works, he confines him[self] to hard study many hours in the day, with little or no exercise, and this specially in winter for a great many days together. He probably thus overworks himself and brings on severe nervous affections&quot;. Shaw advanced Melville $1,500 from Lizzie&#x27;s inheritance to travel four or five months in Europe and the Holy Land.

From October 11, 1856, to May 20, 1857, Melville made a six-month Grand Tour of Europe and the Mediterranean. While in England, in November 1856, he briefly reunited for three days with Hawthorne, who had taken the position of United States Consul at Liverpool, at that time the hub of Britain&#x27;s Atlantic trade. At the nearby coast resort of Southport, amid the sand dunes where they had stopped to smoke cigars, they had a conversation that Hawthorne later described in his journal: Melville, as he always does, began to reason of Providence and futurity, and of everything that lies beyond human ken, and informed me that he &#x27;pretty much made up his mind to be annihilated&#x27; [...] If he were a religious man, he would be one of the most truly religious and reverential; he has a very high and noble nature, and better worth immortality than most of us.

The Mediterranean part of the tour took in the Holy Land, which inspired his epic poem &quot;Clarel.&quot; During the tour he visited Mount Hope, a Christian farm near Jaffa. On April 1, 1857, Melville published his last full-length novel, &quot;The Confidence-Man&quot;. This novel, subtitled &quot;His Masquerade&quot;, has won general acclaim in modern times as a complex and mysterious exploration of issues of fraud and honesty, identity and masquerade. However, when it was published, it received reviews ranging from the bewildered to the denunciatory.

== 1857–1876: Poet ==

To repair his faltering finances, Melville took up public lecturing from late 1857 to 1860. He embarked upon three lecture tours and spoke at lyceums, chiefly on Roman statuary and sightseeing in Rome. Melville&#x27;s lectures, which mocked the pseudo-intellectualism of lyceum culture, were panned by contemporary audiences. On May 30, 1860, Melville boarded the clipper &quot;Meteor&quot; for California, with his brother Thomas at the helm. After a shaky trip around Cape Horn, Melville returned to New York alone via Panama in November. Later that year, he submitted a poetry collection to a publisher but it was not accepted, and is now lost. In 1863, he bought his brother&#x27;s house at 104 East 26th Street in New York City and moved there.

In 1864, Melville visited the Virginia battlefields of the American Civil War. After the war, he published &quot;Battle Pieces and Aspects of the War&quot; (1866), a collection of 72 poems that has been described as &quot;a polyphonic verse journal of the conflict&quot;. The work did not do well commercially—of the print run of 1,260 copies, 300 were sent as review copies, and 551 copies were sold—and reviewers did not realize that Melville had purposely avoided the ostentatious diction and fine writing that were in fashion, choosing to be concise and spare.

In 1866, Melville became a customs inspector for New York City. He held the post for 19 years and had a reputation for honesty in a notoriously corrupt institution. (Unbeknownst to Melville, his position was sometimes protected by future American president Chester A. Arthur, then a customs official who admired Melville&#x27;s writing but never spoke to him.) During these years, Melville suffered from nervous exhaustion, physical pain, and frustration, and would sometimes, in the words of Robertson-Lorant, behave like the &quot;tyrannical captains he had portrayed in his novels&quot;, perhaps even beating his wife Lizzie when he came home after drinking. In 1867 Malcolm, the Melvilles&#x27; older son, died in his bedroom at home at the age of 18 from a self-inflicted gun shot, perhaps intentional, perhaps accidental. In May 1867, Lizzie&#x27;s brother Sam, who shared his family&#x27;s fear for Melville&#x27;s sanity, tried to arrange for her to leave Melville. Lizzie was to visit her family in Boston and assert to a court that her husband was insane. But Lizzie, whether to avoid the social shame divorce carried at the time or because she still loved her husband, refused to go along with the plan.

Though Melville&#x27;s professional writing career had ended, he remained dedicated to his writing. He spent years on what Milder called &quot;his autumnal masterpiece&quot; &quot;Clarel: A Poem and a Pilgrimage&quot; (1876), an 18,000-line epic poem inspired by his 1856 trip to the Holy Land. It is among the longest single poems in American literature. The title character is a young American student of divinity who travels to Jerusalem to renew his faith. One of the central characters, Rolfe, is similar to Melville in his younger days, a seeker and adventurer, while the reclusive Vine is loosely based on Hawthorne, who had died twelve years before. Publication of 350 copies was funded with a bequest from his uncle in 1876, but sales failed miserably and the unsold copies were burned when Melville was unable to buy them at cost. Critic Lewis Mumford found an unread copy in the New York Public Library in 1925 &quot;with its pages uncut&quot;.

== 1877–1891: Final years ==

Melville&#x27;s own income remained limited. But in 1884, Lizzie received a legacy that enabled him to buy a steady stream of books and prints each month. Melville retired on December 31, 1885, after several of his wife&#x27;s relatives further supported the couple with supplementary legacies and inheritances. On February 22, 1886, Stanwix, their younger son, died in San Francisco at age 36, from tuberculosis. In 1889, Melville became a member of the New York Society Library.

Melville had a modest revival of popularity in England when readers rediscovered his novels. He published two collections of poems inspired by his early experiences at sea, with prose head notes. Intended for his relatives and friends, each had a print run of 25 copies. The first, &quot;John Marr and Other Sailors&quot;, was published in 1888, followed by &quot;Timoleon&quot; in 1891.

Melville died on the morning of September 28, 1891. His death certificate shows &quot;cardiac dilation&quot; as the cause. He was interred in the Woodlawn Cemetery in Bronx, New York City.

&quot;The New York Times&quot;″ initial death notice called his masterpiece &quot;Mobie Dick&quot;, the misspelling of which was later erroneously taken to mean that he was unappreciated at his time of death. But there were some appreciations. The &quot;Times&quot;, for instance, published a substantial article of appreciation on October 2. The author said that thinking back to Melville&#x27;s books that were so much read forty years earlier, there is &quot;no difficulty determining why they were then read and talked about,&quot; but the difficulty is &quot;to discover why they are read and talked about no longer.&quot;

Melville left a volume of poetry, &quot;Weeds and Wildings&quot;, and a sketch, &quot;Daniel Orme&quot;, unpublished at the time of his death. His wife also found pages for an unfinished novella, titled &quot;Billy Budd&quot;. Melville had revised and rearranged the manuscript in several stages, leaving the pages in disarray. Lizzie could not decide her husband&#x27;s intentions (or even read his handwriting in some places) and abandoned attempts to edit the manuscript for publication. The pages were stored in a family breadbox until 1919 when Melville&#x27;s granddaughter gave them to Raymond Weaver. Weaver, who initially dismissed the work&#x27;s importance, published a quick transcription in 1924. This version, however, contained many misreadings, some of which affected interpretation. It was an immediate critical success in England, then in the United States. In 1962, the Melville scholars Harrison Hayford and Merton M. Sealts published a critical reading text that was widely accepted. It was adapted as a stage play on Broadway in 1951, then an opera, and in 1961 as a film.

==Writing style==
===General narrative style===
Melville&#x27;s writing style shows both consistencies and enormous changes throughout the years. His development &quot;had been abnormally postponed, and when it came, it came with a rush and a force that had the menace of quick exhaustion in it&quot;. As early as &quot;Fragments from a Writing Desk&quot;, written when Melville was 20, scholar Sealts sees &quot;a number of elements that anticipate Melville&#x27;s later writing, especially his characteristic habit of abundant literary allusion&quot;. &quot;Typee&quot; and &quot;Omoo&quot; were documentary adventures that called for a division of the narrative in short chapters. Such compact organization bears the risk of fragmentation when applied to a lengthy work such as &quot;Mardi&quot;, but with &quot;Redburn&quot; and &quot;White Jacket,&quot; Melville turned the short chapter into a concentrated narrative.

Some chapters of &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; are no more than two pages in standard editions, and an extreme example is Chapter 122, consisting of a single paragraph of 36 words. The skillful handling of chapters in &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; is one of the most fully developed Melvillean signatures, and is a measure of his masterly writing style (something that would lend lasting significance to the opening lines &quot;Call me Ishmael&quot;). Individual chapters have become &quot;a touchstone for appreciation of Melville&#x27;s art and for explanation&quot; of his themes. In contrast, the chapters in &quot;Pierre&quot;, called Books, are divided into short-numbered sections, seemingly an &quot;odd formal compromise&quot; between Melville&#x27;s natural length and his purpose to write a regular romance that called for longer chapters. As satirical elements were introduced, the chapter arrangement restores &quot;some degree of organization and pace from the chaos&quot;. The usual chapter unit then reappears for &quot;Israel Potter&quot;, &quot;The Confidence-Man&quot; and even &quot;Clarel&quot;, but only becomes &quot;a vital part in the whole creative achievement&quot; again in the juxtaposition of accents and of topics in &quot;Billy Budd&quot;.

Newton Arvin points out that only superficially the books after &quot;Mardi&quot; seem as if Melville&#x27;s writing went back to the vein of his first two books. In reality, his movement &quot;was not a retrograde but a spiral one&quot;, and while &quot;Redburn&quot; and &quot;White Jacket&quot; may lack the spontaneous, youthful charm of his first two books, they are &quot;denser in substance, richer in feeling, tauter, more complex, more connotative in texture and imagery&quot;. The rhythm of the prose in &quot;Omoo&quot; &quot;achieves little more than easiness; the language is almost neutral and without idiosyncrasy&quot;, while &quot;Redburn&quot; shows an improved ability in narrative, which fuses imagery and emotion.

Melville&#x27;s early works were &quot;increasingly baroque&quot; in style, and with &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; Melville&#x27;s vocabulary had grown superabundant. Walter Bezanson calls it an &quot;immensely varied style&quot;. According to critic Warner Berthoff, three characteristic uses of language can be recognized. First, the exaggerated repetition of words, as in the series &quot;pitiable&quot;, &quot;pity&quot;, &quot;pitied&quot;, and &quot;piteous&quot;. A second typical device is the use of unusual adjective-noun combinations, as in &quot;concentrating brow&quot; and &quot;immaculate manliness&quot;. A third characteristic is the presence of a participial modifier to emphasize and to reinforce the already established expectations of the reader, as the words &quot;preluding&quot; and &quot;foreshadowing&quot; (&quot;so still and subdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene ...&quot; &quot;In this foreshadowing interval ...&quot;).
After his use of hyphenated compounds in &quot;Pierre&quot;, Melville&#x27;s writing gives Berthoff the impression of becoming less exploratory and less provocative in his choices of words and phrases. Instead of providing a lead &quot;into possible meanings and openings-out of the material in hand,&quot; the vocabulary now served &quot;to crystallize governing impressions,&quot; the diction no longer attracted attention to itself, except as an effort at exact definition. The language, Berthoff continues, reflects a &quot;controlling intelligence, of right judgment and completed understanding&quot;. The sense of free inquiry and exploration that infused his earlier writing and accounted for its &quot;rare force and expansiveness,&quot; tended to give way to &quot;static enumeration&quot;. By comparison to the verbal music and kinetic energy of &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;, Melville&#x27;s subsequent writings seem &quot;relatively muted, even withheld&quot; in his later works.

Melville&#x27;s paragraphing in his best work Berthoff considers to be the virtuous result of &quot;compactness of form and free assembling of unanticipated further data&quot;, such as when the mysterious sperm whale is compared with Exodus&#x27;s invisibility of God&#x27;s face in the final paragraph of Chapter 86 (&quot;The Tail&quot;). Over time Melville&#x27;s paragraphs became shorter as his sentences grew longer, until he arrived at the &quot;one-sentence paragraphing characteristic of his later prose&quot;. Berthoff points to the opening chapter of &quot;The Confidence-Man&quot; for an example, as it counts fifteen paragraphs, seven of which consist of only one elaborate sentence, and four that have only two sentences. The use of similar technique in &quot;Billy Budd&quot; contributes in large part, Berthoff says, to its &quot;remarkable narrative economy&quot;.

===Style and literary allusion===
In Nathalia Wright&#x27;s view, Melville&#x27;s sentences generally have a looseness of structure, easy to use for devices as catalogue and allusion, parallel and refrain, proverb and allegory. The length of his clauses may vary greatly, but the narrative style of writing in &quot;Pierre&quot; and &quot;The Confidence-Man&quot; is there to convey feeling, not thought. Unlike Henry James, who was an innovator of sentence ordering to render the subtlest nuances in thought, Melville made few such innovations. His domain is the mainstream of English prose, with its rhythm and simplicity influenced by the King James Bible. Another important characteristic of Melville&#x27;s writing style is in its echoes and overtones. Melville&#x27;s imitation of certain distinct styles is responsible for this. His three most important sources, in order, are the Bible, Shakespeare, and Milton. Direct quotation from any of the sources is slight; only one sixth of his Biblical allusions can be qualified as such because Melville adapts Biblical usage to his own narrated textual requirements.

The Biblical elements in Melville&#x27;s style can be divided into three categories. In the first, allusion is more within the narrative rather than formal quotation. Several preferred Biblical allusions appear repeatedly throughout his body of work, taking on the nature of refrains. Examples are the injunctions to be &#x27;as wise as serpents and as harmless as doves,&#x27; &#x27;death on a pale horse,&#x27; &#x27;the man of sorrows&#x27;, the &#x27;many mansions of heaven;&#x27; proverbs &#x27;as the hairs on our heads are numbered,&#x27; &#x27;pride goes before a fall,&#x27; &#x27;the wages of sin is death;&#x27; adverbs and pronouns as &#x27;verily, whoso, forasmuch as; phrases as come to pass, children&#x27;s children, the fat of the land, vanity of vanities, outer darkness, the apple of his eye, Ancient of Days, the rose of Sharon.&#x27; Second, there are paraphrases of individual and combined verses. Redburn&#x27;s &quot;Thou shalt not lay stripes upon these Roman citizens&quot; makes use of language of the Ten Commandments in Ex.20 and Pierre&#x27;s inquiry of Lucy: &quot;Loveth she me with the love past all understanding?&quot; combines John 21:15–17, and Philippians 4:7. Third, certain Hebraisms are used, such as a succession of genitives (&quot;all the waves of the billows of the seas of the boisterous mob&quot;), the cognate accusative (&quot;I dreamed a dream&quot;, &quot;Liverpool was created with the Creation&quot;), and the parallel (&quot;Closer home does it go than a rammer; and fighting with steel is a play without ever an interlude&quot;). This passage from &quot;Redburn&quot; shows how these ways of alluding interlock and result in a texture of Biblical language though there is very little direct quotation:

In addition to this, Melville successfully imitates three Biblical strains: the apocalyptic, the prophetic and the sermonic narrative tone of writing. Melville sustains the apocalyptic tone of anxiety and foreboding for a whole chapter of &quot;Mardi.&quot; The prophetic strain is expressed by Melville in &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;, most notably in Father Mapple&#x27;s sermon. The tradition of the Psalms is imitated at length by Melville in &quot;The Confidence-Man&quot;.

In 1849, Melville acquired an edition of Shakespeare&#x27;s works printed in a font large enough for his tired eyes, which led to a deeper study of Shakespeare that greatly influenced the style of his next book, &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; (1851). The critic F. O. Matthiessen found that the language of Shakespeare far surpasses other influences upon the book, in that it inspired Melville to discover his own full strength. On almost every page, debts to Shakespeare can be discovered. The &quot;mere sounds, full of Leviathanism, but signifying nothing&quot; at the end of &quot;Cetology&quot; (Ch. 32) echo the famous phrase in &quot;Macbeth:&quot; &quot;Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury/ Signifying nothing&quot;. Ahab&#x27;s first extended speech to the crew, in the &quot;Quarter-Deck&quot; (Ch. 36) is practically blank verse and so is Ahab&#x27;s soliloquy at the beginning of &quot;Sunset&quot; (Ch. 37):&#x27;I leave a white and turbid wake;/ Pale waters, paler cheeks, where&#x27;er I sail./ The envious billows sidelong swell to whelm/ My track; let them; but first I pass.&#x27; Through Shakespeare, Melville infused &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; with a power of expression he had not previously expressed. Reading Shakespeare had been &quot;a catalytic agent&quot; for Melville, one that transformed his writing from merely reporting to &quot;the expression of profound natural forces&quot;. The extent to which Melville assimilated Shakespeare is evident in the description of Ahab, Matthiessen continues, which ends in language that seems Shakespearean yet is no imitation: &#x27;Oh, Ahab! what shall be grand in thee, it must needs be plucked from the skies and dived for in the deep, and featured in the unbodied air!&#x27; The imaginative richness of the final phrase seems particularly Shakespearean, &quot;but its two key words appear only once each in the plays...and to neither of these usages is Melville indebted for his fresh combination&quot;. Melville&#x27;s diction depended upon no source, and his prose is not based on anybody else&#x27;s verse but on an awareness of &quot;speech rhythm&quot;.

Melville&#x27;s mastering of Shakespeare, Matthiessen finds, supplied him with verbal resources that enabled him to create dramatic language through three essential techniques. First, the use of verbs of action creates a sense of movement and meaning. The effective tension caused by the contrast of &quot;thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds&quot; and &quot;there&#x27;s that in here that still remains indifferent&quot; in &quot;The Candles&quot; (Ch. 119) makes the last clause lead to a &quot;compulsion to strike the breast,&quot; which suggests &quot;how thoroughly the drama has come to inhere in the words;&quot; Second, Melville took advantage of the Shakespearean energy of verbal compounds, as in &quot;full-freighted&quot;. Third, Melville employed the device of making one part of speech act as another, for example, &#x27;earthquake&#x27; as an adjective, or turning an adjective into a noun, as in &quot;placeless&quot;.

Melville&#x27;s style, in Nathalia Wright&#x27;s analysis, seamlessly flows over into theme, because all these borrowings have an artistic purpose, which is to suggest an appearance &quot;larger and more significant than life&quot; for characters and themes that are in fact unremarkable. The allusions suggest that beyond the world of appearances another world exists, one that influences this world, and where ultimate truth can be found. Moreover, the ancient background thus suggested for Melville&#x27;s narratives – ancient allusions being next in number to the Biblical ones – invests them with a sense of timelessness.

In addition to the classical references and stylistic elements, Melville openly referred to a multitude of contemporary scientific and maritime works. He read and referenced works by whalers, sailors, and naturalists in his novel &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;. A large number of volumes he actually owned and annotated have been scanned and made available for online viewing, complete with his notes in the margins.

==Critical reception==
Melville&#x27;s financial success as a writer during his lifetime was not great, relative to his posthumous success; over his entire lifetime Melville&#x27;s writings earned him just over $10,000 (). Melville&#x27;s travelogues based on voyages to the South Seas and stories based on his time in the merchant marine and navy led to some initial success, but his popularity declined dramatically afterwards. By 1876, all of his books were out of print. He was viewed as a minor figure in American literature in the later years of his life and during the years immediately after his death.

===Poetry===
Melville did not publish poetry until his late forties, with &quot;Battle-Pieces&quot; (1866), and did not receive recognition as a poet until well into the 20th century. But he wrote predominantly poetry for about 25 years, twice as long as his prose career. The three novels of the 1850s that Melville worked on most seriously to present his philosophical explorations, &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;, &quot;Pierre&quot;, and &quot;The Confidence Man&quot;, seem to make the step to philosophical poetry a natural one rather than simply a consequence of commercial failure. Since he turned to poetry as a meditative practice, his poetic style, even more than most Victorian poets, was not marked by linguistic play or melodic considerations.

Early critics were not sympathetic. Henry Chapin, in his introduction to &quot;John Marr and Other Poems&quot; (1922), one of the earlier selections of Melville&#x27;s poetry, said Melville&#x27;s verse is &quot;of an amateurish and uneven quality&quot; but in it &quot;that loveable freshness of personality, which his philosophical dejection never quenched, is everywhere in evidence,&quot; in &quot;the voice of a true poet&quot;. The poet and novelist Robert Penn Warren became a champion of Melville as a great American poet and issued a selection of Melville&#x27;s poetry in 1971 prefaced by an admiring critical essay. In the 1990s critic Lawrence Buell argued that Melville &quot;is justly said to be nineteenth-century America&#x27;s leading poet after Whitman and Dickinson&quot; and Helen Vendler remarked of &quot;Clarel&quot;: &quot;What it cost Melville to write this poem makes us pause, reading it. Alone, it is enough to win him, as a poet, what he called &#x27;the belated funeral flower of fame&#x27;.&quot; Some critics now place him as the first modernist poet in the United States while others assert that his work more strongly suggests what today would be a postmodern view.

===Melville revival and Melville studies===

The centennial of Melville&#x27;s birth in 1919 coincided with a renewed interest in his writings known as the &quot;Melville revival&quot;, during which his work experienced a significant critical reassessment. The renewed appreciation began in 1917 with Carl Van Doren&#x27;s article on Melville in a standard history of American literature. Van Doren also encouraged Raymond Weaver, who wrote the author&#x27;s first full-length biography, &quot;Herman Melville: Mariner and Mystic&quot; (1921). Discovering the unfinished manuscript of &quot;Billy Budd&quot;, among papers shown to him by Melville&#x27;s granddaughter, Weaver edited it and published it in a new collected edition of Melville&#x27;s works. Other works that helped fan the flames for Melville were Carl Van Doren&#x27;s &quot;The American Novel&quot; (1921), D. H. Lawrence&#x27;s &quot;Studies in Classic American Literature&quot; (1923), Carl Van Vechten&#x27;s essay in &quot;The Double Dealer&quot; (1922), and Lewis Mumford&#x27;s biography &quot;Herman Melville&quot; (1929).

Starting in the mid-1930s, the Yale University scholar Stanley Thomas Williams supervised more than a dozen dissertations on Melville that were eventually published as books. Where the first wave of Melville scholars focused on psychology, Williams&#x27; students were prominent in establishing Melville Studies as an academic field concerned with texts and manuscripts, tracing Melville&#x27;s influences and borrowings (even plagiarism), and exploring archives and local publications. To provide historical evidence, the independent scholar Jay Leyda searched libraries, family papers, local archives and newspapers across New England and New York to document Melville&#x27;s life day by day for his two-volume &quot;The Melville Log&quot; (1951). Sparked by Leyda and post-war scholars, the second phase of the Melville Revival emphasized research into the biography of Melville rather than accepting Melville&#x27;s early books as reliable accounts.

In 1945, The Melville Society was founded, a non-profit organisation dedicated to the study of Melville&#x27;s life and works. Between 1969 and 2003, the society published 125 issues of &quot;Melville Society Extracts&quot;, which are now freely available on the society&#x27;s website. Since 1999 it has published &quot;Leviathan: A Journal of Melville Studies&quot;, currently three issues a year, published by Johns Hopkins University Press.

The postwar scholars tended to think that Weaver, Harvard psychologist Henry Murray, and Mumford favored Freudian interpretations that read Melville&#x27;s fiction as autobiography; exaggerated his suffering in the family; and inferred a homosexual attachment to Hawthorne. They saw a different arc to Melville&#x27;s writing career. The first biographers saw a tragic withdrawal after the cold critical reception for his prose works and largely dismissed his poetry. A new view emerged of Melville&#x27;s turn to poetry as a conscious choice that placed him among the most important American poets. Other post-war studies, however, continued the broad imaginative and interpretive style; Charles Olson&#x27;s &quot;Call Me Ishmael&quot; (1947) presented Ahab as a Shakespearean tragic hero, and Newton Arvin&#x27;s critical biography, &quot;Herman Melville&quot; (1950), won the National Book Award for non-fiction in 1951.

In the 1960s, Harrison Hayford organized an alliance between Northwestern University Press and the Newberry Library, with backing from the Modern Language Association and funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities, to edit and publish reliable critical texts of Melville&#x27;s complete works, including unpublished poems, journals, and correspondence. The first volume of the Northwestern-Newberry Edition of &quot;The Writings of Herman Melville&quot; was published in 1968 and the last in the fall of 2017. The aim of the editors was to present a text &quot;as close as possible to the author&#x27;s intention as surviving evidence permits&quot;. The volumes have extensive appendices, including textual variants from each of the editions published in Melville&#x27;s lifetime, an historical note on the publishing history and critical reception, and related documents. Because the texts were prepared with financial support from the United States Department of Education, no royalties are charged, and they have been widely reprinted. Hershel Parker published his two-volume &quot;Herman Melville: A Biography&quot;, in 1996 and 2002, based on extensive original research and his involvement as editor of the Northwestern-Newberry Melville edition.

Today Melville’s works feature in programs such as the collaboration between Williams College and the Mystic Seaport maritime museum, which together have created an interdisciplinary ocean and coastal studies program. Williams-Mystic integrates marine science, maritime history, environmental policy, and literature of the sea. Melville scholars Mary Bercaw Edwards and Richard J. King feature among the program’s professors.

===Gender studies===
Melville only gradually attracted the pioneering scholars of women&#x27;s studies, gender, and sexuality in the 1970s and 1980s. Though some held that he hardly portrayed women at all, others saw the few women in his works as traditional figures representing, or even attacking, nineteenth-century gentility, sentimentality, and conventional morality. Melville&#x27;s preference for sea-going tales that involved almost only males has been of interest to scholars in men&#x27;s studies and especially gay and queer studies. Melville was remarkably open in his exploration of sexuality of all sorts. Alvin Sandberg said that the short story &quot;The Paradise of Bachelors and the Tartarus of Maids&quot; offers &quot;an exploration of impotency, a portrayal of a man retreating to an all-male childhood to avoid confrontation with sexual manhood,&quot; from which the narrator engages in &quot;congenial&quot; digressions in heterogeneity. In line with this view, Warren Rosenberg argues the homosocial &quot;Paradise of Bachelors&quot; is &quot;blind to what is real and painful in the world, and thus are [sic] superficial and sterile&quot;.

David Harley Serlin observes in the second half of Melville&#x27;s diptych, &quot;The Tartarus of Maids&quot;, the narrator gives voice to the oppressed women he observes:

In the end Serlin says that the narrator is never fully able to come to terms with the contrasting masculine and feminine modalities.

Issues of sexuality have been observed in other works as well. Rosenberg notes Taji, in &quot;Mardi&quot;, and the protagonist in &quot;Pierre&quot; &quot;think they are saving young &#x27;maidens in distress&#x27; (Yillah and Isabel) out of the purest of reasons but both are also conscious of a lurking sexual motive&quot;. When Taji kills the old priest holding Yillah captive, he says,

In &quot;Pierre&quot;, the motive of the protagonist&#x27;s sacrifice for Isabel is admitted: &quot;womanly beauty and not womanly ugliness invited him to champion the right&quot;. Rosenberg argues,

Rosenberg says that Melville fully explores the theme of sexuality in his major epic poem, &quot;Clarel&quot;. When the narrator is separated from Ruth, with whom he has fallen in love, he is free to explore other sexual (and religious) possibilities before deciding at the end of the poem to participate in the ritualistic order represented by marriage. In the course of the poem, &quot;he considers every form of sexual orientation – celibacy, homosexuality, hedonism, and heterosexuality – raising the same kinds of questions as when he considers Islam or Democracy&quot;.

Some passages and sections of Melville&#x27;s works demonstrate his willingness to address all forms of sexuality, including the homoerotic, in his works. Commonly noted examples from &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; are the &quot;marriage bed&quot; episode involving Ishmael and Queequeg, who sleep with their arms wrapped around each other (Chapter 4, &quot;The Counterpane&quot; and Chapter 10, &quot;A Bosom Friend&quot;); and the &quot;Squeeze of the Hand&quot; (Chapter 94) describing the camaraderie of sailors&#x27; extracting spermaceti from a dead whale. &quot;Clarel&quot; recognizes the homoerotic potential of its eponymous protagonist, including, in a fairly explicit passage, an erection provoked by the figure of a male interlocutor, Lyonesse. In addition, Rosenberg notes that Billy Budd&#x27;s physical attractiveness is described in quasi-feminine terms: &quot;As the Handsome Sailor, Billy Budd&#x27;s position aboard the seventy-four was something analogous to that of a rustic beauty transplanted from the provinces and brought into competition with the highborn dames of the court&quot;.

===Law and literature===
Melville has been useful in the field of law and literature. The chapter &quot;Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish&quot; in &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;, for instance, challenges concepts of property rights. In &quot;Billy Budd&quot;, a handsome and popular young sailor strikes and inadvertently kills the ship&#x27;s master-at-arms. The ship&#x27;s captain immediately convenes a court-martial at which he urges the court to convict and sentence Billy to death. Critics debate Melville&#x27;s intention. Some see the contradiction between unbending legalism and malleable moral principles. Other critics have argued that the captain manipulated and misrepresented the applicable laws.

==Themes==
Melville&#x27;s work often touched on themes of communicative expression and the pursuit of the absolute among illusions. As early as 1839, in the juvenile sketch &quot;Fragments from a Writing Desk&quot;, Melville explores a problem that would reappear in the short stories &quot;Bartleby&quot; (1853) and &quot;Benito Cereno&quot; (1855): the impossibility to find common ground for mutual communication. The sketch centers on the protagonist and a mute lady, leading scholar Sealts to observe: &quot;Melville&#x27;s deep concern with expression and communication evidently began early in his career&quot;.

According to scholar Nathalia Wright, Melville&#x27;s characters are all preoccupied by the same intense, superhuman and eternal quest for &quot;the absolute amidst its relative manifestations,&quot; an enterprise central to the Melville canon: &quot;All Melville&#x27;s plots describe this pursuit, and all his themes represent the delicate and shifting relationship between its truth and its illusion&quot;. It is not clear, however, what the moral and metaphysical implications of this quest are, because Melville did not distinguish between these two aspects. Throughout his life Melville struggled with and gave shape to the same set of epistemological doubts and the metaphysical issues these doubts engendered. An obsession for the limits of knowledge led to the question of God&#x27;s existence and nature, the indifference of the universe, and the problem of evil.

==Legacy and honors==

In 1854, three years following publication of &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;, Melville, New York, on Long Island, was named in Melville&#x27;s honor.

In 1982, the Library of America (LOA) began publishing works in honor of Melville&#x27;s central place in American culture; the first volume contained &quot;Typee&quot;, &quot;Omoo&quot;, and &quot;Mardi&quot;. Subsequent volumes included Melville&#x27;s &quot;Redburn&quot;, &quot;White-Jacket&quot;, and &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;, published in 1983, and &quot;Pierre&quot;, &quot;Israel Potter&quot;, &quot;The Confidence-Man&quot;, &quot;Tales&quot;, and &quot;Billy Budd&quot;, published in 1985. LOA did not publish his complete poetry until 2019.

On August 1, 1984, as part of the Literary Arts Series of stamps, the U.S. Postal Service issued a 20-cent commemorative stamp to honor Melville. The setting for the first day of issue was the Whaling Museum in New Bedford, Massachusetts.

In 1985, the New York City Herman Melville Society gathered at 104 East 26th Street to dedicate the intersection of Park Avenue South and 26th Street as Herman Melville Square, where Melville lived from 1863 to 1891 and where he authored &quot;Billy Budd&quot; and other works. Melville&#x27;s house in Lansingburgh, New York, houses the Lansingburgh Historical Society.

In 2010, a species of extinct sperm whale, &quot;Livyatan melvillei&quot;, was named in honor of Melville. The paleontologists who discovered the fossil were fans of &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;, and dedicated their discovery to the author.

Sadly, Melville himself didn&#x27;t live to see the ultimate success of his masterpiece. At the time of his death in 1891, the slow burn of interest in &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; had not yet caught fire. Melville died not knowing that his novel would become a lasting cultural phenomenon, and that the term &quot;&quot; would still be understood, two centuries hence, even by people who had never read his work.

==Selected bibliography==

* &quot;Typee: A Peep at Polynesian Life&quot; (1846)
* &quot;Omoo: A Narrative of Adventures in the South Seas&quot; (1847)
* &quot;Mardi: and a Voyage Thither&quot; (1849)
* &quot;Redburn: His First Voyage&quot; (1849)
* &quot;White-Jacket; or, The World in a Man-of-War&quot; (1850)
* &quot;Moby-Dick; or, The Whale&quot; (1851)
* &quot;Pierre; or, The Ambiguities&quot; (1852)
* &quot;Isle of the Cross&quot; (1853 unpublished, and now lost)
* &quot;Bartleby, the Scrivener&quot; (1853) (short story)
* &quot;The Encantadas, or Enchanted Isles&quot; (1854) (novella)
* &quot;Benito Cereno&quot; (1855) (novella)
* &quot;Israel Potter: His Fifty Years of Exile&quot; (1855)
* &quot;The Confidence-Man: His Masquerade&quot; (1857)
* &quot;Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War&quot; (1866) (poetry collection)
* &quot;Clarel: A Poem and Pilgrimage in the Holy Land&quot; (1876) (epic poem)
* &quot;John Marr and Other Sailors&quot; (1888) (poetry collection)
* &quot;Timoleon&quot; (1891) (poetry collection)
* &quot;Billy Budd, Sailor (An Inside Narrative)&quot; (1891 unfinished, published posthumously in 1924; authoritative edition in 1962)

== Explanatory notes ==
== Citations ==
== General and cited sources ==

* May be borrowed at Internet Archive here
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Wallace explores the stylistic and aesthetic affinities of English landscape painter J. M. W. Turner (1775-1851) and American novelist Herman Melville, establishing Turner as a decisive influence on the creation of Melville&#x27;s &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;&quot;. (Quotation from dust jacket)
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* Extensive annotated bibliography of Melville scholarship.
* 2 vols. Volume I: &quot;Eternal Ifs: Infant, Boy, and Man (1819-1840)&quot;. Volume II: &quot;Melville at Sea (1840-1846)&quot;.
* 
* 
* Article about the life and works of Herman Melville on the bicentennial of his birth in 1819.
* 
* 
* &quot;Wallace explores the stylistic and aesthetic affinities of English landscape painter J. M. W. Turner (1775-1851) and American novelist Herman Melville, establishing Turner as a decisive influence on the creation of Melville&#x27;s &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;&quot;. (Quotation from dust jacket)

==External links==
* 
* 
* The Melville Society
* Melville Society Extracts, Archives 1969–2005 Online access to all 125 issues of the magazine.
* Melville Electronic Library: a critical archive Scholarly site hosted at Hofstra University: Editions, Manuscripts, Sources, Melville&#x27;s Print Collection, Adaptation, biography, Criticism.
* Melville&#x27;s Marginalia Online A digital archive of books that survive from Herman Melville&#x27;s library with his annotations and markings.
* Melvilliana:the world and writings of Herman Melville. A scholarly blog about all things Melville.
* Arrowhead—The Home of Herman Melville
* Obituary Notices
* Physical description of Melville from his 1856 passport application
* Melville&#x27;s page at Literary Journal.com : research articles on Melville&#x27;s works
* Antiquarian Booksellers&#x27; Association of America: Collecting Herman Melville
* Guide to Herman Melville collection at L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Brigham Young University
* The Herman Melville Collection at the Newberry Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="0" end="15" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343619" start="17" end="21" title="Name change" label="born"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="22" end="29" title="Herman Melville" label="Melvill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="84" end="92" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="94" end="105" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="118" end="122" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q466665" start="130" end="150" title="American Renaissance (literature)" label="American Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="196" end="205" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463076" start="226" end="231" title="Typee" label="Typee"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="291" end="300" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863037" start="312" end="330" title="Billy Budd" label="Billy Budd, Sailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="363" end="370" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="507" end="523" title="#Melville revival and Melville studies" label="Melville revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544219" start="589" end="609" title="great American novel" label="great American novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q172697" start="922" end="939" title="Marquesas Islands" label="Marquesas Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882301" start="998" end="1002" title="Omoo" label="Omoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521576" start="1202" end="1213" title="Lemuel Shaw" label="Lemuel Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290324" start="1221" end="1226" title="Mardi" label="Mardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305519" start="1342" end="1349" title="Redburn" label="Redburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431433" start="1373" end="1385" title="White-Jacket" label="White-Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895947" start="1871" end="1884" title="Benito Cereno" label="Benito Cereno"/>
<link wikidata="Q780407" start="1901" end="1924" title="Bartleby, the Scrivener" label="Bartleby, the Scrivener"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="1976" end="1985" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820043" start="2031" end="2049" title="The Confidence-Man" label="The Confidence-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q247797" start="2142" end="2159" title="customs inspector" label="customs inspector"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966061" start="2233" end="2269" title="Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War" label="Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2339" end="2357" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="2453" end="2465" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126290" start="2477" end="2523" title="Clarel" label="Clarel: A Poem and Pilgrimage in the Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="2601" end="2613" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="2879" end="2901" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2964" end="2977" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400442" start="3280" end="3305" title="Sailors&amp;#x27; Snug Harbor" label="Sailors&amp;#x27; Snug Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3347" end="3353" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3588" end="3614" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792379" start="3713" end="3727" title="Thomas Melvill (American patriot)" label="Thomas Melvill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="3748" end="3764" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566276" start="3816" end="3832" title="Peter Gansevoort" label="Peter Gansevoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510027" start="3859" end="3871" title="Siege of Fort Stanwix" label="Fort Stanwix"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="4159" end="4171" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="4274" end="4288" title="Dutch Reformed Church" label="Dutch Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="4304" end="4313" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="4844" end="4852" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442792" start="5069" end="5083" title="Hershel Parker" label="Hershel Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756786" start="5363" end="5378" title="Andrew Delbanco" label="Andrew Delbanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983783" start="5636" end="5648" title="Newton Arvin" label="Newton Arvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724557" start="6261" end="6276" title="Bleecker Street" label="Bleecker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="6280" end="6289" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180266" start="6414" end="6427" title="scarlet fever" label="scarlet fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149700" start="6738" end="6777" title="Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School" label="Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="7330" end="7346" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q502534" start="7375" end="7387" title="North American fur trade" label="fur business"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712997" start="7405" end="7423" title="The Albany Academy" label="The Albany Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014976" start="8005" end="8018" title="Merton Sealts" label="Merton Sealts"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="9212" end="9221" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305519" start="9542" end="9549" title="Redburn" label="Redburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712997" start="11237" end="11255" title="The Albany Academy" label="The Albany Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="11464" end="11475" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="11493" end="11500" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="12643" end="12652" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126290" start="12669" end="12675" title="Clarel" label="Clarel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167856" start="12919" end="12940" title="James Fenimore Cooper" label="James Fenimore Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865157" start="12954" end="12967" title="The Red Rover" label="The Red Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092480" start="13011" end="13024" title="Panic of 1837" label="Panic of 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076362" start="13310" end="13330" title="Lenox, Massachusetts" label="Lenox, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5740045" start="13918" end="13930" title="Herman Melville House (Troy, New York)" label="rented house"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="14326" end="14336" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="14930" end="14949" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="14951" end="14962" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="14964" end="14976" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q352725" start="14978" end="15003" title="Richard Brinsley Sheridan" label="Richard Brinsley Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="15005" end="15017" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="15019" end="15042" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="15044" end="15054" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q315346" start="15060" end="15072" title="Thomas Moore" label="Thomas Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379913" start="15732" end="15742" title="Green hand (whaling)" label="green hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305519" start="15793" end="15818" title="Redburn" label="Redburn: His First Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q527981" start="16449" end="16471" title="Richard Henry Dana Jr." label="Richard Henry Dana Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3024921" start="16494" end="16519" title="Two Years Before the Mast" label="Two Years Before the Mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180919" start="16530" end="16550" title="Jeremiah N. Reynolds" label="Jeremiah N. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q689515" start="16597" end="16614" title="The Knickerbocker" label="The Knickerbocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437626" start="16678" end="16688" title="Mocha Dick" label="Mocha Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922594" start="17015" end="17032" title="quarter gallery" label="quarter galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309359" start="17114" end="17138" title="Fairhaven, Massachusetts" label="Fairhaven, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379316" start="17418" end="17429" title="Enoch Mudge" label="Enoch Mudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440705" start="17444" end="17464" title="Seamen&amp;#x27;s Bethel" label="Seamen&amp;#x27;s Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q321053" start="17504" end="17513" title="cenotaphs" label="cenotaphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q357447" start="17774" end="17784" title="forecastle" label="forecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22570371" start="17848" end="17851" title="aft" label="aft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471979" start="18578" end="18592" title="Alejandro Selkirk Island" label="Selkirk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q156325" start="18613" end="18635" title="Juan Fernández Islands" label="Juan Fernández Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762593" start="18978" end="18984" title="Gam (nautical term)" label="gammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q687630" start="19076" end="19086" title="Owen Chase" label="Owen Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368833" start="19172" end="19177" title="Essex (whaleship)" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731984" start="19692" end="19706" title="The Encantadas" label="The Encantadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026270" start="20062" end="20067" title="Paita" label="Paita"/>
<link wikidata="Q21064" start="20864" end="20873" title="Nuku Hiva" label="Nuku Hiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463076" start="21030" end="21035" title="Typee" label="Typee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513954" start="21086" end="21098" title="Tai Pi (province)" label="Taipi Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q59211876" start="21180" end="21200" title="Lucy Ann (1810 ship)" label="&amp;quot;Lucy Ann&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="21212" end="21218" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q673400" start="21382" end="21387" title="Mo&amp;#x27;orea" label="Eimeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757816" start="21414" end="21425" title="Beachcombing" label="beachcomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q673400" start="21503" end="21509" title="Moorea" label="Moorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882301" start="21550" end="21554" title="Omoo" label="Omoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012971" start="21768" end="21775" title="Lahaina, Hawaii" label="Lahaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q188705" start="21777" end="21781" title="Maui" label="Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="21790" end="21806" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="21970" end="21977" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431433" start="22267" end="22279" title="White-Jacket" label="White-Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463076" start="23392" end="23397" title="Typee" label="Typee"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="24224" end="24243" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882301" start="25674" end="25678" title="Omoo" label="Omoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q971493" start="26062" end="26085" title="Nathaniel Parker Willis" label="Nathaniel Parker Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521576" start="26506" end="26517" title="Lemuel Shaw" label="Lemuel Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="27470" end="27488" title="Province of Canada" label="Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290324" start="29074" end="29079" title="Mardi" label="Mardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172299" start="29103" end="29118" title="Richard Bentley (publisher)" label="Richard Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305519" start="29654" end="29661" title="Redburn" label="Redburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431433" start="30398" end="30410" title="White-Jacket" label="White-Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q527981" start="30687" end="30709" title="Richard Henry Dana Jr." label="Richard Henry Dana Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="31029" end="31043" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134140" start="31071" end="31086" title="Sartor Resartus" label="Sartor Resartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091008" start="31113" end="31165" title="On Heroes, Hero-Worship, &amp;amp; the Heroic in History" label="On Heroes, Hero-Worship, &amp;amp; the Heroic in History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417354" start="31210" end="31225" title="Evert Duyckinck" label="Evert Duyckinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q31941870" start="31530" end="31544" title="Sarah Morewood" label="Sarah Morewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="31557" end="31578" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="31630" end="31636" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="31645" end="31670" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="31724" end="31743" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916648" start="32090" end="32114" title="Mosses from an Old Manse" label="Mosses from an Old Manse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685666" start="32208" end="32232" title="Hawthorne and His Mosses" label="Hawthorne and His Mosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q101579035" start="32632" end="32647" title="Walter Bezanson" label="Walter Bezanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43664903" start="33659" end="33668" title="Arrowhead (Herman Melville)" label="Arrowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490819" start="33913" end="33919" title="Sophia Hawthorne" label="Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172299" start="36936" end="36951" title="Richard Bentley (publisher)" label="Richard Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987629" start="37255" end="37263" title="Weekly Day Book" label="Day Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084180" start="37578" end="37595" title="Isle of the Cross" label="Isle of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087143" start="37975" end="37988" title="Israel Potter" label="Israel Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757032" start="38454" end="38470" title="The Piazza Tales" label="The Piazza Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q780407" start="38635" end="38658" title="Bartleby, the Scrivener" label="Bartleby, the Scrivener"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895947" start="38675" end="38688" title="Benito Cereno" label="Benito Cereno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="39843" end="39853" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="40694" end="40703" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126290" start="40740" end="40746" title="Clarel" label="Clarel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763600" start="40781" end="40791" title="Mount Hope, Jaffa" label="Mount Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q180294" start="40815" end="40820" title="Jaffa" label="Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820043" start="40893" end="40911" title="The Confidence-Man" label="The Confidence-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q16463" start="41373" end="41379" title="lyceum" label="lyceum"/>
<link wikidata="Q273081" start="41595" end="41602" title="clipper" label="clipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="42041" end="42059" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966061" start="42095" end="42131" title="Battle Pieces and Aspects of the War" label="Battle Pieces and Aspects of the War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="42805" end="42822" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126290" start="43944" end="43975" title="Clarel" label="Clarel: A Poem and a Pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q469888" start="44612" end="44625" title="Lewis Mumford" label="Lewis Mumford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013996" start="45206" end="45230" title="New York Society Library" label="New York Society Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963194" start="45521" end="45548" title="John Marr and Other Sailors" label="John Marr and Other Sailors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45597" end="45605" title="Timoleon (Melville poem)" label="Timoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000666" start="45768" end="45785" title="Woodlawn Cemetery (Bronx, New York)" label="Woodlawn Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="45789" end="45794" title="The Bronx" label="Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="45818" end="45836" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q863037" start="46650" end="46660" title="Billy Budd" label="Billy Budd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930690" start="47034" end="47048" title="Raymond Weaver" label="Raymond Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q59529644" start="47348" end="47364" title="Harrison Hayford" label="Harrison Hayford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014976" start="47369" end="47385" title="Merton M. Sealts" label="Merton M. Sealts"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="47398" end="47419" title="Textual criticism" label="critical reading text"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121916" start="47530" end="47534" title="Billy Budd (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q101579035" start="50614" end="50629" title="Walter Bezanson" label="Walter Bezanson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50698" end="50713" title="Warner Berthoff" label="Warner Berthoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="53691" end="53702" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="53921" end="53937" title="King James Version" label="King James Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9190" start="55449" end="55451" title="Book of Exodus" label="Ex"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="55563" end="55567" title="Gospel of John" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q51613" start="55582" end="55593" title="Epistle to the Philippians" label="Philippians"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150650" start="56504" end="56517" title="Father Mapple" label="Father Mapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="56554" end="56560" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="57263" end="57270" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966061" start="61429" end="61442" title="Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War" label="Battle-Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q312720" start="62554" end="62572" title="Robert Penn Warren" label="Robert Penn Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219886" start="62745" end="62759" title="Lawrence Buell (academic)" label="Lawrence Buell"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="62861" end="62868" title="Walt Whitman" label="Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4441" start="62873" end="62882" title="Emily Dickinson" label="Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703331" start="62893" end="62906" title="Helen Vendler" label="Helen Vendler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889129" start="63166" end="63175" title="Modernist poetry in English" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q113013" start="63281" end="63291" title="Postmodern literature" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039991" start="63600" end="63614" title="Carl Van Doren" label="Carl Van Doren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930690" start="63714" end="63728" title="Raymond Weaver" label="Raymond Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="64173" end="64187" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628058" start="64201" end="64239" title="Studies in Classic American Literature" label="Studies in Classic American Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q312851" start="64254" end="64270" title="Carl Van Vechten" label="Carl Van Vechten"/>
<link wikidata="Q469888" start="64329" end="64342" title="Lewis Mumford" label="Lewis Mumford"/>
<link wikidata="Q96380915" start="64366" end="64381" title="Herman Melville (book)" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="64428" end="64443" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331800" start="64452" end="64475" title="Stanley Thomas Williams" label="Stanley Thomas Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q957911" start="64940" end="64949" title="Jay Leyda" label="Jay Leyda"/>
<link wikidata="Q463153" start="65869" end="65881" title="Henry Murray" label="Henry Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q922978" start="66487" end="66500" title="Charles Olson" label="Charles Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="66678" end="66697" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q59529644" start="66738" end="66754" title="Harrison Hayford" label="Harrison Hayford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508593" start="66785" end="66814" title="Northwestern University Press" label="Northwestern University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q616527" start="66823" end="66839" title="Newberry Library" label="Newberry Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506059" start="66863" end="66890" title="Modern Language Association" label="Modern Language Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="66912" end="66949" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="66980" end="66993" title="critical text" label="critical text"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442792" start="67775" end="67789" title="Hershel Parker" label="Hershel Parker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67821" end="67849" title="Hershel Parker#Melville biography" label="Herman Melville: A Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q35069" start="68499" end="68519" title="women&amp;#x27;s studies" label="women&amp;#x27;s studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12908504" start="68905" end="68923" title="men&amp;#x27;s studies" label="men&amp;#x27;s studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q98929208" start="68939" end="68960" title="gay and queer studies" label="gay and queer studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756064" start="69084" end="69135" title="Paradise of Bachelors and Tartarus of Maids" label="The Paradise of Bachelors and the Tartarus of Maids"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="69173" end="69182" title="impotency" label="impotency"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="71249" end="71258" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q369682" start="71583" end="71593" title="spermaceti" label="spermaceti"/>
<link wikidata="Q844584" start="72226" end="72244" title="law and literature" label="law and literature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72264" end="72288" title="Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish (Moby-Dick)#In legal studies" label="Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="74426" end="74435" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101080" start="74443" end="74461" title="Melville, New York" label="Melville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="74466" end="74477" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428855" start="74529" end="74547" title="Library of America" label="Library of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="75136" end="75155" title="United States Postal Service" label="U.S. Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q825187" start="75232" end="75250" title="first day of issue" label="first day of issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q49147" start="75277" end="75303" title="New Bedford, Massachusetts" label="New Bedford, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q109711" start="75422" end="75433" title="Park Avenue" label="Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487494" start="75609" end="75631" title="Lansingburgh, New York" label="Lansingburgh, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q131759" start="75727" end="75745" title="Livyatan melvillei" label="Livyatan melvillei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="75789" end="75804" title="paleontology" label="paleontologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463076" start="76356" end="76388" title="Typee" label="Typee: A Peep at Polynesian Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882301" start="76410" end="76459" title="Omoo" label="Omoo: A Narrative of Adventures in the South Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290324" start="76481" end="76508" title="Mardi" label="Mardi: and a Voyage Thither"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305519" start="76530" end="76555" title="Redburn" label="Redburn: His First Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431433" start="76577" end="76620" title="White-Jacket" label="White-Jacket; or, The World in a Man-of-War"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="76642" end="76666" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick; or, The Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387840" start="76688" end="76715" title="Pierre; or, The Ambiguities" label="Pierre; or, The Ambiguities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084180" start="76737" end="76754" title="Isle of the Cross" label="Isle of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q780407" start="76802" end="76825" title="Bartleby, the Scrivener" label="Bartleby, the Scrivener"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731984" start="76861" end="76895" title="The Encantadas, or Enchanted Isles" label="The Encantadas, or Enchanted Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895947" start="76927" end="76940" title="Benito Cereno" label="Benito Cereno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087143" start="76972" end="77011" title="Israel Potter" label="Israel Potter: His Fifty Years of Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820043" start="77033" end="77067" title="The Confidence-Man" label="The Confidence-Man: His Masquerade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966061" start="77089" end="77125" title="Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War" label="Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126290" start="77167" end="77213" title="Clarel" label="Clarel: A Poem and Pilgrimage in the Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963194" start="77247" end="77274" title="John Marr and Other Sailors" label="John Marr and Other Sailors"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162931" start="77316" end="77324" title="Timoleon (poems)" label="Timoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q863037" start="77366" end="77406" title="Billy Budd" label="Billy Budd, Sailor (An Inside Narrative)"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="77589" end="77605" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="77782" end="77797" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="77934" end="77943" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="78407" end="78422" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623314" start="78832" end="78850" title="Hofstra University" label="Hofstra University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775152" start="79423" end="79475" title="Antiquarian Booksellers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Antiquarian Booksellers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="79579" end="79603" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13624" wikidata="Q26674" url="?curid=13624" title="High fidelity">
<text>High fidelity (often shortened to hi-fi or, rarely, HiFi) is the high-quality reproduction of sound. It is popular with audiophiles and home audio enthusiasts. Ideally, high-fidelity equipment has inaudible noise and distortion, and a flat (neutral, uncolored) frequency response within the human hearing range.

High fidelity contrasts with the lower-quality &quot;lo-fi&quot; sound produced by inexpensive audio equipment, AM radio, or the inferior quality of sound reproduction that can be heard in recordings made until the late 1940s.

== History ==
Bell Laboratories began experimenting with various recording techniques in the early 1930s. Performances by Leopold Stokowski and the Philadelphia Orchestra were recorded in 1931 and 1932 using telephone lines between the Academy of Music in Philadelphia and the Bell labs in New Jersey. Some multitrack recordings were made on optical sound film, which led to new advances used primarily by MGM (as early as 1937) and Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation (as early as 1941). RCA Victor began recording performances by several orchestras using optical sound around 1941, resulting in higher-fidelity masters for 78-rpm discs. During the 1930s, Avery Fisher, an amateur violinist, began experimenting with audio design and acoustics. He wanted to make a radio that would sound like he was listening to a live orchestra and achieve high fidelity to the original sound. After World War II, Harry F. Olson conducted an experiment whereby test subjects listened to a live orchestra through a hidden variable acoustic filter. The results proved that listeners preferred high-fidelity reproduction, once the noise and distortion introduced by early sound equipment was removed.

Beginning in 1948, several innovations created the conditions that made major improvements in home audio quality possible:
* Reel-to-reel audio tape recording, based on technology taken from Germany after WWII, helped musical artists such as Bing Crosby make and distribute recordings with better fidelity.
* The advent of the 33⅓ rpm long play (LP) microgroove vinyl record, with lower surface noise and quantitatively specified equalization curves as well as noise-reduction and dynamic range systems. Classical music fans, who were opinion leaders in the audio market, quickly adopted LPs because, unlike with older records, most classical works would fit on a single LP.
* Higher quality turntables, with more responsive needles
* FM radio, with wider audio bandwidth and less susceptibility to signal interference and fading than AM radio.
* Better amplifier designs, with more attention to frequency response and much higher power output capability, reproducing audio without perceptible distortion.
* New loudspeaker designs, including acoustic suspension, developed by Edgar Villchur and Henry Kloss with improved bass frequency response.

In the 1950s, audio manufacturers employed the phrase &quot;high fidelity&quot; as a marketing term to describe records and equipment intended to provide faithful sound reproduction. Many consumers found the difference in quality compared to the then-standard AM radios and 78-rpm records readily apparent and bought high-fidelity phonographs and 33⅓ LPs such as RCA&#x27;s New Orthophonics and London&#x27;s FFRR (Full Frequency Range Recording, a UK Decca system). Audiophiles focused on technical characteristics and bought individual components, such as separate turntables, radio tuners, preamplifiers, power amplifiers and loudspeakers. Some enthusiasts even assembled their loudspeaker systems, with the advent of integrated multi-speaker console systems in the 1950s, &quot;hi-fi&quot; became a generic term for home sound equipment, to some extent displacing &quot;phonograph&quot; and &quot;record player&quot;.

In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the development of stereophonic equipment and recordings led to the next wave of home-audio improvement, and in common parlance &quot;stereo&quot; displaced &quot;hi-fi&quot;. Records were now played on &quot;a stereo&quot; (stereophonic phonograph). In the world of the audiophile, however, the concept of &quot;high fidelity&quot; continued to refer to the goal of highly accurate sound reproduction and to the technological resources available for approaching that goal. This period is regarded as the &quot;Golden Age of Hi-Fi&quot;, when vacuum tube equipment manufacturers of the time produced many models considered superior by modern audiophiles, and just before solid state (transistorized) equipment was introduced to the market, subsequently replacing tube equipment as the mainstream technology.
 
In the 1960s, the FTC with the help of the audio manufacturers came up with a definition to identify high-fidelity equipment so that the manufacturers could clearly state if they meet the requirements and reduce misleading advertisements.

A popular type of system for reproducing music beginning in the 1970s was the integrated music centre—which combined a phonograph turntable, AM-FM radio tuner, tape player, preamplifier, and power amplifier in one package, often sold with its own separate, detachable or integrated speakers. These systems advertised their simplicity. The consumer did not have to select and assemble individual components or be familiar with impedance and power ratings. Purists generally avoid referring to these systems as high fidelity, though some are capable of very good quality sound reproduction.

Audiophiles in the 1970s and 1980s preferred to buy each component separately. That way, they could choose models of each component with the specifications that they desired. In the 1980s, several audiophile magazines became available, offering reviews of components and articles on how to choose and test speakers, amplifiers, and other components.

== Listening tests ==

Listening tests are used by hi-fi manufacturers, audiophile magazines, and audio engineering researchers and scientists. If a listening test is done in such a way that the listener who is assessing the sound quality of a component or recording can see the components that are being used for the test (e.g., the same musical piece listened to through a tube power amplifier and a solid-state amplifier), then it is possible that the listener&#x27;s pre-existing biases towards or against certain components or brands could affect their judgment. To respond to this issue, researchers began to use blind tests, in which listeners cannot see the components being tested. A commonly used variant of this test is the ABX test. A subject is presented with two known samples (sample &quot;A&quot;, the reference, and sample &quot;B&quot;, an alternative), and one unknown sample &quot;X,&quot; for three samples total. &quot;X&quot; is randomly selected from &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot;, and the subject identifies &quot;X&quot; as being either &quot;A&quot; or &quot;B&quot;. Although there is no way to prove that a certain methodology is transparent, a properly conducted double-blind test can prove that a method is &quot;not&quot; transparent.

Blind tests are sometimes used as part of attempts to ascertain whether certain audio components (such as expensive, exotic cables) have any subjectively perceivable effect on sound quality. Data gleaned from these blind tests is not accepted by some audiophile magazines such as &quot;Stereophile&quot; and &quot;The Absolute Sound&quot; in their evaluations of audio equipment. John Atkinson, current editor of &quot;Stereophile&quot;, stated that he once purchased a solid-state amplifier, the Quad 405, in 1978 after seeing the results from blind tests, but came to realize months later that &quot;the magic was gone&quot; until he replaced it with a tube amp. Robert Harley of &quot;The Absolute Sound&quot; wrote, in 2008, that: &quot;...blind listening tests fundamentally distort the listening process and are worthless in determining the audibility of a certain phenomenon.&quot;

Doug Schneider, editor of the online Soundstage network, argued the opposite in 2009. He stated: &quot;Blind tests are at the core of the decades&#x27; worth of research into loudspeaker design done at Canada&#x27;s National Research Council (NRC). The NRC researchers knew that for their result to be credible within the scientific community and to have the most meaningful results, they had to eliminate bias, and blind testing was the only way to do so.&quot; Many Canadian companies such as Axiom, Energy, Mirage, Paradigm, PSB, and Revel use blind testing extensively in designing their loudspeakers. Audio professional Dr. Sean Olive of Harman International shares this view.

==Semblance of realism==
Stereophonic sound provided a partial solution to the problem of reproducing the sound of live orchestral performers by creating separation among instruments, the illusion of space, and a phantom central channel. An attempt to enhance reverberation was tried in the 1970s through quadraphonic sound. Consumers did not want to pay the additional costs and space required for the marginal improvements in realism. With the rise in popularity of home theater, however, multi-channel playback systems became popular, and many consumers were willing to tolerate the six to eight channels required in a home theater.

In addition to spatial realism, the playback of music must be subjectively free from noise, such as hiss or hum, to achieve realism. The compact disc (CD) provides about 90 decibels of dynamic range, which exceeds the 80 dB dynamic range of music as normally perceived in a concert hall. Audio equipment must be able to reproduce frequencies high enough and low enough to be realistic. The human hearing range, for healthy young persons, is 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz. Most adults can&#x27;t hear higher than 15,000 Hz. CDs are capable of reproducing frequencies as low as 0 Hz and as high as 22,050 Hz, making them adequate for reproducing the frequency range that most humans can hear. The equipment must also provide no noticeable distortion of the signal or emphasis or de-emphasis of any frequency in this frequency range.

== Modularity ==


&quot;Integrated&quot;, &quot;mini&quot;, or &quot;lifestyle&quot; systems (also known by the older terms &quot;music centre&quot; or &quot;midi system&quot;) contain one or more sources such as a CD player, a tuner, or a cassette tape deck together with a preamplifier and a power amplifier in one box. A limitation of an &quot;integrated&quot; system is that failure of any one component can possibly lead to the need to replace the entire unit, as components are not readily swapped in or out of a system merely by plugging and unplugging cables, and may not even have been made available by the manufacturer to allow piecemeal repairs.

Although some high-end audio manufacturers do produce integrated systems, such products are generally disparaged by audiophiles, who prefer to build a system from &quot;separates&quot; (or &quot;components&quot;), often with each item from a different manufacturer specialising in a particular component. This provides the most flexibility for piece-by-piece upgrades and repairs.

A preamplifier and a power amplifier in one box is called an &quot;integrated amplifier&quot;; with a tuner added, it is a &quot;receiver&quot;. A monophonic power amplifier is called a &quot;monoblock&quot; and is often used for powering a subwoofer. Other modules in the system may include components like cartridges, tonearms, hi-fi turntables, digital media players, DVD players that play a wide variety of discs including CDs, CD recorders, MiniDisc recorders, hi-fi videocassette recorders (VCRs) and reel-to-reel tape recorders. Signal modification equipment can include equalizers and noise-reduction systems.

This modularity allows the enthusiast to spend as little or as much as they want on a component to suit their specific needs, achieve a desired sound, and add components as desired. Also, failure of any component of an integrated system can render it unusable, while the unaffected components of a modular system may continue to function. A modular system introduces the complexity of cabling multiple components and often having different remote controls for each unit.

== Modern equipment ==

Some modern hi-fi equipment can be digitally connected using fiber optic TOSLINK cables, USB ports (including one to play digital audio files), or Wi-Fi support.

Another modern component is the &quot;music server&quot; consisting of one or more computer hard drives that hold music in the form of computer files. When the music is stored in an audio file format that is lossless such as FLAC, Monkey&#x27;s Audio or WMA Lossless, the computer playback of recorded audio can serve as an audiophile-quality source for a hi-fi system. There is now a push from certain streaming services to offer hi-fi services.

Streaming services typically have a modified dynamic range and possibly bit rates lower than audiophile standards. Tidal and others have launched a hi-fi tier that includes access to FLAC and Master Quality Authenticated studio masters for many tracks through the desktop version of the player. This integration is also available for high-end audio systems.

== See also ==
* Audio system measurements
* Comparison of analog and digital recording
* DIY audio
* Edwin Howard Armstrong 
* Entertainment center 
* Lo-fi music
* Wife acceptance factor
* Wi-Fi, a wireless term derived from hi-fi
== References ==
==Further reading==

== External links ==

* A Dictionary of Home Entertainment Terms</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26674" start="0" end="13" title="High fidelity" label="High fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q26674" start="34" end="39" title="High fidelity" label="hi-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26674" start="52" end="56" title="High fidelity" label="HiFi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="78" end="99" title="sound reproduction" label="reproduction of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035081" start="120" end="130" title="audiophile" label="audiophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888931" start="136" end="146" title="home audio" label="home audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q179448" start="207" end="212" title="noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="217" end="227" title="Distortion (music)" label="distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054694" start="261" end="279" title="frequency response" label="frequency response"/>
<link wikidata="Q351087" start="291" end="310" title="human hearing range" label="human hearing range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507298" start="366" end="371" title="lo-fi" label="lo-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="425" end="433" title="AM radio" label="AM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="555" end="572" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q297562" start="663" end="680" title="Leopold Stokowski" label="Leopold Stokowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q659181" start="689" end="711" title="Philadelphia Orchestra" label="Philadelphia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q337337" start="777" end="793" title="Academy of Music (Philadelphia)" label="Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="848" end="868" title="multitrack recording" label="multitrack recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="947" end="950" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="974" end="1012" title="Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation" label="Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="1033" end="1043" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="1169" end="1180" title="78-rpm disc" label="78-rpm disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q337050" start="1201" end="1213" title="Avery Fisher" label="Avery Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="1279" end="1288" title="acoustics" label="acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1430" end="1442" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586496" start="1444" end="1458" title="Harry F. Olson" label="Harry F. Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q544858" start="1854" end="1887" title="Reel-to-reel audio tape recording" label="Reel-to-reel audio tape recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="1971" end="1982" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="2064" end="2073" title="long play" label="long play"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="2091" end="2103" title="vinyl record" label="vinyl record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561855" start="2116" end="2129" title="surface noise" label="surface noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q923115" start="2159" end="2178" title="RIAA equalization" label="equalization curves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="2233" end="2248" title="Classical music" label="Classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850904" start="2264" end="2279" title="opinion leaders" label="opinion leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="2421" end="2431" title="turntables" label="turntables"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2454" end="2461" title="phonograph#" label="needles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="2464" end="2472" title="FM radio" label="FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="2564" end="2572" title="AM radio" label="AM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="2583" end="2592" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347355" start="2723" end="2733" title="distortion" label="distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="2741" end="2752" title="loudspeaker" label="loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505717" start="2772" end="2791" title="acoustic suspension" label="acoustic suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337507" start="2806" end="2820" title="Edgar Villchur" label="Edgar Villchur"/>
<link wikidata="Q705488" start="2825" end="2836" title="Henry Kloss" label="Henry Kloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="3240" end="3243" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="3329" end="3334" title="Decca Records" label="Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035081" start="3344" end="3354" title="Audiophile" label="Audiophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q399804" start="3470" end="3482" title="preamplifier" label="preamplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q758907" start="3485" end="3500" title="power amplifier" label="power amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="3854" end="3866" title="stereophonic" label="stereophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="4378" end="4389" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="4506" end="4517" title="solid state (electronics)" label="solid state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="4519" end="4529" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="4663" end="4666" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="FTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888931" start="4974" end="4986" title="music centre" label="music centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="5924" end="5941" title="audio engineering" label="audio engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q608510" start="6445" end="6456" title="Blinded experiment" label="blind tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q287654" start="6561" end="6569" title="ABX test" label="ABX test"/>
<link wikidata="Q944865" start="6987" end="6998" title="Transparency (data compression)" label="transparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498752" start="7382" end="7393" title="Stereophile" label="Stereophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519694" start="7410" end="7428" title="The Absolute Sound" label="The Absolute Sound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7476" end="7489" title="John Atkinson (music editor)" label="John Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437507" start="8188" end="8227" title="National Research Council (Canada)" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="8694" end="8706" title="Stereophonic" label="Stereophonic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8857" end="8865" title="auditory illusion#In music" label="illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q782526" start="8974" end="8992" title="quadraphonic sound" label="quadraphonic sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q864121" start="9137" end="9149" title="home theater" label="home theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="9443" end="9455" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="9479" end="9486" title="decibel" label="decibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161699" start="9491" end="9504" title="dynamic range" label="dynamic range"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="10050" end="10056" title="signal" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888931" start="10258" end="10270" title="music centre" label="music centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023100" start="10343" end="10352" title="CD player" label="CD player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544018" start="10356" end="10361" title="tuner (radio)" label="tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="10368" end="10381" title="cassette tape" label="cassette tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q399804" start="10403" end="10415" title="preamplifier" label="preamplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q758907" start="10422" end="10437" title="power amplifier" label="power amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348534" start="10801" end="10815" title="high-end audio" label="high-end audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035081" start="10903" end="10913" title="audiophile" label="audiophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q920419" start="11146" end="11153" title="upgrade" label="upgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614678" start="11236" end="11256" title="integrated amplifier" label="integrated amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="11298" end="11306" title="Receiver (radio)" label="receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q770289" start="11410" end="11419" title="subwoofer" label="subwoofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581044" start="11477" end="11487" title="magnetic cartridge" label="cartridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="11489" end="11496" title="tonearm" label="tonearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="11505" end="11514" title="turntable" label="turntable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567371" start="11517" end="11537" title="digital media player" label="digital media player"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="11540" end="11543" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="11596" end="11598" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492" start="11601" end="11612" title="CD recorder" label="CD recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q275079" start="11615" end="11623" title="MiniDisc" label="MiniDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q380616" start="11641" end="11663" title="videocassette recorder" label="videocassette recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q544858" start="11676" end="11702" title="reel-to-reel tape recorder" label="reel-to-reel tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="11747" end="11757" title="Equalization (audio)" label="equalizers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11762" end="11785" title="Noise reduction#In audio" label="noise-reduction systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q185091" start="12228" end="12242" title="remote control" label="remote control"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="12345" end="12356" title="fiber optic" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410364" start="12357" end="12364" title="TOSLINK" label="TOSLINK"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="12373" end="12376" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="12431" end="12436" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="12530" end="12538" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="12539" end="12549" title="hard drive" label="hard drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="12582" end="12595" title="computer file" label="computer file"/>
<link wikidata="Q682626" start="12629" end="12646" title="audio file format" label="audio file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q55542" start="12655" end="12663" title="lossless" label="lossless"/>
<link wikidata="Q219848" start="12672" end="12676" title="FLAC" label="FLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064017" start="12678" end="12697" title="Monkey&amp;#x27;s Audio" label="Monkey&amp;#x27;s Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194" start="12701" end="12713" title="WMA Lossless" label="WMA Lossless"/>
<link wikidata="Q19711013" start="13010" end="13015" title="Tidal (service)" label="Tidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906764" start="13087" end="13115" title="Master Quality Authenticated" label="Master Quality Authenticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819889" start="13271" end="13296" title="Audio system measurements" label="Audio system measurements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155818" start="13299" end="13341" title="Comparison of analog and digital recording" label="Comparison of analog and digital recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205178" start="13344" end="13353" title="DIY audio" label="DIY audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q333987" start="13356" end="13378" title="Edwin Howard Armstrong" label="Edwin Howard Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380479" start="13382" end="13402" title="Entertainment center" label="Entertainment center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507298" start="13406" end="13417" title="Lo-fi music" label="Lo-fi music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848635" start="13420" end="13442" title="Wife acceptance factor" label="Wife acceptance factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="13445" end="13450" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="13454" end="13462" title="wireless" label="wireless"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13625" wikidata="Q29281" url="?curid=13625" title="Holden">
<text>Holden, formerly known as General Motors-Holden, was an Australian subsidiary company of General Motors. Founded in Adelaide, South Australia, it was an automobile manufacturer, importer, and exporter that sold cars under its own marque in Australia. In its last three years, it switched entirely to importing cars. It was headquartered in Port Melbourne, with major industrial operations in the states of South Australia and Victoria. The 164-year-old company ceased trading at the end of 2020.

Holden&#x27;s primary products were its own models developed in-house, such as the Holden Commodore, Holden Caprice, and the Holden Ute. However, Holden had also offered badge-engineered models under sharing arrangements with Nissan, Suzuki, Toyota, Isuzu, and then GM subsidiaries Opel, Vauxhall and Chevrolet. The vehicle lineup had included models from GM Korea, GM Thailand, and GM North America. Holden had also distributed GM&#x27;s German Opel marque in Australia in 2012 and 2013.

Holden was founded in 1856 as a saddlery manufacturer in South Australia before moving into the automotive field in 1898. It became a subsidiary of the United States–based General Motors (GM) in 1931, when the company was renamed General Motors-Holden&#x27;s Ltd. It was renamed Holden Ltd in 1998 and adopted the name GM Holden Ltd in 2005.

Holden briefly owned assembly plants in New Zealand during the early 1990s. The plants had belonged to General Motors from 1926 until 1990 in an earlier and quite separate operation from GM&#x27;s Holden operations in Australia. Holden&#x27;s production became increasingly concentrated in South Australia and Victoria after World War II. However, Holden had factories in all five mainland states of Australia when GM took over in 1931, due to the combining of Holden and GM factories around the country under Holden management. In the postwar period, this decentralisation was slowly reduced and, by 1989, the consolidation of final assembly at Elizabeth in South Australia was largely completed, except for some operations that continued at Dandenong until 1994. Engine manufacturing was consolidated at Fishermans Bend, which was expanded to supply markets overseas.

Although Holden&#x27;s involvement in exports had fluctuated from the 1950s, the declining sales of large sedan cars in Australia led the company to look to international markets to increase profitability. In 2013, Holden revealed it received A$2.17 billion in federal government assistance in the past 12 years, the amount was much larger than expected. Holden blamed a strong Australian currency, high manufacturing costs and a small domestic market among the reasons for exit of local manufacturing. The Australian population also blamed GM&#x27;s consistent mishandling of rebadging Holden&#x27;s lineup leading to a lack of Australian identity and internal company competition, decreasing the brand recognition and desirability of Holden in its domestic market. This led to the announcement, on 11 December 2013, that Holden would cease vehicle and engine production by the end of 2017.

On 29 November 2016, engine production at the Fishermans Bend plant was shut down. On 20 October 2017, production of the last Holden designed Commodore ceased and the Elizabeth plant was shut down. Holden produced nearly 7.7 million vehicles. On 17 February 2020, General Motors announced that the Holden marque would be retired by 2021. On 30 October 2020, the GM Australia Design Studio at Fishermans Bend was shut down. Holden has been replaced by GM Specialty Vehicles (GMSV), which imports the Chevrolet Silverado and the Chevrolet Corvette. The parts supplier known as the Holden Trade Club was renamed GM Trade Parts. An extensive Holden service network continues to help maintain the many Holdens that remain in operation in Australia.

==History==
===Early history===
In 1852 James Alexander Holden emigrated to South Australia from Walsall, Staffordshire, U.K, and in 1856 established J. A. Holden &amp; Co., a saddlery business in Adelaide. In 1879 J. A. Holden&#x27;s eldest son Henry James Holden, became a partner and effectively managed the company. In 1885, German-born H. A. Frost joined the business as a junior partner and J. A. Holden &amp; Co became Holden &amp; Frost Ltd. Edward Holden, James&#x27; grandson, joined the firm in 1905 with an interest in automobiles. From there, the firm evolved through various partnerships, and in 1908, Holden &amp; Frost moved into the business of minor repairs to car upholstery. The company began to re-body older chassis using motor bodies produced by F. T. Hack and Co from 1914. Holden &amp; Frost mounted the body, and painted and trimmed it. The company began to produce complete motorcycle sidecar bodies after 1913. After 1917, wartime trade restrictions led the company to start full-scale production of vehicle body shells. H. J. Holden founded a new company in late 1917, and registered Holden&#x27;s Motor Body Builders Ltd (HMBB) on 25 February 1919, specialising in car bodies and using the former F. T. Hack &amp; Co facility at 400 King William Street in Adelaide before erecting a large four-storey factory on the site.

By 1923, HMBB were producing 12,000 units per year. During this time, HMBB assembled bodies for Ford Motor Company of Australia until its Geelong plant was completed. From 1924, HMBB became the exclusive supplier of car bodies for GM in Australia, with manufacturing taking place at the new Holden Woodville Plant (which was actually in the adjacent suburb of Cheltenham). These bodies were made to suit a number of chassis imported from manufacturers including Austin, Buick, Chevrolet, Cleveland, Dodge, Essex, Fiat, Hudson, Oakland, Oldsmobile, Overland, Reo, Studebaker and Willys-Knight.

In 1926, General Motors (Australia) Limited was established with assembly plants at Newstead, Queensland; Marrickville, New South Wales; City Road, Melbourne, Victoria; Birkenhead, South Australia; and Cottesloe, Western Australia using bodies produced by HMBB and imported complete knock down chassis. In 1930 alone, the still independent Woodville plant built bodies for Austin, Chrysler, DeSoto, Morris, Hillman, Humber, Hupmobile, and Willys-Overland, as well as GM cars. The last of this line of business was the assembly of Hillman Minx sedans in 1948. The Great Depression led to a substantial downturn in production by Holden, from 34,000 units annually in 1930 to just 1,651 units one year later. In 1931, GM purchased HMBB and merged it with General Motors (Australia) Pty Ltd to form General Motors-Holden&#x27;s Ltd (GM-H). Its acquisition of Holden allowed General Motors to inherit an Australian identity, which it used to cultivate nationalist appeal for the firm, largely through the use of public relations, a then novel form of business communication which was imported to Australia through the formation of General Motors (Australia) Limited. Throughout the 1920s, Holden also supplied 60 W-class tramcar bodies to the Melbourne &amp; Metropolitan Tramways Board, of which several examples have been preserved in both Australia and New Zealand.

=== 1940s ===

Holden&#x27;s second full-scale car factory, located in Fishermans Bend (Port Melbourne), was opened on 5 November 1936 by Prime Minister Joseph Lyons, with construction beginning in 1939 on a new plant in Pagewood, New South Wales. However, World War II delayed car production with efforts shifted to the construction of vehicle bodies, field guns, aircraft, and engines. Before the war ended, the Australian government took steps to encourage an Australian automotive industry. Both GM and Ford provided studies to the Australian government outlining the production of the first Australian-designed car. Ford&#x27;s proposal was the government&#x27;s first choice, but required substantial financial assistance. GM&#x27;s study was ultimately chosen because of its low level of government intervention. After the war, Holden returned to producing vehicle bodies, this time for Buick, Chevrolet, Pontiac, and Vauxhall. The Oldsmobile Ace was also produced from 1946 to 1948.

From here, Holden continued to pursue the goal of producing an Australian car. This involved compromise with GM, as Holden&#x27;s managing director, Laurence Hartnett, favoured development of a local design, while GM preferred to see an American design as the basis for &quot;Australia&#x27;s Own Car&quot;. In the end, the design was based on a previously rejected postwar Chevrolet proposal. The Holden was launched in 1948, creating long waiting lists extending through 1949 and beyond. The name &quot;Holden&quot; was chosen in honour of Sir Edward Holden, the company&#x27;s first chairman and grandson of J. A. Holden. Other names considered were &quot;GeM&quot;, &quot;Austral&quot;, &quot;Melba&quot;, &quot;Woomerah&quot;, &quot;Boomerang&quot;, &quot;Emu&quot;, and &quot;Canbra&quot;, a phonetic spelling of Canberra. Although officially designated &quot;48-215&quot;, the car was marketed simply as the &quot;Holden&quot;. The unofficial usage of the name &quot;FX&quot; originated within Holden, referring to the updated suspension on the 48–215 of 1953.

=== 1950s ===
During the 1950s, Holden dominated the Australian car market. GM invested heavily in production capacity, which allowed the company to meet increased postwar demand for motor cars. Less expensive, four-cylinder cars did not offer Holdens the ability to deal with rugged rural areas. Holden 48–215 sedans were produced in parallel with the 50-2106 coupé utility from 1951; the latter was known colloquially as the &quot;ute&quot; and became ubiquitous in Australian rural areas as the workhorse of choice. Production of both the utility and sedan continued with minor changes until 1953, when they were replaced by the facelifted FJ model, introducing a third panel van body style. The FJ was the first major change to the Holden since its 1948 introduction. Over time, it gained iconic status and remains one of Australia&#x27;s most recognisable automotive symbols. A new horizontally slatted grille dominated the front end of the FJ, which received various other trim and minor mechanical revisions. In 1954, Holden began exporting the FJ to New Zealand. Although little changed from the 48–215, marketing campaigns and price cuts kept FJ sales steady until a completely redesigned model was launched. At the 2005 Australian International Motor Show in Sydney, Holden paid homage to the FJ with the Efijy concept car. Commercial success underpinned the rise of Holden as a cultural icon, as the Holden car became synonymous with the &#x27;Australian way of life&#x27;, coming to symbolise the stability of post-war Australian capitalism.

Holden&#x27;s next model, the FE, launched in 1956, offered in a new station wagon body style dubbed &quot;Station Sedan&quot; in the company&#x27;s sales literature. In the same year, Holden commenced exports to Malaya, Thailand, and North Borneo. Strong sales continued in Australia, and Holden achieved a market share of more than 50% in 1958 with the revised FC model. This was the first Holden to be tested on the new Lang Lang Proving Ground in Lang Lang, Victoria. In 1957, Holden&#x27;s export markets grew to 17 countries, with new additions including Indonesia, Hong Kong, Singapore, Fiji, Sudan, the East Africa region, and South Africa. Indonesian market cars were assembled locally by P.T. Udatin. The opening of the Dandenong, Melbourne, production facility in 1956 brought further jobs; by 1959, Holden employed 19,000 workers country-wide. In 1959, complete knock-down assembly began in South Africa and Indonesia.

=== 1960s ===
In 1960, Holden introduced its third major new model, the FB. The car&#x27;s style was inspired by 1950s Chevrolets, with tailfins and a wrap-around windscreen with &quot;dog leg&quot; A-pillars. By the time it was introduced, many considered the appearance dated. Much of the motoring industry at the time noted that the adopted style did not translate well to the more compact Holden. The FB became the first Holden that was adapted for left-hand drive markets, enhancing its export potential, and as such was exported to New Caledonia, New Hebrides, the Philippines, and Hawaii.

In 1960, Ford unveiled the new Falcon in Australia, only months after its introduction in the United States. To Holden&#x27;s advantage, the Falcon was not durable, particularly in the front suspension, making it ill-suited for Australian conditions. In response to the Falcon, Holden introduced the facelifted EK series in 1961; the new model featured two-tone paintwork and optional Hydramatic automatic transmission. A restyled EJ series came in 1962, debuting the new luxury oriented Premier model. The EH update came a year later, bringing the new Red motor, providing better performance than the previous Grey motor. The HD series of 1965 had the introduction of the Powerglide automatic transmission. At the same time, an &quot;X2&quot; performance option with a more powerful version of the six-cylinder engine was made available. In 1966, the HR was introduced, including changes in the form of new front and rear styling and higher-capacity engines. More significantly, the HR fitted standard front seat belts; Holden thus became the first Australian automaker to provide the safety device as standard equipment across all models. This coincided with the completion of the production plant in Acacia Ridge, Queensland. By 1963, Holden was exporting cars to Africa, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, the Pacific Islands, and the Caribbean.

Holden began assembling the compact HA series Vauxhall Viva in 1964. This was superseded by the Holden Torana in 1967, a development of the Viva ending Vauxhall production in Australia. Holden offered the LC, a Torana with new styling, in 1969 with the availability of Holden&#x27;s six-cylinder engine. In the development days, the six-cylinder Torana was reserved for motor racing, but research had shown a business case existed for such a model. The LC Torana was the first application of Holden&#x27;s new three-speed Tri-Matic automatic transmission. This was the result of Holden&#x27;s A$16.5 million transformation of the Woodville, South Australia, factory for its production.

Holden&#x27;s association with the manufacture of Chevrolets and Pontiacs ended in 1968, coinciding with the year of Holden&#x27;s next major new model, the HK. This included Holden&#x27;s first V8 engine, a Chevrolet engine imported from Canada. Models based on the HK series included an extended-length prestige model, the Brougham; and a two-door coupé, the Monaro. The mainstream Holden Special was rebranded the Kingswood, and the basic fleet model, the Standard, became the Belmont. On 3 March 1969, Alexander Rhea, managing director of General Motors-Holden&#x27;s at the time, was joined by press photographers and the Federal Minister of Shipping and Transport, Ian Sinclair as the two men drove the two-millionth Holden, an HK Brougham, off the production line. This came just over half a decade since the one-millionth car, an EJ Premier sedan, rolled off the Dandenong line on 25 October 1962. Following the Chevrolet V8 fitted to the HK, the first Australian-designed and mass-produced V8, the Holden V8 engine debuted in the Hurricane concept of 1969 before fitment to facelifted HT model. This was available in two capacities: . Late in HT production, use of the new Tri-Matic automatic transmission, first seen in the LC Torana was phased in as Powerglide stock was exhausted, but Holden&#x27;s official line was that the HG of 1971 was the first full-sized Holden to receive it.

Despite the arrival of serious competitors—namely, the Ford Falcon, Chrysler Valiant, and Japanese cars—in the 1960s, Holden&#x27;s locally produced large six- and eight-cylinder cars remained Australia&#x27;s top-selling vehicles. Sales were boosted by exporting the Kingswood sedan, station wagon, and utility body styles to Indonesia, Trinidad and Tobago, Pakistan, the Philippines, and South Africa in complete knock-down form.

=== 1970s ===
Holden launched the new HQ series in 1971. At this time, the company was producing all of its passenger cars in Australia, and every model was of Australian design; however, by the end of the decade, Holden was producing cars based on overseas designs. The HQ was thoroughly re-engineered, featuring a perimeter frame and semi-monocoque (unibody) construction. Other firsts included an all-coil suspension and an extended wheelbase for station wagons, while the utilities and panel vans retained the traditional coil/leaf suspension configuration. The series included the new prestige Statesman brand, which also had a longer wheelbase, replacing the Brougham. The Statesman remains noteworthy because it was not marketed as a &quot;Holden&quot;, but rather a &quot;Statesman&quot;.

The HQ framework led to a new generation of two-door Monaros, and despite the introduction of the similar-sized competitors, the HQ range became the top-selling Holden of all time, with 485,650 units sold in three years; 14,558 units were exported and 72,290 CKD kits were constructed. The HQ series was facelifted in 1974 with the introduction of the HJ, heralding new front-panel styling and a revised rear fascia. This new bodywork was to remain, albeit with minor upgrades, through the HX and HZ series. Detuned engines adhering to government emission standards were brought in with the HX series, whilst the HZ brought considerably improved road handling and comfort with the introduction of radial-tuned suspension. As a result of GM&#x27;s toying with the Wankel rotary engine, as used by Mazda of Japan, an export agreement was initiated in 1975. This involved Holden exporting with powertrains, HJ, and later, HX series Premiers as the Mazda Roadpacer AP. Mazda then fitted these cars with the 13B rotary engine and three-speed automatic transmission. Production ended in 1977, after just 840 units sold.

Development of the Torana continued in with the larger mid-sized LH series released in 1974, offered only as a four-door sedan. The LH Torana was one of the few cars worldwide engineered to accommodate four-, six-, and eight-cylinder engines. This trend continued until Holden introduced the Sunbird in 1976, essentially the four-cylinder Torana with a new name. Designated LX, both the Sunbird and Torana introduced a three-door hatchback variant. A final UC update appeared in 1978. During its production run, the Torana achieved legendary racing success in Australia, achieving victories at the Mount Panorama Circuit in Bathurst, New South Wales.

In 1975, Holden introduced the compact Gemini, the Australian version of the &quot;T-car&quot;, based on the Opel Kadett C. The Gemini was an overseas design developed jointly with Isuzu, GM&#x27;s Japanese affiliate; and was powered by a 1.6-litre four-cylinder engine. Fast becoming a popular car, the Gemini rapidly attained sales leadership in its class, and the nameplate lived on until 1987.

Holden&#x27;s most popular car to date, the Commodore, was introduced in 1978 as the VB. The new family car was loosely based on the Opel Rekord E body shell, but with the front from the Opel Senator grafted to accommodate the larger Holden six-cylinder and V8 engines. Initially, the Commodore maintained Holden&#x27;s sales leadership in Australia. However, some of the compromises resulting from the adoption of a design intended for another market hampered the car&#x27;s acceptance. In particular, it was narrower than its predecessor and its Falcon rival, making it less comfortable for three rear-seat passengers. With the abandonment of left-hand drive markets, Holden exported almost 100,000 Commodores to markets such as New Zealand, Thailand, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Indonesia, Malta and Singapore.

During the 1970s, Holden ran an advertising jingle &quot;Football, Meat Pies, Kangaroos, and Holden cars&quot;, a localised version of the &quot;Baseball, Hot Dogs, Apple Pies, and Chevrolet&quot; jingle used by GM&#x27;s Chevrolet division in the United States.

Holden discontinued the Torana in 1979 and the Sunbird in 1980. After the 1978 introduction of the Commodore, the Torana became the &quot;in-between&quot; car, surrounded by the smaller and more economical Gemini and the larger, more sophisticated Commodore. The closest successor to the Torana was the Camira, released in 1982 as Australia&#x27;s version of GM&#x27;s medium-sized &quot;J-car&quot;.
=== 1980s ===
The 1980s were challenging for Holden and the Australian automotive industry. The Australian Government tried to revive the industry with the Button car plan, which encouraged car makers to focus on producing fewer models at higher, more economical volumes, and to export cars. The decade opened with the shut-down of the Pagewood, New South Wales production plant and introduction of the light commercial Rodeo, sourced from Isuzu in Japan. The Rodeo was available in both two- and four-wheel drive chassis cab models with a choice of petrol and diesel powerplants. The range was updated in 1988 with the TF series, based on the Isuzu TF. Other cars sourced from Isuzu during the 1980s were the four-wheel drive Jackaroo (1981), the Shuttle (1982) van and the Piazza (1986) three-door sports hatchback. The second generation Holden Gemini from 1985 was also based on an Isuzu design, although, its manufacture was undertaken in Australia.

In 1981, the Fishermans Bend engine plant began production of the Family II - part of a global engine programme for GM&#x27;s compact vehicles. The plant supplied the engine locally for the Camira model, and to export markets - primarily to GM&#x27;s plants in Europe for installation in Opel/Vauxhall vehicles.

While GM Australia&#x27;s commercial vehicle range had originally been mostly based on Bedford products, these had gradually been replaced by Isuzu products as the Bedford brand was being retired in Britain. This process began in the 1970s and by 1982 Holden&#x27;s commercial vehicle arm no longer offered any Bedford products.

The new Holden WB commercial vehicles and the Statesman WB limousines were introduced in 1980. However, the designs, based on the HQ and updated HJ, HX and HZ models from the 1970s were less competitive than similar models in Ford&#x27;s lineup. Thus, Holden abandoned those vehicle classes altogether in 1984. Sales of the Commodore also fell, with the effects of the 1979 energy crisis lessening, and for the first time the Commodore lost ground to the Ford Falcon. Sales in other segments also suffered when competition from Ford intensified, and other Australian manufacturers: Mitsubishi, Nissan and Toyota gained market share. When released in 1982, the Camira initially generated good sales, which later declined because buyers considered the 1.6-litre engine underpowered, and the car&#x27;s build and ride quality below-average. The Camira lasted just seven years, and contributed to Holden&#x27;s accumulated losses of over A$500 million by the mid-1980s.

In 1984, Holden introduced the VK Commodore, with significant styling changes from the previous VH. The Commodore was next updated in 1986 as the VL, which had new front and rear styling. Controversially, the VL was powered by the 3.0-litre Nissan RB30 six-cylinder engine and had a Nissan-built, electronically controlled four-speed automatic transmission. Holden even went to court in 1984 to stop local motoring magazine &quot;Wheels&quot; from reporting on the matter. The engine change was necessitated by the legal requirement that all new cars sold in Australia after 1986 had to consume unleaded petrol. Because it was unfeasible to convert the existing six-cylinder engine to run on unleaded fuel, the Nissan engine was chosen as the best engine available. However, changing currency exchange rates doubled the cost of the engine and transmission over the life of the VL. The decision to opt for a Japanese-made transmission led to the closure of the Woodville, South Australia assembly plant. Emboldened by the apparent sign of turnaround, GM paid off Holden&#x27;s mounted losses of A$780 million on 19 December 1986. At GM headquarters&#x27; request, Holden was then reorganised and recapitalised, separating the engine and car manufacturing divisions in the process. This involved the splitting of Holden into &quot;Holden&#x27;s Motor Company&quot; (HMC) and &quot;Holden&#x27;s Engine Company&quot; (HEC). For the most part, car bodies were now manufactured at Elizabeth, with engines as before, confined to the Fishermans Bend plant in Port Melbourne, Victoria. The engine manufacturing business was successful, building four-cylinder &quot;Family II&quot; engines for use in cars built overseas. The final phase of the Commodore&#x27;s recovery strategy involved the 1988 VN, a significantly wider model powered by the American-designed, Australian-assembled 3.8-litre Buick V6 engine.

Holden began to sell the subcompact Suzuki Swift-based Barina in 1985. The Barina was launched concurrently with the Suzuki-sourced Holden Drover, followed by the Scurry later on in 1985. In the previous year, Nissan Pulsar hatchbacks were rebadged as the Holden Astra, as a result of a deal with Nissan. This arrangement ceased in 1989 when Holden entered a new alliance with Toyota, forming a new company: United Australian Automobile Industries (UAAI). UAAI resulted in Holden selling rebadged versions of Toyota&#x27;s Corolla and Camry, as the Holden Nova and Apollo respectively, with Toyota re-branding the Commodore as the Lexcen.
=== 1990s ===
The company changed throughout the 1990s, increasing its Australian market share from 21 percent in 1991 to 28.2 percent in 1999. Besides manufacturing Australia&#x27;s best selling car, which was exported in significant numbers, Holden continued to export many locally produced engines to power cars made elsewhere. In this decade, Holden adopted a strategy of importing cars it needed to offer a full range of competitive vehicles. During 1998, General Motors-Holden&#x27;s Ltd name was shortened to &quot;Holden Ltd&quot;.

On 26 April 1990, GM&#x27;s New Zealand subsidiary Holden New Zealand announced that production at the assembly plant based in Trentham would be phased out and vehicles would be imported duty-free—this came after the 1984 closure of the Petone assembly line due to low output volumes. During the 1990s, Holden, other Australian automakers and trade unions pressured the Australian Government to halt the lowering of car import tariffs. By 1997, the federal government had already cut tariffs to 22.5 percent, from 57.5 percent ten years earlier; by 2000, a plan was formulated to reduce the tariffs to 15 percent. Holden was critical, saying that Australia&#x27;s population was not large enough, and that the changes could tarnish the local industry.

Holden reintroduced its defunct Statesman title in 1990—this time under the Holden marque, as the Statesman and Caprice. For 1991, Holden updated the Statesman and Caprice with a range of improvements, including the introduction of four-wheel anti-lock brakes (ABS); although, a rear-wheel system had been standard on the Statesman Caprice from March 1976. ABS was added to the short-wheelbase Commodore range in 1992. Another returning variant was the full-size utility, and on this occasion it was based on the Commodore. The VN Commodore received a major facelift in 1993 with the VR—compared to the VN, approximately 80 percent of the car model was new. Exterior changes resulted in a smoother overall body and a &quot;twin-kidney&quot; grille—a Commodore styling trait that remained until the 2002 VY model and, as of 2013, remains a permanent staple on HSV variants.

Holden introduced the all-new VT Commodore in 1997, the outcome of a A$600 million development programme that spanned more than five years. The new model featured a rounded exterior body shell, improved handling and many firsts for an Australian-built car. Also, a stronger body structure increased crash safety. The locally produced Buick-sourced V6 engine powered the Commodore range, as did the 5.0-litre Holden V8 engine, and was replaced in 1999 by the 5.7-litre &quot;LS&quot; unit.

The UAAI badge-engineered cars first introduced in 1989 sold in far fewer numbers than anticipated, but the Holden Commodore, Toyota Camry, and Corolla were all successful when sold under their original nameplates. The first generation Nova and the donor Corolla were produced at Holden&#x27;s Dandenong, Victoria facility until 1994. UAAI was dissolved in 1996, and Holden returned to selling only GM products. The Holden Astra and Vectra, both designed by Opel in Germany, replaced the Toyota-sourced Holden Nova and Apollo. This came after the 1994 introduction of the Opel Corsa replacing the already available Suzuki Swift as the source for the Holden Barina. Sales of the full-size Holden Suburban SUV sourced from Chevrolet commenced in 1998—lasting until 2001. Also in 1998, local assembly of the Vectra began at Elizabeth, South Australia. These cars were exported to Japan and Southeast Asia with Opel badges. However, the Vectra did not achieve sufficient sales in Australia to justify local assembly, and reverted to being fully imported in 2000.

=== 2000s ===
In the 1990s, Holden&#x27;s share of the Australian market surged and peaked at 27.5 percent in 2000 before declining to 15.2 percent in 2006. From March 2003, Holden no longer held the number one sales position in Australia, losing ground to Toyota. Commodore sales had peaked in 1998 at 94,642 vehicles and were relatively stable up to 2004 before going into a steady decline. Total Holden sales peaked in 2002 at 178,392 vehicles and were stable up to 2005 before declining for the rest of the decade and the next.

This downturn affected Holden&#x27;s profits; the company recorded a combined gain of A$842.9 million from 2002 to 2004, and a combined loss of A$290 million from 2005 to 2006. Factors contributing to the loss included the development of an all-new model, the strong Australian dollar and the cost of reducing the workforce at the Elizabeth plant, including the loss of 1,400 jobs after the closure of the third-shift assembly line in 2005, after two years in operation. Holden fared better in 2007, posting an A$6 million loss. This was followed by an A$70.2 million loss in the 2008, an A$210.6 million loss in 2009, and a profit of A$112 million in 2010. On 18 May 2005, &quot;Holden Ltd&quot; became &quot;GM Holden Ltd&quot;, coinciding with the resettling to the new Holden headquarters on 191 Salmon Street, Port Melbourne, Victoria.

Holden caused controversy in 2005 with their Holden Employee Pricing television advertisement, which ran from October to December 2005. The campaign publicised, &quot;for the first time ever, all Australians can enjoy the financial benefit of Holden Employee Pricing&quot;. However, this did not include a discounted dealer delivery fee and savings on factory fitted options and accessories that employees received. At the same time, employees were given a further discount of 25 to 29 percent on selected models.

Holden revived the Monaro coupe in 2001. Based on the Commodore VX architecture, the coupe attracted worldwide attention after being shown as a concept car at Australian auto shows. The VX Commodore received its first major update in 2002 with the VY series. A mildly facelifted VZ model launched in 2004, introducing the &quot;High Feature&quot; engine. This was built at the Fishermans Bend facility completed in 2003, with a maximum output of 900 engines per day. This has reportedly added A$5.2 billion to the Australian economy; exports account for about A$450 million alone. After the VZ, the &quot;High Feature&quot; engine powered the all-new Holden Commodore (VE). In contrast to previous models, the VE no longer used an Opel-sourced platform adapted both mechanically and in size, but was based on the Holden developed GM Zeta platform, that was earmarked to become a &quot;Global RWD Architecture&quot;, until plans were cancelled due to the 2007/08 global financial crisis.

Throughout the 1990s, Opel had also been the source of many Holden models. To increase profitability, Holden looked to the South Korean Daewoo brand for replacements after acquiring a 44.6 percent stake—worth US$251 million—in the company in 2002 as a representative of GM. This was increased to 50.9 percent in 2005, but when GM further increased its stake to 70.1 percent around the time of its 2009 Chapter 11 reorganisation, Holden&#x27;s interest was relinquished and transferred to another (undisclosed) part of GM.

The commencement of the Holden-branded Daewoo models began with the 2005 Holden Barina, which based on the Daewoo Kalos, replaced the Opel Corsa as the source of the Barina. In the same year, the Viva, based on the Daewoo Lacetti, replaced the entry-level Holden Astra Classic, although the new-generation Astra introduced in 2004 continued on. The Captiva crossover SUV came next in 2006. After discontinuing the Frontera and Jackaroo models in 2003, Holden was only left with one all-wheel drive model: the Adventra, a Commodore-based station wagon. The fourth model to be replaced with a South Korean alternative was the Vectra by the mid-size Epica in 2007. As a result of the split between GM and Isuzu, Holden lost the rights to use the &quot;Rodeo&quot; nameplate. Consequently, the Holden Rodeo was facelifted and relaunched as the Colorado in 2008.

Following Holden&#x27;s successful application for a A$149 million government grant to build a localised version of the Chevrolet Cruze in Australia from 2011, Holden in 2009 announced that it would initially import the small car unchanged from South Korea as the Holden Cruze. Following the government grant announcement, Kevin Rudd, Australia&#x27;s Prime Minister at the time, stated that production would support 600 new jobs at the Elizabeth facility; however, this failed to take into account Holden&#x27;s previous announcement, whereby 600 jobs would be shed when production of the &quot;Family II&quot; engine ceased in late 2009.

=== 2010s ===
In March 2012, Holden was given a $270 million lifeline by the Australian Federal Government (Labor Party of Australia) along with the South Australian and Victorian state governments. In return, Holden planned to inject over $1 billion into car manufacturing in Australia. They estimated the new investment package would return around $4 billion to the Australian economy and see GM Holden continue making cars in Australia until at least 2022.

In mid-2013, Holden sought a further A$265 million, in addition to the A$275 million that was already committed by the Federal, South Australian and Victorian governments to remain viable as a car manufacturer in Australia. A source close to Holden informed the &quot;Australian&quot; news publication that the car company is losing money on every vehicle that it produces and consequently initiated negotiations to reduce employee wages by up to A$200 per week to cut costs, following the announcement of 400 job cuts and an assembly line reduction of 65 (400 to 335) cars per day. From 2001 to 2012, Holden received over A$150 million a year in subsidy from Australian government. The subsidy from 2007 was more than Holden&#x27;s capital investment of the same period. From 2004, Holden was only able to make a profit in 2010 and 2011.

Industry Minister Kim Carr confirmed on 10 July 2013 that talks had been scheduled between the Australian government and Holden. On 13 August 2013, 1,700 employees at the Elizabeth plant in South Australia voted to accept a three-year wage freeze to decrease the chances of the production line&#x27;s closure in 2016. Holden&#x27;s ultimate survival, though, depended on continued negotiations with the Federal Government—to secure funding for the period from 2016 to 2022—and the final decision of the global headquarters in Detroit, US.

Following an unsuccessful attempt to secure the extra funding required from the new Liberal/National coalition government, on 11 December 2013, General Motors announced that Holden would cease engine and vehicle manufacturing operations in Australia by the end of 2017. As a result, 2,900 jobs would be lost over four years. Beyond 2017 Holden&#x27;s Australian presence would consist of a national sales company, a parts distribution centre and a global design studio.

In May 2014, GM reversed their decision to abandon the Lang Lang Proving Ground and decided to keep it as part of its engineering capability in Australia.

In 2015, Holden again began selling a range of Opel-derived cars comprising the Astra VXR and Insignia VXR (both based on the OPC models sold by Vauxhall) and Cascada. Later that year, Holden also announced plans to sell the European Astra and the South Korean Cruze alongside each other from 2017.

In December 2015, Belgian entrepreneur Guido Dumarey commenced negotiations to buy the Commodore manufacturing plant in Elizabeth, with a view to continue producing a rebadged Zeta-based premium range of rear and all-wheel drive vehicles for local and export sales. The proposal was met with doubt in South Australia, and it later came to nothing. On 20 October 2017, Holden ceased manufacturing vehicles in Australia with the closure of the Elizabeth plant. Afterwards, Holden became an importer of rebadged cars from various GM subsidiaries located in the United States, Canada, Germany, Thailand, and South Korea.

=== 2020s ===
On 17 February 2020, General Motors announced that the Holden brand would be retired by 2021, after GM stated it would no longer make right-hand drive vehicles globally, leaving the Australia and New Zealand market altogether. Holden produced nearly 7.7 million vehicles.

== Vehicles ==
;Holden-designed models
* Holden Standard (1948–1968)
* Holden Utility (1948–2017)
* Holden 48-215-FJ (1948–1956)
* Holden Panel Van (1953–1969)
* Holden FE-FC (1956–1960)
* Holden FB-EK (1960–1962)
* Holden Premier (1962–1968)
* Holden Special (1953–1968)
* Holden Brougham (1968–1971)
* Holden Sandman (1974–1980)
* Holden Camira (1982–1989)
* Holden Statesman/Caprice (1990–2017)
* Holden Commodore/Berlina/Calais (1978–2017)
* Holden Ute (2000-2017)
* Holden Belmont/Kingswood/Premier (1968–1984)
* Holden Monaro (1968–1977; 2001–2005)
* Holden Sunbird/Torana (1967–1980)
* Statesman (1971–1984)

;Chevrolet-based models
* Holden Astra Sedan (2017–2019)
* Holden Barina (2011–2018)
* Holden Colorado (2008–2020)
* Holden Colorado 7/Trailblazer (2012–2020)
* Holden Cruze (2009–2016)
* Holden Malibu (2013–2016)
* Holden Spark (2009–2020)
* Holden Suburban (1998–2001)
* Holden Trax (2013–2020)
* Holden Volt (2012–2015)
* Holden Equinox (2018–2020)

;Daewoo-based models
* Holden Barina (2005–2011)
* Holden Captiva (2006–2018)
* Holden Epica (2007–2011)
* Holden Viva (2005–2009)

;GMC-based models
* Holden Acadia (2018–2020)

;Isuzu-based models
* Holden Camira (1984–1987), only in New Zealand
* Holden Frontera (1995–2004)
* Holden Gemini (1975–1986)
* Holden Jackaroo/Monterey (1981–2002)
* Holden Piazza (1986–1988)
* Holden Rodeo (1981–2008)
* Holden Shuttle (1982–1990)

;Nissan-based models
* Holden Astra (1984–1989)

;Opel/Vauxhall-based models
* Holden Astra (1996–2009, 2015–2020)
* Holden Barina (1994–2005)
* Holden Calibra (1991–1998)
* Holden Cascada (2015–2017)
* Holden Combo (1996–2012)
* Holden Commodore (2018–2020)
* Holden Insignia (2015–2017)
* Holden Tigra (2005–2007)
* Holden Vectra (1997–2006)
* Holden Zafira (2001–2005)

;Suzuki-based models
* Holden Barina (1985–1994)
* Holden Cruze (2002–2006)
* Holden Drover
* Holden Scurry

;Toyota-based models
* Holden Apollo (1989–1996)
* Holden Nova (1989–1996)

==Driveline components==
;Inline-4 engines
* Holden Starfire motor (1978–1986)
* GM Family II engine (for Opel) (1981–2009)

;Inline-6 engines
* Holden straight-six motor (1948–1986)

;V6 engines 
* Holden 3800 (1988–2006)
* Holden AlloyTec (2004–2016)

;V8 engines
* Holden V8 engine (1968–2000)

;Transmissions
* Holden TriMatic (1970–1988)
* Holden manual transmission (1948–1986)

;Differentials
* Holden Banjo differential (1948–1984)
* Holden Salisbury differential (1968–1988)

== Corporate affairs and identity ==
Holden&#x27;s logo, of a lion holding a stone, was introduced in 1928. Holden&#x27;s Motor Body Builders appointed Rayner Hoff to design the emblem, which refers to a fable in which observations of lions rolling stones led to the invention of the wheel. With the 1948 launch of the 48–215, Holden revised its logo. It commissioned another redesign in 1972 to better represent the company. The emblem was reworked once more in 1995.

In 1987, Holden established Holden Special Vehicles (HSV) in partnership with Tom Walkinshaw, who primarily manufactured modified, high-performance Commodore variants. To further reinforce the brand, HSV introduced the HSV Dealer Team into the V8 Supercar fold in 2005 under the naming rights of Toll HSV Dealer Team.

In 2010, Holden sold vehicles across Australia through the Holden Dealer Network (310 authorised stores and 12 service centres), which employed more than 13,500 people. On 8 May 2015, Jeff Rolfs, Holden&#x27;s CFO, became interim chairman and managing director. Holden announced on 6 February 2015 that Mark Bernhard would return to Holden as chairman and managing director, the first Australian to hold the post in 25 years.

=== Exports ===
Holden began to export vehicles in 1954, sending the FJ to New Zealand. Exports to New Zealand continued, but to broaden their export potential, Holden began to cater their Commodore, Monaro and Statesman/Caprice models for both right- and left-hand drive markets. The Middle East was Holden&#x27;s largest export market, with the Commodore sold as the Chevrolet Lumina from 1998, and the Statesman from 1999 as the Chevrolet Caprice. Commodores were also sold as the Chevrolet Lumina in Brunei, Fiji and South Africa, and as the Chevrolet Omega in Brazil. Pontiac in North America also imported Commodore sedans from 2008 through to 2009 as the G8. The G8&#x27;s cessation was a consequence of GM&#x27;s Chapter 11 bankruptcy resulting in the demise of the Pontiac brand.

Sales of the Monaro began in 2003 to the Middle East as the Chevrolet Lumina Coupe. Later that year a modified version of the Monaro began selling in the United States (but not in Canada) as the Pontiac GTO, and under the Monaro name through Vauxhall dealerships in the United Kingdom. This arrangement continued through to 2006 when the car was discontinued. The long-wheelbase Statesman sales in the Chinese market as the Buick Royaum began in 2005, before being replaced in 2007 by the Statesman-based Buick Park Avenue. Statesman/Caprice exports to South Korea also began in 2005. These Korean models were sold as the Daewoo Statesman, and later as the Daewoo Veritas from 2008. Holden&#x27;s move into international markets proved profitable; export revenue increased from A$973 million in 1999 to just under $1.3 billion in 2006.

From 2011, the WM Caprice was exported to North America as the Chevrolet Caprice PPV, a version of the Caprice built exclusively for law enforcement in North America and sold only to police. From 2007, the HSV-based Commodore was exported to the United Kingdom as the Vauxhall VXR8.

In 2013, Chevrolet announced that exports of the Commodore would resume to North America in the form of the VF Commodore as the Chevrolet SS sedan for the 2014 model year. The Chevrolet SS Sedan was also imported to the United States (but again, not to Canada) for 2015 with only minor changes, notably the addition of Magnetic Ride Control suspension and a Tremec TR-6060 manual transmission. For the 2016 model year the SS sedan received a facelift based on the VF Series II Commodore unveiled in September 2015. In 2017, production of Holden&#x27;s last two American exports, the SS and the Caprice PPV was discontinued.

=== Leadership ===

*Edward Holden (1917–1934)
*Laurence Hartnett (1934–1946)
*Harold E. Bettle (1946–1953)
*Earl C. Daum (1953–1959)
*Harlow C. Gage (1959–1962)
*David L. Heglund (1962–1966)
*Max C. Wilson (1966–1968)
*Alexander D. Rhea (1968–1970)
*A. C. &quot;Bill&quot; Gibbs (1970–1973)
*Damon Martin (1973–1976)
*Charles S. &quot;Chuck&quot; Chapman (1976–1987)
*John G. Bagshaw (1987–1990)
*William J. Hamel (1990–1997)
*James R. Wiemels (1997–1999)
*Peter Hanenberger (1999–2003)
*Denny Mooney (2003–2007)
*Chris Gubbey (2007–2008)
*Mark Reuss (2008–2009)
*Alan Batey (2009–2010)
*Michael Devereux (2010–2014)
*Gerry Dorizas (2014–2014)
*Jeff Rolfs (Interim chairman and managing director) (2014–2015)
*Mark Bernhard (2015–2018)
*Dave Buttner (2018–2019)
*Kristian Aquilina (2019–2020) [Acting Chairman and Managing Director]

==Sales==

Whilst previously holding the number one position in Australian vehicle sales, Holden has sold progressively fewer cars during most of the 21st century, in part due to a large drop in Commodore sales.



== Motorsport ==
Holden has been involved with factory backed teams in Australian touring car racing since 1968. The main factory-backed teams have been the Holden Dealer Team (1969–1987), the Holden Racing Team (1990–2016) and Triple Eight Race Engineering (2017–2020). , Holden won the Bathurst 1000 30 times, more than any other manufacturer, and won the Australian Touring Car and Supercars Championship title 21 times. Brad Jones Racing, Erebus Motorsport, Matt Stone Racing, Tekno Autosports, Team 18 and Walkinshaw Andretti United also ran Holden Commodores in the 2021 Supercars Championship.

== See also ==
*&quot;The Death of Holden&quot;, a 2016 book
*List of Holden vehicles by nameplate
*Walkinshaw Performance

== Notes ==
== References ==
;Books
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

;Internet
:* Part One, Part Two, Part Three (PDF).
* Wagner, David Paul, Canowindra Motors Holden Museum. australiaforvisitors.com. Photographic record of this Holden museum that closed in 2016.

;Magazines
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Early history of Holden
* Trafalgar Holden Museum, Gippsland, Victoria</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29281" start="0" end="6" title="Holden" label="Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q29281" start="26" end="47" title="Holden" label="General Motors-Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="67" end="85" title="subsidiary company" label="subsidiary company"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="89" end="103" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="116" end="141" title="Adelaide, South Australia" label="Adelaide, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="153" end="176" title="automobile manufacturer" label="automobile manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="230" end="236" title="brand" label="marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623026" start="340" end="354" title="Port Melbourne" label="Port Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="406" end="421" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="426" end="434" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422924" start="580" end="596" title="Holden Commodore" label="Holden Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624389" start="598" end="612" title="Holden Caprice" label="Holden Caprice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624392" start="622" end="632" title="Holden Ute" label="Holden Ute"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="667" end="683" title="Badge engineering" label="badge-engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="723" end="729" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181642" start="731" end="737" title="Suzuki" label="Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="739" end="745" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q29803" start="747" end="752" title="Isuzu" label="Isuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="779" end="783" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q59187" start="785" end="793" title="Vauxhall Motors" label="Vauxhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="798" end="807" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q497193" start="853" end="861" title="GM Korea" label="GM Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192249" start="1019" end="1025" title="saddle" label="saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="1044" end="1059" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29281" start="1217" end="1249" title="Holden" label="General Motors-Holden&amp;#x27;s Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q29281" start="1266" end="1276" title="Holden" label="Holden Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q29281" start="1306" end="1319" title="Holden" label="GM Holden Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1655" end="1667" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="1720" end="1739" title="States and territories of Australia" label="states of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805262" start="1976" end="1985" title="Holden Elizabeth Plant" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159408" start="2073" end="2082" title="Dandenong" label="Dandenong"/>
<link wikidata="Q113540747" start="2136" end="2151" title="Holden Fishermans Bend Plant" label="Fishermans Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="2462" end="2480" title="Australian Government" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="2778" end="2787" title="rebadging" label="rebadging"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191405" start="3545" end="3566" title="GM Specialty Vehicles" label="GM Specialty Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q871329" start="3593" end="3612" title="Chevrolet Silverado" label="Chevrolet Silverado"/>
<link wikidata="Q60851987" start="3621" end="3639" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C8)" label="Chevrolet Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073613" start="3879" end="3901" title="James Alexander Holden" label="James Alexander Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q504530" start="3936" end="3943" title="Walsall" label="Walsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="4036" end="4044" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q21538937" start="4085" end="4103" title="Henry James Holden" label="Henry James Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073583" start="4180" end="4191" title="H. A. Frost" label="H. A. Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343479" start="4289" end="4302" title="Edward Holden" label="Edward Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412146" start="5102" end="5121" title="King William Street, Adelaide" label="King William Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436934" start="5288" end="5319" title="Ford Australia" label="Ford Motor Company of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q231765" start="5330" end="5337" title="Geelong" label="Geelong"/>
<link wikidata="Q105962723" start="5483" end="5505" title="Holden Woodville Plant" label="Holden Woodville Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090176" start="5552" end="5562" title="Cheltenham, South Australia" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="5608" end="5615" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q781156" start="5654" end="5660" title="Austin Motor Company" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27415" start="5662" end="5667" title="Buick" label="Buick"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="5669" end="5678" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100681" start="5680" end="5689" title="Cleveland (automobile)" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27564" start="5691" end="5696" title="Dodge" label="Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q568071" start="5698" end="5703" title="Essex (automobile)" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="5705" end="5709" title="Fiat Automobiles" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313428" start="5711" end="5717" title="Hudson Motor Car Company" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817947" start="5719" end="5726" title="Oakland Motor Car Company" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q204327" start="5728" end="5738" title="Oldsmobile" label="Oldsmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q616328" start="5740" end="5748" title="Overland Automobile" label="Overland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584348" start="5750" end="5753" title="Reo Motor Car Company" label="Reo"/>
<link wikidata="Q938876" start="5755" end="5765" title="Studebaker" label="Studebaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582319" start="5770" end="5783" title="Willys-Knight" label="Willys-Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935526" start="5870" end="5890" title="Newstead, Queensland" label="Newstead, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382582" start="5892" end="5921" title="Marrickville, New South Wales" label="Marrickville, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="5934" end="5953" title="Melbourne, Victoria" label="Melbourne, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916420" start="5955" end="5982" title="Birkenhead, South Australia" label="Birkenhead, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695963" start="5988" end="6016" title="Cottesloe, Western Australia" label="Cottesloe, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933280" start="6060" end="6079" title="complete knock down" label="complete knock down"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="6167" end="6175" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q27558" start="6177" end="6183" title="DeSoto (automobile)" label="DeSoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q776997" start="6185" end="6191" title="Morris Motors" label="Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544816" start="6193" end="6200" title="Hillman" label="Hillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636194" start="6202" end="6208" title="Humber Limited" label="Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638351" start="6210" end="6219" title="Hupmobile" label="Hupmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537825" start="6225" end="6240" title="Willys-Overland" label="Willys-Overland"/>
<link wikidata="Q29625928" start="6316" end="6328" title="Hillman Minx" label="Hillman Minx"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="6349" end="6365" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="6793" end="6809" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945093" start="6994" end="7001" title="W-class Melbourne tram" label="W-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811935" start="7024" end="7067" title="Melbourne &amp;amp; Metropolitan Tramways Board" label="Melbourne &amp;amp; Metropolitan Tramways Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q113540747" start="7222" end="7237" title="Holden Fishermans Bend Plant" label="Fishermans Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623026" start="7239" end="7253" title="Port Melbourne" label="Port Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="7289" end="7303" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q370966" start="7304" end="7316" title="Joseph Lyons" label="Joseph Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124351" start="7372" end="7380" title="Pagewood" label="Pagewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="7382" end="7397" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7408" end="7420" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018806" start="8090" end="8104" title="Oldsmobile Ace" label="Oldsmobile Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500638" start="8292" end="8309" title="Laurence Hartnett" label="Laurence Hartnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="8962" end="8970" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11286115" start="9009" end="9015" title="Holden 48-215" label="48-215"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178058" start="9573" end="9586" title="coupé utility" label="coupé utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779218" start="9855" end="9857" title="Holden FJ" label="FJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q357884" start="9885" end="9894" title="panel van" label="panel van"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151625" start="10442" end="10477" title="Australian International Motor Show" label="Australian International Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624343" start="10527" end="10532" title="Holden Efijy" label="Efijy"/>
<link wikidata="Q850270" start="10533" end="10544" title="concept car" label="concept car"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879489" start="10797" end="10799" title="Holden FE" label="FE"/>
<link wikidata="Q188886" start="10836" end="10849" title="station wagon" label="station wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="10980" end="10986" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147441" start="11002" end="11014" title="North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632909" start="11130" end="11132" title="Holden FC" label="FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532050" start="11190" end="11214" title="Lang Lang Proving Ground" label="Lang Lang Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804848" start="11218" end="11237" title="Lang Lang, Victoria" label="Lang Lang, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159408" start="11497" end="11506" title="Dandenong" label="Dandenong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="11508" end="11517" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563155" start="11771" end="11773" title="Holden FB" label="FB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361399" start="11835" end="11842" title="Car tailfin" label="tailfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930094" start="11898" end="11907" title="Pillar (car)" label="A-pillars"/>
<link wikidata="Q752431" start="12252" end="12264" title="New Hebrides" label="New Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363870" start="12327" end="12333" title="Ford Falcon (Australia)" label="Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920478" start="12607" end="12616" title="Holden EK" label="EK series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954217" start="12681" end="12691" title="Hydramatic" label="Hydramatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286927" start="12727" end="12736" title="Holden EJ" label="EJ series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624363" start="12784" end="12791" title="Holden Premier" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624341" start="12803" end="12805" title="Holden EH" label="EH"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879581" start="12849" end="12858" title="Holden Red motor" label="Red motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879581" start="12907" end="12917" title="Holden Grey motor" label="Grey motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624346" start="12923" end="12932" title="Holden HD" label="HD series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236706" start="12969" end="12979" title="Powerglide" label="Powerglide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624350" start="13148" end="13150" title="Holden HR" label="HR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670845" start="13499" end="13523" title="Acacia Ridge, Queensland" label="Acacia Ridge, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q946808" start="13673" end="13680" title="compact car" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511551" start="13691" end="13704" title="Vauxhall Viva (1963–1979)" label="Vauxhall Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q739622" start="13741" end="13754" title="Holden Torana" label="Holden Torana"/>
<link wikidata="Q40990" start="14397" end="14404" title="Pontiac (automobile)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624349" start="14489" end="14491" title="Holden HK" label="HK"/>
<link wikidata="Q341174" start="14527" end="14536" title="V8 engine" label="V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q913680" start="14657" end="14665" title="Holden Brougham" label="Brougham"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="14682" end="14687" title="coupé" label="coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q338724" start="14693" end="14699" title="Holden Monaro" label="Monaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q17189350" start="14716" end="14730" title="Holden Special" label="Holden Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450851" start="14749" end="14758" title="Holden Kingswood" label="Kingswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432007" start="14774" end="14785" title="fleet vehicle" label="fleet model"/>
<link wikidata="Q17189350" start="14791" end="14799" title="Holden Standard" label="Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014961" start="14838" end="14852" title="Alexander Rhea" label="Alexander Rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982908" start="15003" end="15015" title="Ian Sinclair" label="Ian Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879557" start="15339" end="15355" title="Holden V8 engine" label="Holden V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337662" start="15371" end="15380" title="Holden Hurricane" label="Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624351" start="15426" end="15434" title="Holden HT" label="HT model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088804" start="15797" end="15813" title="Chrysler Valiant" label="Chrysler Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12012915" start="16200" end="16202" title="Holden HQ" label="HQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960473" start="16498" end="16512" title="semi-monocoque" label="semi-monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586513" start="16761" end="16770" title="Statesman (automobile)" label="Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q637272" start="17312" end="17314" title="Holden HJ" label="HJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q182883" start="17723" end="17743" title="Wankel engine" label="Wankel rotary engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="17756" end="17761" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q609111" start="17851" end="17861" title="powertrain" label="powertrain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17889" end="17897" title="Holden Kingswood#HJ" label="Premiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110235" start="17905" end="17923" title="Mazda Roadpacer AP" label="Mazda Roadpacer AP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17963" end="17966" title="Mazda Wankel engine#AP" label="13B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010528" start="18130" end="18139" title="Mid-size car" label="mid-sized"/>
<link wikidata="Q739622" start="18367" end="18374" title="Holden Sunbird" label="Sunbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950645" start="18673" end="18695" title="Mount Panorama Circuit" label="Mount Panorama Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674962" start="18766" end="18772" title="Isuzu Gemini" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985253" start="18810" end="18815" title="GM T platform (RWD)" label="T-car"/>
<link wikidata="Q622959" start="18836" end="18847" title="Opel Kadett" label="Opel Kadett"/>
<link wikidata="Q263694" start="19211" end="19213" title="Holden Commodore VB" label="VB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069474" start="19259" end="19270" title="Opel Rekord" label="Opel Rekord"/>
<link wikidata="Q964775" start="19313" end="19325" title="Opel Senator" label="Opel Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q915531" start="20501" end="20507" title="Holden Camira" label="Camira"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513868" start="20586" end="20591" title="GM J platform" label="J-car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955803" start="20755" end="20770" title="Button car plan" label="Button car plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666883" start="21002" end="21018" title="light commercial vehicle" label="light commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624362" start="21019" end="21024" title="Holden Rodeo" label="Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024680" start="21113" end="21124" title="chassis cab" label="chassis cab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543717" start="21243" end="21251" title="Isuzu TF" label="Isuzu TF"/>
<link wikidata="Q689192" start="21326" end="21334" title="Isuzu Bighorn" label="Jackaroo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21347" end="21354" title="Isuzu Fargo#Holden Shuttle" label="Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674974" start="21374" end="21380" title="Isuzu Piazza" label="Piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q910129" start="21439" end="21452" title="Holden Gemini" label="Holden Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000836" start="21620" end="21629" title="GM Family II engine" label="Family II"/>
<link wikidata="Q507235" start="21954" end="21961" title="Bedford Vehicles" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q29803" start="22009" end="22014" title="Isuzu" label="Isuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624400" start="22205" end="22214" title="Holden WB" label="Holden WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586513" start="22243" end="22255" title="Statesman WB" label="Statesman WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624352" start="22346" end="22348" title="Holden HX" label="HX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456542" start="22353" end="22355" title="Holden HZ" label="HZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="22566" end="22584" title="1979 energy crisis" label="1979 energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939847" start="22779" end="22789" title="Mitsubishi Motors Australia" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="22791" end="22797" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="22802" end="22808" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q117261139" start="23195" end="23207" title="Holden Commodore (VK)" label="VK Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q615359" start="23260" end="23262" title="Holden Commodore (VH)" label="VH"/>
<link wikidata="Q917250" start="23310" end="23312" title="Holden Commodore (VL)" label="VL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23405" end="23416" title="Nissan RB engine#RB30" label="Nissan RB30"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992353" start="23594" end="23600" title="Wheels (magazine)" label="Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000836" start="24821" end="24830" title="Family II engine" label="Family II"/>
<link wikidata="Q917224" start="24953" end="24955" title="Holden Commodore (VN)" label="VN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986361" start="25050" end="25065" title="Buick V6 engine" label="Buick V6 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q750262" start="25104" end="25116" title="Suzuki Swift" label="Suzuki Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624340" start="25123" end="25129" title="Holden Barina" label="Barina"/>
<link wikidata="Q181642" start="25185" end="25191" title="Suzuki" label="Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25200" end="25213" title="Suzuki Jimny#SJ413/Samurai" label="Holden Drover"/>
<link wikidata="Q488761" start="25231" end="25237" title="Suzuki Carry" label="Scurry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993801" start="25278" end="25291" title="Nissan Pulsar" label="Nissan Pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030898" start="25324" end="25336" title="Holden Astra" label="Holden Astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887491" start="25476" end="25515" title="United Australian Automobile Industries" label="United Australian Automobile Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q243543" start="25591" end="25598" title="Toyota Corolla" label="Corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q500035" start="25603" end="25608" title="Toyota Camry" label="Camry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531455" start="25617" end="25628" title="Holden Nova" label="Holden Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514821" start="25633" end="25639" title="Holden Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879523" start="26299" end="26317" title="Holden New Zealand" label="Holden New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838497" start="26375" end="26383" title="Trentham, New Zealand" label="Trentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q120070" start="26485" end="26491" title="Petone" label="Petone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624389" start="27099" end="27120" title="Holden Caprice" label="Statesman and Caprice"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="27244" end="27260" title="Anti-lock braking system" label="anti-lock brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624393" start="27585" end="27587" title="Holden Commodore (VR)" label="VR"/>
<link wikidata="Q917477" start="27804" end="27806" title="Holden Commodore (VY)" label="VY"/>
<link wikidata="Q917230" start="27905" end="27917" title="Holden Commodore (VT)" label="VT Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="28223" end="28232" title="V6 engine" label="V6 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q724143" start="28349" end="28351" title="GM LS engine" label="LS"/>
<link wikidata="Q246644" start="28798" end="28804" title="Opel Vectra" label="Vectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="28823" end="28827" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q376916" start="28937" end="28947" title="Opel Corsa" label="Opel Corsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q859501" start="29053" end="29068" title="Holden Suburban" label="Holden Suburban"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="29069" end="29072" title="Sport utility vehicle" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q917236" start="31369" end="31381" title="Holden Commodore VX" label="Commodore VX"/>
<link wikidata="Q917214" start="31594" end="31596" title="Holden Commodore (VZ)" label="VZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756180" start="31643" end="31655" title="GM High Feature engine" label="High Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541682" start="31966" end="31987" title="Holden Commodore (VE)" label="Holden Commodore (VE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q632300" start="32059" end="32067" title="Automobile platform" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513915" start="32145" end="32161" title="GM Zeta platform" label="GM Zeta platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="32277" end="32300" title="global financial crisis" label="global financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q497193" start="32439" end="32445" title="GM Daewoo" label="Daewoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532041" start="32705" end="32730" title="General Motors Chapter 11 reorganization" label="Chapter 11 reorganisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q488154" start="32933" end="32945" title="Daewoo Kalos" label="Daewoo Kalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q493989" start="33041" end="33055" title="Daewoo Lacetti" label="Daewoo Lacetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q482542" start="33175" end="33182" title="Daewoo Winstorm" label="Captiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q875600" start="33183" end="33196" title="crossover SUV" label="crossover SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259323" start="33240" end="33248" title="Holden Frontera" label="Frontera"/>
<link wikidata="Q12211810" start="33308" end="33323" title="all-wheel drive" label="all-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422924" start="33335" end="33343" title="Holden Adventra" label="Adventra"/>
<link wikidata="Q495422" start="33473" end="33478" title="Daewoo Tosca" label="Epica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674944" start="33666" end="33674" title="Isuzu D-Max" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q494073" start="33805" end="33820" title="Chevrolet Cruze" label="Chevrolet Cruze"/>
<link wikidata="Q43135" start="34008" end="34018" title="Kevin Rudd" label="Kevin Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639334" start="35645" end="35653" title="Kim Carr" label="Kim Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q580068" start="36888" end="36900" title="Opel Insignia" label="Insignia VXR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025129" start="36953" end="36960" title="Opel Cascada" label="Cascada"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277637" start="37133" end="37146" title="Guido Dumarey" label="Guido Dumarey"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="37594" end="37602" title="Rebranding (automobile)" label="rebadged"/>
<link wikidata="Q17189350" start="38040" end="38055" title="Holden Special" label="Holden Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624392" start="38070" end="38084" title="Holden Ute" label="Holden Utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q11286115" start="38099" end="38112" title="Holden 48-215" label="Holden 48-215"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779218" start="38113" end="38115" title="Holden FJ" label="FJ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38130" end="38146" title="Holden Panel Van" label="Holden Panel Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879489" start="38161" end="38170" title="Holden FE" label="Holden FE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632909" start="38171" end="38173" title="Holden FC" label="FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563155" start="38188" end="38197" title="Holden FB" label="Holden FB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920478" start="38198" end="38200" title="Holden EK" label="EK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624363" start="38215" end="38229" title="Holden Premier" label="Holden Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q17189350" start="38244" end="38258" title="Holden Special" label="Holden Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q913680" start="38273" end="38288" title="Holden Brougham" label="Holden Brougham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299511" start="38303" end="38317" title="Holden Sandman" label="Holden Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q915531" start="38332" end="38345" title="Holden Camira" label="Holden Camira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624389" start="38360" end="38384" title="Holden Caprice" label="Holden Statesman/Caprice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422924" start="38399" end="38430" title="Holden Commodore" label="Holden Commodore/Berlina/Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624392" start="38445" end="38455" title="Holden Ute" label="Holden Ute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450851" start="38470" end="38502" title="Holden Kingswood" label="Holden Belmont/Kingswood/Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q338724" start="38517" end="38530" title="Holden Monaro" label="Holden Monaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q739622" start="38556" end="38577" title="Holden Torana" label="Holden Sunbird/Torana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586513" start="38592" end="38601" title="Statesman (automobile)" label="Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030898" start="38641" end="38653" title="Holden Astra" label="Holden Astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624340" start="38674" end="38687" title="Holden Barina" label="Holden Barina"/>
<link wikidata="Q21233198" start="38702" end="38717" title="Holden Colorado" label="Holden Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071321" start="38732" end="38761" title="Holden TrailBlazer" label="Holden Colorado 7/Trailblazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q494073" start="38776" end="38788" title="Chevrolet Cruze" label="Holden Cruze"/>
<link wikidata="Q287723" start="38803" end="38816" title="Chevrolet Malibu" label="Holden Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14515874" start="38831" end="38843" title="Chevrolet Spark" label="Holden Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q859501" start="38858" end="38873" title="Holden Suburban" label="Holden Suburban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071315" start="38888" end="38899" title="Holden Trax" label="Holden Trax"/>
<link wikidata="Q124572479" start="38914" end="38925" title="Holden Volt" label="Holden Volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071199" start="38940" end="38954" title="Holden Equinox" label="Holden Equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624340" start="38991" end="39004" title="Holden Barina" label="Holden Barina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624336" start="39019" end="39033" title="Holden Captiva" label="Holden Captiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q495422" start="39048" end="39060" title="Daewoo Tosca" label="Holden Epica"/>
<link wikidata="Q493989" start="39075" end="39086" title="Daewoo Lacetti" label="Holden Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q936505" start="39120" end="39133" title="Holden Acadia" label="Holden Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39169" end="39182" title="Holden Camira#JJ (New Zealand; 1984–1987)" label="Holden Camira"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259323" start="39218" end="39233" title="Holden Frontera" label="Holden Frontera"/>
<link wikidata="Q910129" start="39248" end="39261" title="Holden Gemini" label="Holden Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q689192" start="39276" end="39300" title="Isuzu Trooper" label="Holden Jackaroo/Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674974" start="39315" end="39328" title="Isuzu Piazza" label="Holden Piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624362" start="39343" end="39355" title="Holden Rodeo" label="Holden Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q633485" start="39370" end="39384" title="Holden Shuttle" label="Holden Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030898" start="39421" end="39433" title="Holden Astra" label="Holden Astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030898" start="39477" end="39489" title="Holden Astra" label="Holden Astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624340" start="39515" end="39528" title="Holden Barina" label="Holden Barina"/>
<link wikidata="Q466506" start="39543" end="39557" title="Holden Calibra" label="Holden Calibra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025129" start="39572" end="39586" title="Holden Cascada" label="Holden Cascada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136710" start="39601" end="39613" title="Holden Combo" label="Holden Combo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964138" start="39628" end="39644" title="Holden Commodore (ZB)" label="Holden Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q580068" start="39659" end="39674" title="Holden Insignia" label="Holden Insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q653699" start="39689" end="39701" title="Holden Tigra" label="Holden Tigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q246644" start="39716" end="39729" title="Holden Vectra" label="Holden Vectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q671495" start="39744" end="39757" title="Holden Zafira" label="Holden Zafira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624340" start="39794" end="39807" title="Holden Barina" label="Holden Barina"/>
<link wikidata="Q932329" start="39822" end="39834" title="Suzuki Ignis" label="Holden Cruze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410131" start="39849" end="39862" title="Holden Drover" label="Holden Drover"/>
<link wikidata="Q488761" start="39865" end="39878" title="Holden Scurry" label="Holden Scurry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514821" start="39903" end="39916" title="Holden Apollo" label="Holden Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531455" start="39931" end="39942" title="Holden Nova" label="Holden Nova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40001" end="40022" title="Holden straight-six motor#Starfire" label="Holden Starfire motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000836" start="40037" end="40056" title="GM Family II engine" label="GM Family II engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="40062" end="40066" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879581" start="40101" end="40126" title="Holden straight-six motor" label="Holden straight-six motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986361" start="40155" end="40166" title="Buick V6 engine" label="Holden 3800"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756180" start="40181" end="40196" title="GM High Feature engine" label="Holden AlloyTec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879557" start="40224" end="40240" title="Holden V8 engine" label="Holden V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29281" start="40271" end="40286" title="Holden TriMatic" label="Holden TriMatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q114714083" start="40358" end="40383" title="Holden Banjo differential" label="Holden Banjo differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q114714083" start="40398" end="40427" title="Holden Salisbury differential" label="Holden Salisbury differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299324" start="40593" end="40604" title="Rayner Hoff" label="Rayner Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624372" start="40939" end="40962" title="Holden Special Vehicles" label="Holden Special Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q540002" start="40989" end="41003" title="Tom Walkinshaw" label="Tom Walkinshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051556" start="41130" end="41145" title="HSV Dealer Team" label="HSV Dealer Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q664833" start="42026" end="42042" title="Chevrolet Lumina" label="Chevrolet Lumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q740890" start="42089" end="42106" title="Chevrolet Caprice" label="Chevrolet Caprice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071252" start="42203" end="42218" title="Chevrolet Omega" label="Chevrolet Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q251986" start="42319" end="42321" title="Pontiac G8" label="G8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339720" start="42642" end="42653" title="Pontiac GTO" label="Pontiac GTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q59187" start="42689" end="42697" title="Vauxhall Motors" label="Vauxhall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42952" end="42969" title="Buick Park Avenue#Third generation (2007–2012)" label="Buick Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624389" start="43069" end="43085" title="Daewoo Statesman" label="Daewoo Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q490781" start="43104" end="43118" title="Daewoo Veritas" label="Daewoo Veritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q490781" start="43299" end="43309" title="Holden Caprice (WM)" label="WM Caprice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917466" start="43552" end="43565" title="Vauxhall VXR8" label="Vauxhall VXR8"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834628" start="43926" end="43932" title="Transmission Technologies Corporation" label="Tremec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838095" start="43933" end="43940" title="Tremec TR-6060 transmission" label="TR-6060"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343479" start="44214" end="44227" title="Edward Holden" label="Edward Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500638" start="44241" end="44258" title="Laurence Hartnett" label="Laurence Hartnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014961" start="44413" end="44430" title="Alexander Rhea" label="Alexander D. Rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174506" start="44651" end="44668" title="Peter Hanenberger" label="Peter Hanenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259209" start="44682" end="44694" title="Denny Mooney" label="Denny Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106737" start="44708" end="44720" title="Chris Gubbey" label="Chris Gubbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735139" start="44734" end="44744" title="Mark Reuss" label="Mark Reuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879468" start="45400" end="45418" title="Holden Dealer Team" label="Holden Dealer Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962546" start="45436" end="45454" title="Walkinshaw Andretti United" label="Holden Racing Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051779" start="45471" end="45500" title="Triple Eight Race Engineering" label="Triple Eight Race Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983921" start="45531" end="45544" title="Bathurst 1000" label="Bathurst 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824760" start="45601" end="45623" title="Australian Touring Car Championship" label="Australian Touring Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="45628" end="45650" title="Supercars Championship" label="Supercars Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954043" start="45667" end="45684" title="Brad Jones Racing" label="Brad Jones Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385355" start="45686" end="45703" title="Erebus Motorsport" label="Erebus Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165807" start="45705" end="45722" title="Matt Stone Racing" label="Matt Stone Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695465" start="45724" end="45740" title="Tekno Autosports" label="Tekno Autosports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085498" start="45742" end="45749" title="Team 18" label="Team 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962546" start="45754" end="45780" title="Walkinshaw Andretti United" label="Walkinshaw Andretti United"/>
<link wikidata="Q85737951" start="45815" end="45842" title="2021 Supercars Championship" label="2021 Supercars Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082680" start="45867" end="45886" title="The Death of Holden" label="The Death of Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573318" start="45907" end="45943" title="List of Holden vehicles by nameplate" label="List of Holden vehicles by nameplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962545" start="45945" end="45967" title="Walkinshaw Performance" label="Walkinshaw Performance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13627" wikidata="Q687282" url="?curid=13627" title="Hank Greenberg">
<text>Henry Benjamin Greenberg (January 1, 1911 – September 4, 1986), nicknamed &quot;Hammerin&#x27; Hank&quot;, &quot;Hankus Pankus&quot;, and &quot;the Hebrew Hammer&quot;, was an American professional baseball player and team executive. He played in Major League Baseball (MLB), primarily for the Detroit Tigers as a first baseman in the 1930s and 1940s. A member of the Baseball Hall of Fame and a two-time Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award winner, he was one of the premier power hitters of his generation and is widely considered one of the greatest sluggers in baseball history.

Greenberg played the first twelve of his 13 major league seasons for Detroit; with the Tigers, he was an All-Star for four seasons and was named the American League (AL) Most Valuable Player in 1935 and 1940. He had a batting average over .300 in eight seasons, and won two World Series championships with the Tigers ( and ). He was the AL home run leader four times and his 58 home runs for the Tigers in 1938 equaled Jimmie Foxx&#x27;s 1932 mark for the most in one season by anyone other than Babe Ruth, and tied Foxx for the most home runs between Ruth&#x27;s record 60 in 1927 and Roger Maris&#x27; record 61 in 1961. Greenberg was the first major league player to hit 25 or more home runs in a season in each league, and remains the AL record-holder for most runs batted in in a single season by a right-handed batter.

When the United States joined World War II, Greenberg was the first major leaguer to join the armed forces; he spent 47 months in military service, more than any other major league player, all of which took place during what would have been prime years in his major league career. Like many players who served in WWII, his career statistics suffered because of the war and would have certainly been higher had he not served in the armed services during wartime. In 1947, Greenberg signed a contract for a record $85,000 salary before being sold to the Pittsburgh Pirates, where he played his final MLB season that year. After retiring from playing, Greenberg continued to work in baseball as a team executive for the Cleveland Indians and Chicago White Sox.

Greenberg was the first Jewish superstar in American team sports. He attracted national attention in 1934 in the middle of a pennant race when he grappled with the decision of whether or not to play baseball on the Jewish High Holy Days; after consultation with his rabbi, he decided to play on Rosh Hashanah, but refused to play on Yom Kippur, instead spending the day at the synagogue. Having endured his share of antisemitic abuse in his career, Greenberg was one of the few opposing players to publicly welcome African-American player Jackie Robinson to the major leagues in 1947.

==Early life==
Greenberg was born on January 1, 1911, in Greenwich Village, New York City, to Romanian Jewish immigrant parents from Bucharest, Sarah (née Schwartz) (1881–1951) and David Greenberg (1883–1969). He was the third of four children and had two brothers, Ben (1906–1994) and Joe (1915–2001), and a sister, Lillian (1907–1989). His parents had originally wanted to name him &quot;Hyman&quot;; however, the name on his birth certificate was erroneously listed as &quot;Henry&quot;.

The family owned a successful cloth-shrinking plant in New York. Eventually, they moved from Greenwich Village to the Bronx where Greenberg attended James Monroe High School. There, Greenberg was an outstanding all-around athlete and was bestowed with the long-standing nickname of &quot;Bruggy&quot; by his basketball coach. His preferred sport was baseball, and his preferred position was first base. However, his best sport was basketball and he helped the high school basketball team win the city championship. Greenberg also excelled at soccer and track and field.

In 1929, the 18-year-old Greenberg was recruited by the New York Yankees, who already had Lou Gehrig at first base. As first base was already taken on the Yankee team, Greenberg turned down the Yankees&#x27; offer and instead attended New York University on an athletic scholarship; there, he was a member of Sigma Alpha Mu. During this time, he also had a tryout with the New York Giants; Giants manager John McGraw, however, was not impressed by the first baseman. Hence, after his freshman year ended, Greenberg signed with the Detroit Tigers for $9,000 ($ today).

==Professional career==
===Minor leagues===
Greenberg played minor league baseball for three years. He played 17 games in 1930 for the Hartford Senators of the Eastern League before playing the remainder of the year with the Raleigh Capitals of the Piedmont League, hitting .314 with 19 home runs. In 1931, he played for the Evansville Hubs in the Illinois–Indiana–Iowa League, hitting .318 with 15 home runs and 85 runs batted in. In 1932, the Beaumont Exporters in the Texas League, he hit 39 homers with 131 RBIs, winning the league&#x27;s Most Valuable Player award, and leading Beaumont to the Texas League title.

===Major leagues===
====Early years====
On September 14, 1930, Greenberg made his major league debut as a pinch hitter against the New York Yankees. It was the only game he appeared in that year but, as a result, made him the youngest player (19) to appear in the major leagues in 1930. It was another three years before he rejoined the majors. In 1933, for the Tigers, Greenberg hit .301 with 87 runs batted in. At the same time, he was third in the league in strikeouts (78).

In 1934, his second season in the majors, Greenberg hit .339 and helped the Tigers reach their first World Series in 25 years. He led the league in doubles, with 63 (the fourth-highest all-time in a single season), and extra-base hits (96). Additionally, he was third in the AL in slugging percentage (.600) – behind Jimmie Foxx and Lou Gehrig, but ahead of Babe Ruth – and in RBIs (139), sixth in batting average (.339), seventh in home runs (26), and ninth in on-base percentage (.404).

Late in the 1934 season, he announced that he would not play on September 10, which was Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year, or on September 19, the Day of Atonement, Yom Kippur. Detroit fans grumbled at the decision, however, with one reportedly saying, &quot;Rosh Hashanah comes every year but the Tigers haven&#x27;t won the pennant since 1909.&quot; As a result, Greenberg did considerable soul-searching, and discussed the matter with his rabbi and his father; finally he relented and agreed to play on Rosh Hashanah, but stuck with his decision not to play on Yom Kippur. Dramatically, Greenberg hit two home runs in a 2–1 Tigers victory over the Red Sox on Rosh Hashanah. The next day, the &quot;Detroit Free Press&quot; ran the Hebrew lettering for &quot;Happy New Year&quot; across its front page.

Columnist and poet Edgar A. Guest expressed the general opinion in a poem titled &quot;Came Yom Kippur: Speaking of Greenberg&quot;, in which he used the Irish (and thus Catholic) names Murphy and Mulroney. The poem, published in the &quot;Detroit Free Press&quot;, ends with the lines:

The Detroit press was not so kind regarding the Yom Kippur decision, nor were many fans, but Greenberg in his autobiography recalled that he received a standing ovation from congregants at Congregation Shaarey Zedek when he arrived. With Greenberg absent from the lineup, the Tigers lost to the New York Yankees 5–2. They went on to face the St. Louis Cardinals in the 1934 World Series, losing in seven games against the &quot;Gashouse Gang&quot;.

In 1935, Greenberg led the league in RBIs (168), total bases (389), and extra base hits (98), tied Foxx for the AL title in home runs (36), was 2nd in the league in doubles (46), slugging percentage (.628), was 3rd in the league in triples (16), and in runs scored (121), 6th in on-base percentage (.411) and walks (87), and was 7th in batting average (.328). He was unanimously voted as the Most Valuable Player in the American League. By the All-Star break that season, Greenberg had hit 25 home runs and set an MLB record (still standing) of 103 RBIs, but was not selected to the AL All-Star roster; one reason was that AL manager Mickey Cochrane had put himself on the All-Star roster despite eventually not playing in the game.

That season, Greenberg led the Tigers to another pennant. However, during Game 2, he sprained his wrist and was sidelined for the remainder of the series as the Tigers won their first World Series title.

In April 1936, Greenberg re-injured his wrist in a collision with Jake Powell of the Washington Senators and did not play the remainder of the season. He finished the season with 16 hits, 1 home run, and 15 RBIs in 12 games.

In 1937, Greenberg recovered from his injury and was voted to the AL All-Star roster, but did not play. On September 19, 1937, he hit the first home run into the center-field bleachers at Yankee Stadium. He led the AL by driving in 184 runs (third all-time, behind Hack Wilson in 1930 and Lou Gehrig in 1931), and in extra-base hits (103), while batting .337 with 200 hits. He was second in the league in home runs (40), doubles (49), total bases (397), slugging percentage (.668), and walks (102), third in on-base percentage (.436), and seventh in batting average (.337). Greenberg came in third in the vote for MVP, behind teammate Charlie Gehringer and Joe DiMaggio.

A prodigious home run hitter, Greenberg narrowly missed breaking Babe Ruth&#x27;s single-season home run record in 1938, when he hit 58 home runs, leading the league for the second time. That year, he had 11 games with multiple home runs, a new major league record. Greenberg matched what was then the single-season home run record by a right-handed batter, (Jimmie Foxx, 1932); the mark stood for 66 years until it was broken by Sammy Sosa and Mark McGwire in 1998. Greenberg also had a 59th home run washed away in a rainout. It has been long speculated that Greenberg was intentionally walked late in the season to prevent him from breaking Ruth&#x27;s record, but Greenberg dismissed this speculation, calling it &quot;crazy stories&quot;. Howard Megdal has calculated that in September 1938, Greenberg was walked in over 20% of his plate appearances, above his average for the season. Baseball historian Ron Kaplan, while not dismissing antisemitism&#x27;s role in Greenberg&#x27;s decreased home run rate, states that there was nothing different in the way Greenberg was pitched to in the final days of the 1938 season.

Greenberg was again voted to the AL All-Star roster in 1938, but because he was not named to the 1935 AL All-Star roster and was benched in the 1937 game, he declined to accept a starting position on the 1938 AL team and did not play (the NL won 4–1). He led the league in runs scored (144) and at-bats per home run (9.6), tied for the AL lead in walks (119), was second in RBIs (146), slugging percentage (.683), and total bases (380), and third in OBP (.438) and set a still-standing major league record of 39 homers in his home park, the newly re-configured Briggs Stadium. He also set a major-league record with 11 multiple-home run games and came in third in the vote for MVP, behind Jimmie Foxx and Bill Dickey.

In 1939, Greenberg was voted to the AL All-Star roster for the third year in a row and was a starter at first base, and singled and walked in four at-bats (AL won 3–1). He finished second in the AL in home runs (33) and strikeouts (95), third in doubles (42) and slugging percentage (.622), fourth in RBIs (112), sixth in walks (91), and ninth in on-base percentage (.420).

After the 1939 season ended, Greenberg was asked by general manager Jack Zeller to take a salary cut of $5,000 ($ today) as a result of his off-year in power and run production. He was asked to move from first base to left field to accommodate Rudy York, who was one of the best young hitters of his generation; York was tried at catcher, third baseman, and outfielder and proved to be a defensive liability at each position. Greenberg in turn, demanded a $10,000 bonus if he mastered left field, insisting &quot;he&quot; was the one taking the risk in learning a new position. Greenberg received his bonus at the end of spring training.

In 1940, Greenberg switched from playing the first base position to the left field position. For the fourth consecutive time, he was voted by the season&#x27;s American All-Star team manager Joe McCarthy to the AL All-Star team. In the bottom of the sixth inning, Greenberg and Lou Finney were sent into the game to replace right fielder Charlie Keller and left fielder Ted Williams, with Greenberg playing in left field and Finney in right field. Greenberg batted twice in the game and fouled out to the catcher twice. The NL won the game 4–0, the first All-Star Game shutout.

That season, Greenberg led the AL in home runs for the third time in six years with 41; in RBIs (150), doubles (50), total bases (384), extra-base hits (99), at-bats per home run (14.0), and slugging percentage (.670; 44 points ahead of Joe DiMaggio). Greenberg finished second in the league to Williams in runs scored (129) and OBP (.433), all while batting .340 (fifth-best in the AL). He also led the Tigers to the AL pennant, and won his second AL MVP award, becoming the first player in major-league history to win an MVP award at two different playing positions. However, the Tigers subsequently lost the 1940 World Series against the Cincinnati Reds in seven games.

Greenberg admitted in his autobiography after his career ended that he had taken part in sign stealing in September 1940 season, which was inspired by teammates Tommy Bridges and Pinky Higgins, who noticed that the new rifle they used for their hunt had a telescopic lens that could read signs when in the stands in the outfield. He also said that sign stealing was going on in the 1948 Cleveland Indians and the 1959 Chicago White Sox teams.

====World War II service====
On October 16, 1940, Greenberg became the first American League player to register for the nation&#x27;s first peacetime draft. In the spring of 1941, the Detroit draft board initially classified Greenberg as 4F for &quot;flat feet&quot; after his first physical for military service, and he was recommended for light duty. The rumors that he had bribed the board, and concern that he would be likened to Jack Dempsey (who had received negative publicity for failure to serve in World War I), led Greenberg to request to be reexamined. On April 18, he was found fit for regular military service and was reclassified.

On May 7, 1941, he was inducted into the U.S. Army after playing left field in 19 games, and reported to Fort Custer at Battle Creek, Michigan. His salary was cut from $55,000 ($ today) a year to $21 ($ today) a month. In November, while serving as an anti-tank gunner, he was promoted to sergeant, but was honorably discharged on December 5 (the United States Congress released men aged 28 years and older from service), two days before Japan bombed Pearl Harbor.

After the bombing of Pearl Harbor and the United States officially joining the war effort, Greenberg re-enlisted as a sergeant on February 1, 1942, and volunteered for service in the Army Air Forces, becoming the first major league player to do so. He graduated from Officer Candidate School and was commissioned as a first lieutenant in the Air Corps (the new &quot;Air Force&quot; service retained the old name for its own logistics and training elements) and was assigned to the Physical Education Program.

In February 1944, he was sent to the U.S. Army Special Services school. Promoted to captain, he requested overseas duty later that year and served in the China-Burma-India Theater for over six months, scouting locations for B-29 bomber bases and was a physical training officer with the 58th Bomber Wing. He was a Special Services officer of the 20th Bomber Command, 20th Air Force in China when it began bombing Japan on June 15. He was ordered to New York, and in late 1944, to Richmond, Virginia. Greenberg served 47 months, the longest of any major league player.

====Return to baseball====
Greenberg remained in military uniform until he was placed on the military inactive list and discharged from the U.S. Army on June 14, 1945. He was the first major league player to return to the majors after the war. In his first game back on July 1, he hit a home run. The 1945 All-Star Game, scheduled for July 10, had been officially cancelled on April 24 and Major League Baseball did not name All-Stars that season due to strict travel restrictions in place during the last days of the war. In place of the All-Star Game, seven interleague games were played on July 9 and 10 to benefit the American Red Cross and the War Relief fund. An Associated Press All-Star roster was named for the AL and NL by a group of their sportswriters that included Greenberg as one of the All-Stars.

Greenberg, who played left field in 72 games and batted .311 in 1945, helped lead the Tigers to a come-from-behind American League pennant, clinching it with a dramatic grand slam home run in the ninth inning on the final day of the season against the St. Louis Browns, avoiding a one-game playoff against the now-second-place Washington Senators. The Tigers went on to beat the Cubs in the 1945 World Series in seven games. Greenberg hit two of the only three home runs hit in that World Series, with Phil Cavarretta hitting one for the Cubs in Game 1. Greenberg homered in Game 2, where he batted in three runs in a 4–1 Tigers win, and hit a two-run homer in in the eighth inning of Game 6 that tied the score 8–8; the Cubs went on to win that game with a run in the bottom of the 12th.

In 1946, he returned to peak form and playing at first base. He led the AL in home runs (44) and RBIs (127), both for the fourth time. He was second in slugging percentage (.604) and total bases (316) behind Ted Williams.

In 1947, Greenberg and the Tigers had a lengthy salary dispute. When Greenberg decided to retire rather than play for less, Detroit sold his contract to the Pittsburgh Pirates. To persuade him not to retire, Pittsburgh made Greenberg the first baseball player to make $100,000 in a season as pure salary. Team co-owner Bing Crosby recorded a song, &quot;Goodbye, Mr. Ball, Goodbye&quot; with Groucho Marx and Greenberg to celebrate Greenberg&#x27;s arrival. The Pirates also reduced the size of Forbes Field&#x27;s cavernous left field, renaming the section &quot;Greenberg Gardens&quot; to accommodate Greenberg&#x27;s pull-hitting style.

Greenberg played first base for the Pirates in 1947 and his time there coincided with the arrival of Jackie Robinson in the Major Leagues. He was one of the few opposing players to publicly welcome Robinson to the majors at a time when most opposing players were openly hostile. Greenberg himself had faced hostilities from opposing players and spectators who often shouted antisemitic slurs at him during games and, hence, knew what Robinson was going through. During a game against the Brooklyn Dodgers, he collided with Robinson while covering first base. Afterwards, Greenberg asked if Robinson was alright and encouraged him to &quot;Stick in there. You’re doing fine. Keep your chin up.&quot; Robinson later praised Greenberg, saying, &quot;Class tells. It sticks out all over Mr. Greenberg.&quot;

That year he also had a chance to mentor a young future Hall-of-Famer, the 24-year-old Ralph Kiner. Greenberg was impressed by the rookie, later saying of him, &quot;Ralph had a natural home run swing. All he needed was somebody to teach him the value of hard work and self-discipline. Early in the morning on off-days, every chance we got, we worked on hitting.&quot; Kiner hit 51 home runs that year to lead the National League and ended his career with 369 home runs, eventually being elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame.

In his final season of 1947, Greenberg tied for the league lead in walks with 104, with a .408 on-base percentage and finished eighth in the league in home runs and tenth in slugging percentage. Greenberg became the first major league player to hit 25 or more home runs in a season in each league. Despite still being productive, Greenberg decided to retire as a player to take a front-office post with the Cleveland Indians. No player had ever retired after a final season in which they hit so many home runs. Since then, only Ted Williams (1960; 29), Dave Kingman (1986; 35), Mark McGwire (2001; 29), Barry Bonds (2007; 28) and David Ortiz (2016; 38) have hit as many or more homers in their final season.

==Player profile==
===Career overall===
It is speculated that, had it not been for his service in World War II, Greenberg would likely have approached 500 home runs and 1,800 RBIs; he missed all but 19 games of the 1941 season, the three full seasons that followed, and most of 1945 to World War II military service.

Starring as a first baseman and left fielder with the Tigers (1930, 1933–46) and doing duty only briefly with the Pirates (1947), Greenberg played nine full seasons. He compiled 331 home runs, 1,046 runs and 1,276 RBIs in 1,394 games. Greenberg was also an excellent contact hitter, earning a lifetime batting average of .313. During his career, he was named to the All-Star Team four times, and won the AL Most Valuable Player Award twice, in 1935 and 1940.

As a fielder, the Greenberg was awkward and unsure of himself early in his career, but mastered first base through countless hours of practice. Over the course of his career he demonstrated a higher-than-average fielding percentage and range at first base. When asked by the Tigers&#x27; front office to move to left field in 1940 to make room for Rudy York, he worked tirelessly to master that position as well, reducing his errors in the outfield from 15 in 1940 to 0 in 1945.

===Antisemitism===
During his career, Greenberg faced a number of antisemitic incidents, racial slurs from both spectators and opposing players. Other players sometimes stared because they had never before seen a Jew. According to sportswriter Ross Newhan, Greenberg may have encountered more bigotry over his career than any player other than Jackie Robinson. Greenberg sometimes retaliated against the racial attacks, once going into the Chicago White Sox clubhouse and challenging manager Jimmy Dykes to a fight. On another occasion he called out the entire Yankees team, daring the perpetrator to reveal himself.

In the 1935 World Series, umpire George Moriarty warned three Chicago Cubs players to stop yelling antisemitic slurs at Greenberg and eventually cleared the players from the Cubs bench. Moriarty was disciplined for this action by then-commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis.

Greenberg initially resented being singled out as a Jewish ballplayer and, unlike his parents, was not a particularly observant Jew. However, he later accepted his place in baseball, saying:

In his autobiography, Greenberg wrote that he used the antisemitism that he faced as a source of motivation. At and towering above his contemporaries, he disproved the commonly held stereotype that Jews were not athletic and did not belong in sports. His decision to not play on Yom Kippur at a time of rampant antisemitism in the United States, and around the world, was significant and made him a hero in the American Jewish community. Sandy Koufax, who did not play in Game 1 of the 1965 World Series because it fell on Yom Kippur, has often pointed out that his decision to not play was not unprecedented: &quot;Hank Greenberg did it first.&quot;

==Post-playing career==
=== Management and ownership ===
After the 1947 season, Greenberg retired as a player, and Cleveland Indians owner Bill Veeck hired him as the Indians&#x27; farm director. When Veeck was forced to sell the Indians due to a divorce settlement, new owner Ellis Ryan retained Greenberg, promoting him to general manager.

During his tenure, he sponsored more African American players than any other major league executive. Greenberg&#x27;s contributions to the Cleveland farm system led to the team&#x27;s successes throughout the 1950s, although Bill James once wrote that the Indians&#x27; late 1950s collapse should also be attributed to him. In 1949, Larry Doby also recommended Greenberg scout three players Doby used to play with in the Negro leagues: Hank Aaron, Ernie Banks, and Willie Mays. The next offseason Doby asked what Indians&#x27; scouts said about his recommendations. Greenberg replied: &quot;Our guys checked &#x27;em out and their reports were not good. They said that Aaron has a hitch in his swing and will never hit good pitching. Banks is too slow and didn&#x27;t have enough range [at shortstop], and Mays can&#x27;t hit a curveball.&quot;

While Ryan had initially been content to leave baseball matters to Greenberg, he tried to seize greater control after the 1952 season, when the Indians suffered a drop in attendance despite coming within two games of the pennant. The Indians board sided with Greenberg, prompting Ryan to sell out to a group headed by Myron H. Wilson, who voiced full confidence in Greenberg. Under Wilson, Greenberg&#x27;s role as operating head of the franchise was cemented to the point that he represented the Indians at owners meetings alongside vice president and board member George Medinger. During this time, he and Pirates owner John W. Galbreath helped negotiate an amended player pension plan in which the players got 60% of television revenues from the All-Star Game and World Series.

In 1953, he was partly responsible for an important change to baseball&#x27;s waivers rule. In previous seasons, once a player passed through waivers in his team&#x27;s league (AL or NL), any team from the other league could acquire him, a detail the Yankees used to often outbid other AL teams for NL players. Greenberg successfully campaigned for a new rule that, after June 15, required players to pass through waivers in both leagues before teams in the other league could attempt to obtain them.

Greenberg&#x27;s influence grew even more in 1956 when he joined a syndicate headed by Bill Daley that bought the Indians from Wilson. Although Greenberg had been operating head of the franchise since 1950, this was the first time that he had been a part-owner. However, in 1957, he was forced to resign as general manager, as he put it, &quot;in order to satisfy a hostile press.&quot; He remained a part-owner, however, and in 1958 tried to buy out Daley and become principal owner. He intended to serve as his own general manager if successful. However, Daley and several other directors bought him out.

In 1959, Greenberg and Veeck teamed up for a second time when they led a syndicate that purchased the Chicago White Sox; Veeck served as team president with Greenberg as vice president and general manager. During Veeck and Greenberg&#x27;s first season, the White Sox won their first AL pennant since 1919. Veeck would sell his shares in the White Sox in 1961, and Greenberg stepped down as general manager on August 26 of that season.

After the 1960 season, the American League announced plans to put a team in Los Angeles. Greenberg immediately became the favorite to become the new team&#x27;s first owner and persuaded Veeck to join him as his partner. However, when Los Angeles Dodgers owner Walter O&#x27;Malley got wind of these developments, he threatened to scuttle the whole deal by invoking his exclusive rights to operate a major league team in southern California. In truth, O&#x27;Malley wanted no part of competing against an expansion team owned by a master promoter such as Veeck, even if he was only a minority partner. Greenberg wouldn&#x27;t budge and pulled out of the running for what became the Los Angeles Angels. Greenberg later became a successful investment banker, briefly returning to baseball as a minority partner with Veeck when the latter repurchased the White Sox in 1975. For instance, in 1965, he participated with a group of investors in returning bankrupt Overseas National Airways to operation.

In 1970, when St. Louis Cardinals outfielder Curt Flood challenged Major League Baseball&#x27;s reserve clause, Greenberg was amongst the few baseball players to openly support him, and testified on his behalf.

==Personal life==

While he grew up in an Orthodox Jewish household, Greenberg himself was not an observant Jew and later raised his children in a secular household.

In 1946, Greenberg married Caral Gimbel, daughter of Bernard Gimbel of the Gimbels department store family. The marriage was not a happy one, however, and they eventually divorced in 1958. In 1966, Greenberg married actress Mary Jo Tarola, who appeared on-screen under the stage name &quot;Linda Douglas&quot;, and remained with her until his death.

Greenberg had three children, all from his first marriage: sons Glenn and Stephen, and daughter Alva. Stephen played baseball at Yale University and spent five years in the Washington Senators/Texas Rangers organization; he later became a baseball executive and sports agent. Alva became a newspaper editor for the &quot;Old Lyme Gazette&quot; in Old Lyme, Connecticut.

Later in life, Greenberg became an avid tennis player and often took part in amateur tournaments.

Greenberg died of metastatic kidney cancer in Beverly Hills, California, on September 4, 1986. His remains were entombed at Hillside Memorial Park Cemetery, in Culver City, California.

==Honors==

Greenberg was elected to National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1956 on his eighth ballot, garnering 85% of the votes. He was the first Jewish player elected to the Hall of Fame.

On June 12, 1983, the Detroit Tigers retired Greenberg&#x27;s number 5 during &quot;Greenberg-Gehringer Day&quot; at Tiger Stadium, along with former teammate Charlie Gehringer&#x27;s number 2. Both Greenberg and Gehringer attended the ceremony. In 1999, he was ranked No. 37 by &quot;The Sporting News&quot; on its list of &quot;Baseball&#x27;s 100 Greatest Players&quot;, and was a nominee for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team the same year. In 2020, Greenberg was ranked by &quot;The Athletic&quot; at No. 67 on its &quot;Baseball 100&quot; list, complied by sportswriter Joe Posnanski.

Greenberg was elected to the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame in 1958. Additionally, he was elected to the International Jewish Sports Hall of Fame in 1979, and to the National Jewish Sports Hall of Fame in 1995.

In 2013, the Bob Feller Act of Valor Award honored Greenberg as one of 37 Baseball Hall of Fame members for his service in the United States Army Air Force during World War II.

In 2006, Greenberg was featured on a United States postage stamp. The stamp is one of a block of four honoring &quot;baseball sluggers&quot;, the others being Mickey Mantle, Mel Ott, and Roy Campanella.

In 1998, Greenberg was the subject of a documentary which was directed and written by Aviva Kempner entitled &quot;The Life and Times of Hank Greenberg&quot;. In 2010, he was again one of the main subjects of the film &quot;Jews and Baseball: An American Love Story&quot;, alongside Hall of Famer Sandy Koufax of the Los Angeles Dodgers. The film was directed by Peter Miller and written by Ira Berkow.

In May 2024, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a house resolution which recognized the contributions of Jewish Americans in wake of rising antisemitism in the country. Greenberg, along with Koufax, were one of a handful of people who was singled out in the resolution by name.

==See also==
*Major League Baseball titles leaders
*List of Jewish Major League Baseball players
*List of Major League Baseball home run records
*List of Major League Baseball doubles records
*List of Major League Baseball career batting average leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career on-base percentage leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career slugging percentage leaders
*List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders
*List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders
*List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders
*List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders

==References==
===Book sources===
*
*
==Further reading==
*
* 
*

==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q687282" start="0" end="24" title="Hank Greenberg" label="Henry Benjamin Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q687282" start="80" end="99" title="Hank Greenberg" label="Hammerin&amp;#x27; Hank"/>
<link wikidata="Q687282" start="113" end="126" title="Hank Greenberg" label="Hankus Pankus"/>
<link wikidata="Q687282" start="144" end="161" title="Hank Greenberg" label="the Hebrew Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="198" end="206" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="247" end="268" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="294" end="308" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326154" start="314" end="327" title="first baseman" label="first baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="368" end="389" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="405" end="437" title="MLB Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815849" start="549" end="557" title="Slugging percentage" label="sluggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="685" end="693" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="729" end="770" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="American League (AL) Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="798" end="813" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="854" end="866" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137106" start="920" end="935" title="List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders" label="home run leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329352" start="999" end="1010" title="Jimmie Foxx" label="Jimmie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="1076" end="1085" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="1166" end="1177" title="Roger Maris" label="Roger Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="1345" end="1359" title="runs batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1436" end="1448" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="1958" end="1976" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="2123" end="2140" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="2145" end="2162" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="2189" end="2195" title="Jewish American" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736114" start="2387" end="2401" title="High Holy Days" label="High Holy Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="2460" end="2473" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q126192972" start="2498" end="2508" title="Observance of Yom Kippur by Jewish athletes" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2581" end="2592" title="anti-semitic" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="2704" end="2719" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="2808" end="2825" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="2845" end="2860" title="Romanian Jews" label="Romanian Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="2884" end="2893" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="3357" end="3366" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139911" start="3392" end="3416" title="James Monroe High School (New York)" label="James Monroe High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="3593" end="3601" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326154" start="3634" end="3644" title="first baseman" label="first base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="3674" end="3684" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="3870" end="3886" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="3904" end="3914" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="4049" end="4068" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512279" start="4123" end="4137" title="Sigma Alpha Mu" label="Sigma Alpha Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="4187" end="4202" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q712153" start="4219" end="4230" title="John McGraw" label="John McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="4345" end="4359" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="4444" end="4465" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674520" start="4518" end="4535" title="Hartford Senators" label="Hartford Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208358" start="4543" end="4557" title="Eastern League (1938–present)" label="Eastern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086353" start="4608" end="4624" title="Raleigh Capitals" label="Raleigh Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191523" start="4632" end="4647" title="Piedmont League" label="Piedmont League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24062760" start="4708" end="4723" title="Evansville Hubs" label="Evansville Hubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996672" start="4731" end="4759" title="Illinois–Indiana–Iowa League" label="Illinois–Indiana–Iowa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877555" start="4828" end="4846" title="Beaumont Exporters" label="Beaumont Exporters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134569" start="4854" end="4866" title="Texas League" label="Texas League"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018152" start="4926" end="4952" title="Texas League Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player award"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="5134" end="5150" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="5583" end="5595" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329352" start="5799" end="5810" title="Jimmie Foxx" label="Jimmie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="5815" end="5825" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="5840" end="5849" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="6060" end="6073" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="6138" end="6148" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="6415" end="6420" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563380" start="6624" end="6631" title="1934 Boston Red Sox" label="Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q601669" start="6674" end="6692" title="Detroit Free Press" label="Detroit Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337270" start="6798" end="6812" title="Edgar A. Guest" label="Edgar A. Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q601669" start="7019" end="7037" title="Detroit Free Press" label="Detroit Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160670" start="7256" end="7282" title="Congregation Shaarey Zedek" label="Congregation Shaarey Zedek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563471" start="7436" end="7453" title="1934 World Series" label="1934 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329352" start="7616" end="7620" title="Jimmy Foxx" label="Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="7909" end="7929" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="7937" end="7952" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="7961" end="7975" title="All-Star break (MLB)" label="All-Star break"/>
<link wikidata="Q326416" start="8151" end="8166" title="Mickey Cochrane" label="Mickey Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563675" start="8435" end="8453" title="1935 World Series" label="World Series title"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124916" start="8522" end="8533" title="Jake Powell" label="Jake Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067349" start="8857" end="8866" title="bleachers" label="bleachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371347" start="8947" end="8958" title="Hack Wilson" label="Hack Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="8971" end="8981" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q711944" start="9317" end="9334" title="Charlie Gehringer" label="Charlie Gehringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q297142" start="9339" end="9351" title="Joe DiMaggio" label="Joe DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="9367" end="9375" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="9419" end="9428" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329352" start="9713" end="9724" title="Jimmie Foxx" label="Jimmie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q455117" start="9784" end="9794" title="Sammy Sosa" label="Sammy Sosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q462481" start="9799" end="9811" title="Mark McGwire" label="Mark McGwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284940" start="9873" end="9880" title="Rainout (sports)" label="rainout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329352" start="11170" end="11181" title="Jimmie Foxx" label="Jimmie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q862064" start="11186" end="11197" title="Bill Dickey" label="Bill Dickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115920" start="11643" end="11654" title="Jack Zeller" label="Jack Zeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486997" start="11819" end="11828" title="Rudy York" label="Rudy York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149868" start="12286" end="12296" title="Left fielder" label="left field"/>
<link wikidata="Q332899" start="12405" end="12417" title="Joe McCarthy (baseball manager)" label="Joe McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685489" start="12492" end="12502" title="Lou Finney" label="Lou Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085103" start="12552" end="12566" title="Charlie Keller" label="Charlie Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="12584" end="12596" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q297142" start="13030" end="13042" title="Joe DiMaggio" label="Joe DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="13176" end="13178" title="American League" label="AL"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="13242" end="13248" title="Most valuable player" label="AL MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564790" start="13404" end="13421" title="1940 World Series" label="1940 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564703" start="13434" end="13449" title="1940 Cincinnati Reds season" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819250" start="13628" end="13641" title="Tommy Bridges" label="Tommy Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057728" start="13646" end="13659" title="Pinky Higgins" label="Pinky Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566233" start="13849" end="13871" title="1948 Cleveland Indians season" label="1948 Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569599" start="13880" end="13902" title="1959 Chicago White Sox season" label="1959 Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304772" start="14103" end="14114" title="draft board" label="draft board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="14149" end="14151" title="4F (military conscription)" label="4F"/>
<link wikidata="Q653200" start="14162" end="14171" title="flat feet" label="flat feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q313686" start="14345" end="14357" title="Jack Dempsey" label="Jack Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14419" end="14430" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471007" start="14663" end="14674" title="Fort Custer Training Center" label="Fort Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="14678" end="14700" title="Battle Creek, Michigan" label="Battle Creek, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="14847" end="14855" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q843610" start="14865" end="14885" title="honorably discharged" label="honorably discharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="14905" end="14927" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="14996" end="15001" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="15009" end="15021" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="15034" end="15057" title="bombing of Pearl Harbor" label="bombing of Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="15207" end="15222" title="Army Air Forces" label="Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q12622609" start="15291" end="15315" title="Officer Candidate School" label="Officer Candidate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715023" start="15342" end="15358" title="US First Lieutenant" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="15366" end="15375" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15441" end="15480" title="1941 in aviation#June" label="its own logistics and training elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574730" start="15582" end="15598" title="Special Services (entertainment)" label="Special Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114211" start="15619" end="15626" title="captain" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q715314" start="15689" end="15714" title="China Burma India Theater of World War II" label="China-Burma-India Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="15759" end="15763" title="B-29" label="B-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640902" start="15822" end="15838" title="58th Air Division" label="58th Bomber Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042652" start="15881" end="15900" title="XX Bomber Command" label="20th Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505636" start="15902" end="15916" title="20th Air Force" label="20th Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="16015" end="16033" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565552" start="16405" end="16423" title="1945 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="1945 All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="16494" end="16515" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="16726" end="16744" title="American Red Cross" label="American Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="16773" end="16789" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565592" start="17170" end="17186" title="1945 St. Louis Browns season" label="St. Louis Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565606" start="17245" end="17264" title="1945 Washington Senators season" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565612" start="17309" end="17326" title="1945 World Series" label="1945 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q581425" start="17420" end="17435" title="Phil Cavarretta" label="Phil Cavarretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="17916" end="17928" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="18088" end="18106" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="18250" end="18261" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="18323" end="18335" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963954" start="18426" end="18438" title="Forbes Field" label="Forbes Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="18673" end="18688" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="19060" end="19076" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108486" start="19464" end="19475" title="Ralph Kiner" label="Ralph Kiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="19880" end="19901" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229109" start="20457" end="20469" title="Dave Kingman" label="Dave Kingman"/>
<link wikidata="Q462481" start="20482" end="20494" title="Mark McGwire" label="Mark McGwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q314712" start="20507" end="20518" title="Barry Bonds" label="Barry Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q448005" start="20534" end="20545" title="David Ortiz" label="David Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326154" start="20945" end="20958" title="first baseman" label="first baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149868" start="20963" end="20975" title="left fielder" label="left fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="21297" end="21310" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="21335" end="21364" title="MLB Most Valuable Player award" label="AL Most Valuable Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149868" start="21703" end="21713" title="left field" label="left field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486997" start="21739" end="21748" title="Rudy York" label="Rudy York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369543" start="22115" end="22126" title="Ross Newhan" label="Ross Newhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="22311" end="22328" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179040" start="22363" end="22374" title="Jimmy Dykes" label="Jimmy Dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563675" start="22496" end="22513" title="1935 World Series" label="1935 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542621" start="22522" end="22537" title="George Moriarty" label="George Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="22551" end="22563" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106481" start="22737" end="22760" title="Kenesaw Mountain Landis" label="Kenesaw Mountain Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="23234" end="23244" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="23366" end="23381" title="American Jewish" label="American Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q440256" start="23393" end="23405" title="Sandy Koufax" label="Sandy Koufax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572071" start="23441" end="23458" title="1965 World Series" label="1965 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="23722" end="23739" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746900" start="23746" end="23756" title="Bill Veeck" label="Bill Veeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051525" start="23884" end="23894" title="Ellis Ryan" label="Ellis Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285183" start="23932" end="23947" title="general manager (baseball)" label="general manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="23987" end="24003" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037014" start="24175" end="24185" title="Bill James" label="Bill James"/>
<link wikidata="Q711825" start="24283" end="24293" title="Larry Doby" label="Larry Doby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="24371" end="24384" title="Negro leagues" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="24386" end="24396" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051017" start="24398" end="24409" title="Ernie Banks" label="Ernie Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="24415" end="24426" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331611" start="25114" end="25129" title="Myron H. Wilson" label="Myron H. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262280" start="25418" end="25435" title="John W. Galbreath" label="John W. Galbreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881374" start="25656" end="25663" title="Waivers (baseball)" label="waivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568898" start="26167" end="26177" title="William R. Daley" label="Bill Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="26790" end="26807" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11185665" start="27135" end="27146" title="1960 Major League Baseball season" label="1960 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="27360" end="27379" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565843" start="27386" end="27406" title="Walter O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Walter O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="27807" end="27825" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="Los Angeles Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="27863" end="27880" title="investment banker" label="investment banker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358922" start="28083" end="28108" title="Overseas National Airways" label="Overseas National Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="28138" end="28157" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195372" start="28169" end="28179" title="Curt Flood" label="Curt Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="28378" end="28393" title="Orthodox Jewish" label="Orthodox Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q47240104" start="28556" end="28570" title="Bernard Gimbel" label="Bernard Gimbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562675" start="28578" end="28585" title="Gimbels" label="Gimbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q94760009" start="28727" end="28741" title="Linda Douglas" label="Mary Jo Tarola"/>
<link wikidata="Q130214640" start="28928" end="28935" title="Stephen Greenberg" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="28983" end="28998" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="29027" end="29060" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Washington Senators/Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980190" start="29201" end="29222" title="Old Lyme, Connecticut" label="Old Lyme, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="29342" end="29352" title="metastatic" label="metastatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242950" start="29353" end="29366" title="kidney cancer" label="kidney cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="29370" end="29395" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763964" start="29448" end="29479" title="Hillside Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Hillside Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q493378" start="29484" end="29507" title="Culver City, California" label="Culver City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="29547" end="29577" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="29719" end="29733" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750255" start="29814" end="29827" title="Tiger Stadium (Detroit)" label="Tiger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q711944" start="29856" end="29873" title="Charlie Gehringer" label="Charlie Gehringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q951872" start="29982" end="29999" title="The Sporting News" label="The Sporting News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857867" start="30097" end="30135" title="Major League Baseball All-Century Team" label="Major League Baseball All-Century Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087006" start="30190" end="30202" title="The Athletic" label="The Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211847" start="30282" end="30295" title="Joe Posnanski" label="Joe Posnanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837684" start="30327" end="30355" title="Michigan Sports Hall of Fame" label="Michigan Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q114418" start="30401" end="30441" title="International Jewish Sports Hall of Fame" label="International Jewish Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722392" start="30462" end="30497" title="National Jewish Sports Hall of Fame" label="National Jewish Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q105044139" start="30521" end="30550" title="Bob Feller Act of Valor Award" label="Bob Feller Act of Valor Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="30737" end="30750" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q345004" start="30845" end="30858" title="Mickey Mantle" label="Mickey Mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q726655" start="30860" end="30867" title="Mel Ott" label="Mel Ott"/>
<link wikidata="Q735795" start="30873" end="30887" title="Roy Campanella" label="Roy Campanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829041" start="30976" end="30989" title="Aviva Kempner" label="Aviva Kempner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252517" start="31005" end="31041" title="The Life and Times of Hank Greenberg" label="The Life and Times of Hank Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31114" end="31155" title="Jews and Baseball: An American Love Story" label="Jews and Baseball: An American Love Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q440256" start="31187" end="31199" title="Sandy Koufax" label="Sandy Koufax"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="31207" end="31226" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065967" start="31281" end="31291" title="Ira Berkow" label="Ira Berkow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="31311" end="31340" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751586" start="31350" end="31366" title="house resolution" label="house resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="31440" end="31452" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738199" start="31593" end="31629" title="Major League Baseball titles leaders" label="Major League Baseball titles leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q125935468" start="31631" end="31675" title="List of Jewish Major League Baseball players" label="List of Jewish Major League Baseball players"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577606" start="31677" end="31723" title="List of Major League Baseball home run records" label="List of Major League Baseball home run records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577598" start="31725" end="31770" title="List of Major League Baseball doubles records" label="List of Major League Baseball doubles records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589025" start="31772" end="31832" title="List of Major League Baseball career batting average leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career batting average leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643442" start="31834" end="31887" title="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589011" start="31889" end="31945" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244079" start="31947" end="32006" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589026" start="32008" end="32071" title="List of Major League Baseball career on-base percentage leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career on-base percentage leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589022" start="32073" end="32137" title="List of Major League Baseball career slugging percentage leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career slugging percentage leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137106" start="32139" end="32192" title="List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589039" start="32194" end="32250" title="List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q987124" start="32252" end="32311" title="List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577595" start="32313" end="32365" title="List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13628" wikidata="Q57106" url="?curid=13628" title="Heinrich Schliemann">
<text>Johann Ludwig Heinrich Julius Schliemann (; 6 January 1822 – 26 December 1890) was a German businessman and an influential amateur archaeologist. He was an advocate of the historicity of places mentioned in the works of Homer and an archaeological excavator of Hisarlik, now presumed to be the site of Troy, along with the Mycenaean sites Mycenae and Tiryns. His work lent weight to the idea that Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; reflects historical events. Schliemann&#x27;s excavation of nine layers of archaeological remains has been criticized as destructive of significant historical artefacts, including the layer that is believed to be the Homeric Troy.

==Early life and education==
Schliemann was born 6 January 1822, in Neubukow, Mecklenburg-Schwerin (part of the German Confederation) to Luise Therese Sophie Schliemann and Ernst Schliemann, a Lutheran minister. He was the fifth of nine children. The family moved to Ankershagen in summer 1823. Their second home houses the Heinrich Schliemann Museum today.

Heinrich&#x27;s father was a poor pastor. His mother died in 1831, when Heinrich was nine years old, and his father sent Heinrich to live with his uncle Friedrich Schliemann, also a pastor. When he was eleven years old, his father paid for his enrollment in the Gymnasium (grammar school) at Neustrelitz, but he had to leave it after three months. Heinrich&#x27;s interest in history was initially encouraged by his father, who had schooled him in the tales of the Iliad and the Odyssey and had given him a copy of Ludwig Jerrer&#x27;s &quot;Illustrated History of the World&quot; for Christmas in 1829. Schliemann claimed that at the age of 7 he had declared he would one day excavate the city of Troy.

Heinrich had to transfer to the Realschule (vocational school) after his father was accused of embezzling church funds and made his exams in 1836. His family&#x27;s poverty made a university education impossible. In his archaeological career, there was often a division between Schliemann and the educated professionals.

At age 14, after leaving Realschule, Heinrich became an apprentice at Herr Holtz&#x27;s grocery in Fürstenberg. He later said that his passion for Homer was born when he heard a drunken miller reciting it at the grocer&#x27;s. He laboured for five years until he was forced to leave because he hurt his chest, lifting a heavy barrel and coughing up blood. In 1841, Schliemann moved to Hamburg and became a cabin boy on the &quot;Dorothea,&quot; a brig bound for Venezuela. After twelve days at sea, the ship foundered in a gale. The survivors washed up on the shores of the Netherlands. Schliemann became a messenger, office attendant, and later, a bookkeeper in Amsterdam.

==Career==
On 1 March 1844, 22-year-old Schliemann took a position with B. H. Schröder &amp; Co., an import/export firm. In 1846, the firm sent him as a General Agent to St. Petersburg.

In time, Schliemann represented a number of companies. He learned Russian and Greek, employing a system that he used his entire life to learn languages; Schliemann claimed that it took him six weeks to learn a language and wrote his diary in the language of whatever country he happened to be in. By the end of his life, he could converse in English, French, Dutch, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Russian, Swedish, Polish, Greek, Latin, and Arabic, besides his native German.

Schliemann&#x27;s ability with languages was an important part of his career as a businessman in the importing trade. In 1850, he learned of the death of his brother, Ludwig, who had become wealthy as a speculator in the California gold fields.

Schliemann went to California in early 1851 and started a bank in Sacramento buying and reselling over a million dollars&#x27; worth of gold dust in just six months. When the local Rothschild agent complained about short-weight consignments, he left California, pretending it was because of illness. While he was there, California became the 31st state in September 1850, and Schliemann acquired United States citizenship. Schliemann propounded this story in his autobiography of 1881, though he clearly was in St Petersburg that day, and &quot;in actual fact, ...obtained his American citizenship only in 1869.&quot;

According to his memoirs, before arriving in California he dined in Washington, D.C., with President Millard Fillmore and his family, but W. Calder III says that Schliemann didn&#x27;t attend but simply read about a similar gathering in the papers.

Schliemann also published what he said was an eyewitness account of the San Francisco Fire of 1851, which he said was in June although it took place in May. At the time he was in Sacramento and used the report of the fire in the &quot;Sacramento Daily Journal&quot; to write his report.

On 7 April 1852, he sold his business and returned to Russia. There he attempted to live the life of a gentleman, which brought him into contact with Ekaterina Petrovna Lyschin (1826–1896), the niece of one of his wealthy friends, whom he married on 12 October 1852. Schliemann next made a good profit trading in indigo dye.

By 1858, Schliemann was 36 years old and wealthy enough to retire. In his memoirs, he claimed that he wished to dedicate himself to the pursuit of Troy.

==Amateur archaeologist==
Heinrich Schliemann was an amateur archaeologist. He was obsessed with the stories of Homer and ancient Mediterranean civilizations. He dedicated the second part of his life to unveiling the actual physical remains of the cities of Homer&#x27;s epic tales. Many refer to him as the &quot;father of pre-Hellenistic archaeology&quot;.

In 1868, Schliemann visited sites in the Greek world, and published his second book &quot;Ithaka, der Peloponnesus und Troja&quot; in which he described ancient sites in Greece and the Ottoman Empire and asserted that Hissarlik was the site of Troy. He submitted this book as a dissertation to the University of Rostock. In 1869, he was awarded a PhD &quot;in absentia&quot; from the university for that submission. David Traill wrote that the examiners gave him his PhD on the basis of his topographical analyses of Ithaca, which were in part simply translations of another author&#x27;s work or drawn from poetic descriptions by the same author. Other researchers who worked with documents from the university archives clearly contradict Traill&#x27;s statements.

Schliemann was an honorary member of the Society of Antiquaries of London and elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1880.

===Troy and Mycenae===
Schliemann&#x27;s first interest of a classical nature seems to have been the location of Troy. At the time he began excavating in Turkey, the site commonly believed to be Troy was at Pınarbaşı, a hilltop at the south end of the Trojan Plain. The site had been previously excavated by English amateur archaeologist and local expert Frank Calvert. Schliemann performed soundings at Pınarbaşı but was disappointed by his findings. It was Calvert who identified Hissarlik as Troy and suggested Schliemann dig there on land owned by Calvert&#x27;s family.

Schliemann was at first sceptical about the identification of Hissarlik with Troy but was persuaded by Calvert. In 1870, Schliemann began digging a trench at Hissarlik, and by 1873 had discovered nine buried cities.

Schliemann found pure copper and metal molds as well as a lot of other metal tools, cutlery, shields, and vases which were found at around 28 to feet deep at the site.

The day before digging was to stop on 15 June 1873, which was the day he discovered gold, which he took to be Priam&#x27;s Treasure trove. Recent research has confirmed several settlements on the site spanning 3,600 years. The layer that Schliemann referred to as &quot;the Burnt City&quot; and believed to be Troy is now thought to be from 3,000 to 2,000 BCE, too early to be the location of the Trojan War as Homer describes it.

He later wrote that he had seen the gold glinting in the dirt and dismissed the workmen so that he and Sophia could excavate it themselves; they removed it in her shawl. However, Schliemann&#x27;s oft-repeated story of the treasure being carried by Sophia in her shawl was untrue. Schliemann later admitted fabricating it; at the time of the discovery, Sophia was in fact with her family in Athens, following the death of her father.

Schliemann smuggled the treasure out of the Ottoman Empire into Greece. The Ottoman Empire sued Schliemann in a Greek court, and Schliemann was forced to pay a 10,000 gold franc indemnity. Schliemann ended up sending 50,000 gold francs to the Constantinople Imperial Museum, and got permission for further excavations at Hissarlik. In 1874 Schliemann published &quot;Troy and Its Remains&quot;. Schliemann at first offered his collections, which included Priam&#x27;s Gold, to the Greek government, then the French, and finally the Russians. In 1881, his collections ended up in Berlin, housed first in the Ethnographic Museum, and then the Museum for Pre- and Early History, until the start of WWII. In 1939, all exhibits were packed and stored in the museum basement, then moved to the Prussian State Bank vault in January 1941. In 1941, the treasure was moved to the Flakturm located at the Berlin Zoological Garden, called the Zoo Tower. Dr. Wilhelm Unverzagt protected the three crates containing the Trojan gold when the Battle of Berlin commenced, right up until SMERSH forces took control of the tower on 1 May. On 26 May 1945, Soviet forces, led by Lt. Gen. Nikolai Antipenko, Andre Konstantinov, deputy head of the Arts Committee, Viktor Lazarev, and Serafim Druzhinin, took the three crates away on trucks. The crates were then flown to Moscow on 30 June 1945, and taken to the Pushkin Museum ten days later. In 1994, the museum admitted the collection was in their possession.

In 1876, he began digging at Mycenae, under the supervision of Panagiotis Stamatakis, a Greek archaeologist attached to the excavation as a condition of Schliemann&#x27;s permit. There, he discovered the Shaft Graves, with their skeletons and more regal gold, including the so-called Mask of Agamemnon. These findings were published in &quot;Mycenae&quot; in 1878.

Although he had received permission in 1876 to continue excavation, Schliemann did not reopen the dig site at Troy until 1878–1879, after another excavation in Ithaca designed to locate a site mentioned in the &quot;Odyssey&quot;. Emile Burnouf and Rudolf Virchow joined him there in 1879.

In 1880 Schliemann began excavation of the Treasury of Minyas at Orchomenus (Boeotia).

From 1882 to 1883 Schliemann made a sixth excavation at Troy, in 1884 an excavation of Tiryns with Wilhelm Dörpfeld, and from 1889 to 1890 a seventh and eighth excavation at Troy, also with Dörpfeld.

==Personal life==
After learning that his childhood sweetheart Minna had married, Schliemann married Ekaterina Petrovna Lyschin (1826–1896) on October 12, 1852. She was the niece of one of his wealthy friends in St Petersburg and they had three children; a son, Sergey (1855–1941), and two daughters, Natalya (1859–1869) and Nadezhda (1861–1935). As a consequence of his many travels, Schliemann was often separated from his wife and children. He spent a month studying at the Sorbonne in 1866 while moving his assets from St. Petersburg to Paris to invest in real estate. He asked his wife to join him, but she refused.

Schliemann threatened to divorce Ekaterina twice before doing so. In 1869, he bought property and settled in Indianapolis for about three months to take advantage of Indiana&#x27;s liberal divorce laws, although he obtained the divorce by lying about his residency in the U.S. and his intention to remain in the state. He moved to Athens as soon as an Indiana court granted him the divorce and married again two months later.

A former teacher and Athenian friend, Theokletos Vimpos, the Archbishop of Mantineia and Kynouria, helped Schliemann find someone &quot;enthusiastic about Homer and about a rebirth of my beloved Greece...with a Greek name and a soul impassioned for learning.&quot; The archbishop suggested the 17-year-old Sophia Engastromenos, daughter of his cousin. They were married by the archbishop on 23 September 1869. They later had two children, Andromache and Agamemnon Schliemann.

==Death==
On 1 August 1890, Schliemann returned reluctantly to Athens, and in November travelled to Halle, where his chronic ear infection was operated upon, on 13 November. The doctors deemed the operation a success, but his inner ear became painfully inflamed. Ignoring his doctors&#x27; advice, he left the hospital and travelled to Leipzig, Berlin and Paris. From the last, he planned to return to Athens in time for Christmas, but his ear condition became even worse. Too sick to make the boat ride from Naples to Greece, Schliemann remained in Naples but managed to make a journey to the ruins of Pompeii. On Christmas Day 1890, he collapsed into a coma; he died in a Naples hotel room the following day; the cause of death was cholesteatoma.

His corpse was then transported by friends to the First Cemetery in Athens. It was interred in a mausoleum shaped like a temple erected in ancient Greek style, designed by Ernst Ziller in the form of an amphiprostyle temple on top of a tall base. The frieze circling the outside of the mausoleum shows Schliemann conducting the excavations at Mycenae and other sites.

==Legacy and criticism==
Schliemann&#x27;s magnificent residence in the city centre of Athens, the &quot;Iliou Melathron&quot; (Ιλίου Μέλαθρον, &quot;Palace of Ilium&quot;), today houses the Numismatic Museum of Athens.

Along with Sir Arthur Evans, Schliemann was a pioneer in the study of the Aegean civilization in the Bronze Age. The two men knew of each other, Evans having visited Schliemann&#x27;s sites. Schliemann had planned to excavate at Knossos but died before fulfilling that dream. Evans bought the site and stepped in to take charge of the project, which was then still in its infancy.

Further excavation of the Troy site by others indicated that the level Schliemann named the Troy of the &quot;Iliad&quot; was inaccurate, although they retain the names given by Schliemann. In a 1998 article for &quot;The Classical World,&quot; D.F. Easton wrote that Schliemann &quot;was not very good at separating fact from interpretation&quot; and claimed that, &quot;Even in 1872 Frank Calvert could see from the pottery that Troy II had to be hundreds of years too early to be the Troy of the Trojan War, a point finally proven by the discovery of Mycenaean pottery in Troy VI in 1890.&quot; &quot;King Priam&#x27;s Treasure&quot; was found in the Troy II level, that of the Early Bronze Age, long before Priam&#x27;s city of Troy VI or Troy VIIa in the prosperous and elaborate Mycenaean Age. Moreover, the finds were unique. The elaborate gold artefacts do not appear to belong to the Early Bronze Age.

His excavations were condemned by later archaeologists as having destroyed the main layers of the real Troy. Kenneth W. Harl, in the Teaching Company&#x27;s &quot;Great Ancient Civilizations of Asia Minor&quot; lecture series, sarcastically claimed that Schliemann&#x27;s excavations were carried out with such rough methods that he did to Troy what the Greeks could not do in their times, destroying and levelling down the entire city walls to the ground.

In 1972, Professor William Calder of the University of Colorado, speaking at a commemoration of Schliemann&#x27;s birthday, claimed that he had uncovered several possible problems in Schliemann&#x27;s work. Other investigators followed, such as Professor David Traill of the University of California.

A 2004 article of the National Geographic Society called into question Schliemann&#x27;s qualifications, his motives, and his methods:
A 2005 article presented similar criticisms when reporting on a speech by University of Pennsylvania scholar C. Brian Rose:
Schliemann&#x27;s methods have been described as &quot;savage and brutal. He ploughed through layers of soil and everything in them without proper record keeping—no mapping of finds, few descriptions of discoveries.&quot; His rough excavation, conclusory interpretation and appropriation of artifacts were criticised by contemporary antiquarians, among them Spyridon Comnos and Stephen Salisbury III. The fame of his discoveries overshadowed such criticism through most of the twentieth century, such that Carl Blegen excused his recklessness: &quot;Although there were some regrettable blunders, those criticisms are largely colored by a comparison with modern techniques of digging; but it is only fair to remember that before 1876 very few persons, if anyone, yet really knew how excavations should properly be conducted. There was no science of archaeological investigation, and there was probably no other digger who was better than Schliemann in actual field work.&quot;

In 1874, Schliemann also initiated and sponsored the removal of medieval edifices from the Acropolis of Athens, including the great Frankish Tower. Despite considerable opposition, including from King George I of the Hellenes, Schliemann saw the project through. The eminent historian of Frankish Greece, William Miller, later denounced this as &quot;an act of vandalism unworthy of any people imbued with a sense of the continuity of history&quot;, and &quot;pedantic barbarism&quot;.

In his excavations at Troy, Schliemann found many swastikas adorned on pottery and consulted with Aryan nationalist Émile-Louis Burnouf to identify the symbol. Claiming that the symbol was connected with the Aryans, Burnouf adopted and popularised the swastika as a symbol of Aryan nationalism.

==Publications==

* &quot;La Chine et le Japon au temps présent&quot; (1867)
* &quot;Ithaka, der Peloponnesus und Troja&quot; (1868) (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2010. )
* &quot;Trojanische Altertümer: Bericht über die Ausgrabungen in Troja&quot; (1874) (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2010. )
* &quot;Troja und seine Ruinen&quot; (1875). Translated into English as &quot;Troy and its Remains&quot; (1875) (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2010. )
* &quot;Mykena&quot; (1878). Translated into English as &quot;Mycenae: A Narrative of Researches and Discoveries at Mycenae and Tiryns&quot; (1878) (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2010. )
* &quot;Ilios, City and Country of the Trojans&quot; (1880) (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2010. )
* &quot;Orchomenos: Bericht über meine Ausgrabungen in Böotischen Orchomenos&quot; (1881) (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2010. )
* &quot;Tiryns: Der prähistorische Palast der Könige von Tiryns&quot; (1885) (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2010. ). Translated into English &quot;Tiryns: The Prehistoric Palace of the Kings of Tiryns&quot; (1885)
* &quot;Bericht über de Ausgrabungen in Troja im Jahre 1890&quot; (1891) (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2010. ).
* Heinrich Schliemann; Sophia Schliemann (ed.): &quot;Heinrich Schliemann&#x27;s Autobiography&quot;. Leipzig, 1892. (Online version in German)

==See also==

* List of archaeologists
* List of polyglots
* Ernst Boetticher

==References==
==Sources==
* 

==Bibliography==
* 
* .
* 
* 

==Further reading==

==External links==
* 
* American School of Classical Studies at Athens. .
* Museum für Vor- und Frühgeschichte exhibition on The Worlds of Schliemann: His Life. His Discoveries. His Legacy (13.05.2022 to 08.01.2023).
* Schliemann&#x27;s porky pies (lies) about excavating Troy - Curator&#x27;s Corner S5 Ep11 from the British Museum
* &quot;Original Skizzen Heinrich Schliemann&#x27;s zu dessen Werk Ilios&quot; – photographic and drawing documentation of Schliemann&#x27;s excavations prepared most probably for his publication &quot;Atlas trojanischer Alterthümer&quot; (1874)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57106" start="0" end="40" title="Heinrich Schliemann" label="Johann Ludwig Heinrich Julius Schliemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517710" start="172" end="183" title="historicity" label="historicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="220" end="225" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="261" end="269" title="Hisarlik" label="Hisarlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="302" end="306" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="323" end="332" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="339" end="346" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q217379" start="351" end="357" title="Tiryns" label="Tiryns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="416" end="421" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355118" start="437" end="454" title="Historicity of the Iliad" label="historical events"/>
<link wikidata="Q9638" start="728" end="736" title="Neubukow" label="Neubukow"/>
<link wikidata="Q158445" start="738" end="758" title="Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin" label="Mecklenburg-Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="772" end="792" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="862" end="870" title="Minister (Christianity)" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q20308" start="927" end="938" title="Ankershagen" label="Ankershagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596454" start="984" end="1010" title="Heinrich Schliemann Museum" label="Heinrich Schliemann Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="1281" end="1290" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q20352" start="1311" end="1322" title="Neustrelitz" label="Neustrelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1484" end="1489" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="1498" end="1505" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="1717" end="1721" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q667471" start="1756" end="1766" title="Realschule" label="Realschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q311539" start="2145" end="2156" title="Fürstenberg/Havel" label="Fürstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="2431" end="2438" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q49640" start="2452" end="2461" title="cabin boy" label="cabin boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="2493" end="2497" title="brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="2508" end="2517" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2620" end="2631" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2709" end="2718" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531668" start="2874" end="2887" title="General Agent" label="General Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="2891" end="2905" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="3696" end="3706" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="4026" end="4051" title="United States citizenship" label="United States citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4317" end="4333" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q12306" start="4350" end="4366" title="Millard Fillmore" label="Millard Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022482" start="4571" end="4597" title="San Francisco Fire of 1851" label="San Francisco Fire of 1851"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4734" end="4758" title="Sacramento Daily Journal" label="Sacramento Daily Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q422662" start="5100" end="5110" title="indigo dye" label="indigo dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q159895" start="5925" end="5946" title="University of Rostock" label="University of Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060492" start="6144" end="6150" title="Homer&amp;#x27;s Ithaca" label="Ithaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417893" start="6435" end="6467" title="Society of Antiquaries of London" label="Society of Antiquaries of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742987" start="6496" end="6524" title="American Antiquarian Society" label="American Antiquarian Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6742" end="6751" title="Pınarbaşı Köyü" label="Pınarbaşı"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385967" start="6890" end="6903" title="Frank Calvert" label="Frank Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="7017" end="7026" title="Hissarlik" label="Hissarlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q123592492" start="7249" end="7265" title="Schliemann&amp;#x27;s Trench" label="digging a trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q304483" start="7607" end="7628" title="Priam&amp;#x27;s Treasure" label="Priam&amp;#x27;s Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403377" start="8536" end="8541" title="franc" label="franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q708399" start="8542" end="8551" title="indemnity" label="indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="8607" end="8621" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9059" end="9063" title="WWII" label="WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q91914" start="9234" end="9242" title="Flakturm" label="Flakturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q154828" start="9258" end="9282" title="Berlin Zoological Garden" label="Berlin Zoological Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074078" start="9295" end="9304" title="Zoo Tower" label="Zoo Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575470" start="9310" end="9327" title="Wilhelm Unverzagt" label="Wilhelm Unverzagt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="9391" end="9407" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158363" start="9434" end="9440" title="SMERSH" label="SMERSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245023" start="9605" end="9619" title="Viktor Lazarev" label="Viktor Lazarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872" start="9753" end="9767" title="Pushkin Museum" label="Pushkin Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="9883" end="9890" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16855531" start="9917" end="9938" title="Panagiotis Stamatakis" label="Panagiotis Stamatakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597783" start="10058" end="10070" title="Grave Circle A, Mycenae" label="Shaft Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126741" start="10138" end="10155" title="Mask of Agamemnon" label="Mask of Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="10436" end="10443" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q274979" start="10451" end="10464" title="Emile Burnouf" label="Emile Burnouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q76432" start="10469" end="10483" title="Rudolf Virchow" label="Rudolf Virchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574822" start="10554" end="10572" title="Treasury of Minyas" label="Treasury of Minyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574822" start="10576" end="10596" title="Orchomenus (Boeotia)" label="Orchomenus (Boeotia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q217379" start="10686" end="10692" title="Tiryns" label="Tiryns"/>
<link wikidata="Q60239" start="10698" end="10714" title="Wilhelm Dörpfeld" label="Wilhelm Dörpfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="11277" end="11285" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="11531" end="11543" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="11588" end="11595" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q532638" start="12155" end="12175" title="Sophia Schliemann" label="Sophia Engastromenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q390410" start="12303" end="12323" title="Agamemnon Schliemann" label="Agamemnon Schliemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="12389" end="12395" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="12426" end="12431" title="Halle, Saxony-Anhalt" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="12662" end="12669" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="12671" end="12677" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="12682" end="12687" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="12728" end="12734" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="12835" end="12841" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="12845" end="12851" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="12929" end="12936" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="12941" end="12954" title="Christmas Day" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q558230" start="13060" end="13073" title="cholesteatoma" label="cholesteatoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362125" start="13126" end="13140" title="First Cemetery of Athens" label="First Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="13173" end="13182" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q66108" start="13248" end="13260" title="Ernst Ziller" label="Ernst Ziller"/>
<link wikidata="Q290472" start="13279" end="13292" title="amphiprostyle" label="amphiprostyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="13327" end="13333" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="13605" end="13610" title="Troy" label="Ilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q658339" start="13636" end="13663" title="Numismatic Museum of Athens" label="Numismatic Museum of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q188929" start="13677" end="13693" title="Arthur Evans" label="Sir Arthur Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q192530" start="13740" end="13759" title="Aegean civilization" label="Aegean civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="13767" end="13777" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q173527" start="13895" end="13902" title="Knossos" label="Knossos"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="14074" end="14078" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="14158" end="14163" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15758695" start="14266" end="14285" title="Classical World (journal)" label="The Classical World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390779" start="15069" end="15084" title="Kenneth W. Harl" label="Kenneth W. Harl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206658" start="15459" end="15481" title="University of Colorado" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="15742" end="15769" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610453" start="16357" end="16378" title="Stephen Salisbury III" label="Stephen Salisbury III"/>
<link wikidata="Q552469" start="16485" end="16496" title="Carl Blegen" label="Carl Blegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="17048" end="17067" title="Acropolis of Athens" label="Acropolis of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q12885865" start="17089" end="17103" title="Frankish Tower (Acropolis of Athens)" label="Frankish Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142" start="17153" end="17182" title="George I of Greece" label="King George I of the Hellenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197995" start="17245" end="17260" title="Frankokratia" label="Frankish Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q15730496" start="17262" end="17276" title="William Miller (historian)" label="William Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="17494" end="17502" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q274979" start="17560" end="17579" title="Émile-Louis Burnouf" label="Émile-Louis Burnouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="17886" end="17912" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="18019" end="18045" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="18180" end="18206" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="18377" end="18403" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="18486" end="18512" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="18625" end="18651" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="18751" end="18777" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="18971" end="18997" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492089" start="19169" end="19191" title="List of archaeologists" label="List of archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042816" start="19194" end="19211" title="List of polyglots" label="List of polyglots"/>
<link wikidata="Q19194731" start="19214" end="19230" title="Ernst Boetticher" label="Ernst Boetticher"/>
<link wikidata="Q466718" start="19339" end="19385" title="American School of Classical Studies at Athens" label="American School of Classical Studies at Athens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13629" wikidata="Q189347" url="?curid=13629" title="Hypnos">
<text>In Greek mythology, Hypnos (; Ancient Greek: , &#x27;sleep&#x27;), also spelled Hypnus, is the personification of sleep. The Roman equivalent is Somnus. His name is the origin of the word hypnosis. Pausanias wrote that Hypnos was the dearest friend of the Muses.

== Etymology ==
According to the Dutch linguist Robert S. P. Beekes, the god&#x27;s name derives from the Proto-Indo-European root &quot;*sup-no-&quot; &#x27;sleep&#x27;.

==Description==

Hypnos is usually the fatherless son of Nyx (&quot;The Night&quot;), although sometimes Nyx&#x27;s consort Erebus (&quot;The Darkness&quot;) is named as his father. His twin brother is Thanatos (&quot;Death&quot;). Both siblings live in the underworld (Hades). According to rumors, Hypnos lived in a big cave, which the river Lethe (&quot;Forgetfulness&quot;) comes from and where night and day meet. They call this area the Land of Dreams. His bed is made of ebony, and on the entrance of the cave grow several poppies and other soporific plants. No light and no sound would ever enter his grotto. According to Homer, he lives on the island Lemnos, which later on has been claimed to be his very own dream island. He is said to be a calm and gentle god, as he helps humans in need and, due to their sleep, owns half of their lives.

==Family==
Hypnos lived next to his twin brother, Thanatos (, ), in the underworld, where the rays of the sun never reached them.

In Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Theogony&quot;, Hypnos is one of the offspring of Nyx (, ), the goddess of Night, without a father. In genealogies from works by Roman authors, he is the son of Erebus (Darkness) and Nox (Night, the Roman name for Nyx). In the &quot;Iliad&quot;, Nyx is a dreadful and powerful goddess, and even Zeus fears to enter her realm.

His wife, Pasithea, is one of the youngest of the Charites and is promised to him by Hera, who is the goddess of marriage and birth.

== Mythology ==
=== Hypnos in the &quot;Iliad&quot; ===

Hypnos was able to trick Zeus and help the Danaans win the Trojan War. During the war, Hera loathed her brother and husband, Zeus, so she devised a plot to trick him. She decided that to trick him she needed to make him so enamored with her that he would fall for the trick. So she washed herself with ambrosia and anointed herself with oil, made especially for her to make herself impossible for Zeus to resist. She wove flowers through her hair, put on three brilliant pendants for earrings, and donned a wondrous robe. She then called for Aphrodite, the goddess of love, and asked her for a charm that would ensure that her trick would not fail. To procure the charm, however, she lied to Aphrodite because they sided on opposite sides of the war. She told Aphrodite that she wanted the charm to help herself and Zeus stop fighting. Aphrodite willingly agreed. Hera was almost ready to trick Zeus, but she needed the help of Hypnos, who had tricked Zeus once before.

Hera called on Hypnos and asked him to help her by putting Zeus to sleep. Hypnos was reluctant because the last time he had put the god to sleep, he was furious when he awoke. It was Hera who had asked him to trick Zeus the first time as well. She was furious that Heracles, Zeus&#x27; son, sacked the city of the Trojans. So she had Hypnos put Zeus to sleep, and set blasts of angry winds upon the sea while Heracles was still sailing home. When Zeus awoke he was furious and went on a rampage looking for Hypnos. Hypnos managed to avoid Zeus by hiding with his mother, Nyx. This made Hypnos reluctant to accept Hera&#x27;s proposal and help her trick Zeus again. Hera first offered him a beautiful golden seat that can never fall apart and a footstool to go with it. He refused this first offer, remembering the last time he tricked Zeus. Hera finally got him to agree by promising that he would be married to Pasithea, one of the youngest Graces, whom he had always wanted to marry. Hypnos made her swear by the river Styx and call on the gods of the underworld to be witnesses so that he would be ensured that he would marry Pasithea.

Hera went to see Zeus on Gargarus, the topmost peak of Mount Ida. Zeus was extremely taken by her and suspected nothing as Hypnos was shrouded in a thick mist and hidden upon a pine tree that was close to where Hera and Zeus were talking. Zeus asked Hera what she was doing there and why she had come from Olympus, and she told him the same lie she told Aphrodite. She told him that she wanted to go help her parent stop quarreling and she stopped there to consult him because she didn&#x27;t want to go without his knowledge and have him be angry with her when he found out. Zeus said that she could go any time and that she should postpone her visit and stay there with him so they could enjoy each other&#x27;s company. He told her that he was never in love with anyone as much as he loved her at that moment. He took her in his embrace and Hypnos went to work putting him to sleep, with Hera in his arms. While this went on, Hypnos traveled to the ships of the Achaeans to tell Poseidon, God of the Sea, that he could now help the Danaans and give them a victory while Zeus was sleeping. This is where Hypnos leaves the story, leaving Poseidon eager to help the Danaans. Thanks to Hypnos helping to trick Zeus, the war changed its course in Hera&#x27;s favor, and Zeus never found out that Hypnos had tricked him one more time.

=== Hypnos and Endymion ===
According to a passage in &quot;Deipnosophistae&quot;, the sophist and dithyrambic poet Licymnius of Chios tells a different tale about the Endymion myth, in which Hypnos loves Endymion and does not close the eyes of his beloved even while he is asleep, but lulls him to rest with eyes wide open so that he may without interruption enjoy the pleasure of gazing at them.

==Hypnos in art==

Hypnos appears in numerous works of art, most of which are vases. An example of one vase that Hypnos is featured on is called &quot;Ariadne Abandoned by Theseus,&quot; which is part of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston&#x27;s collection. In this vase, Hypnos is shown as a winged god dripping Lethean water upon the head of Ariadne as she sleeps.

There are only three bronze statues featuring Hypnos known to be found in the Roman world. The first one was found in mid-19th century in Civitella d&#x27;Arno (Italy), kept in the British Museum in London since 1868. This bronze head has wings sprouting from his temples and the hair is elaborately arranged, some tying in knots and some hanging freely from his head. The second one, a torsus, was found in Jumilla (Spain) in 1893 and is now exhibited at the Berlin antiquities collection. The most recent discovery took place in 1988 in Almedinilla (also in Spain), where bronze statue almost intact of Hypnos was found in a Roman villa dated in the 2nd century A.D. It is kept in the local History &amp; Archaeology Museum.

The National Roman Museum of the Italian capital keeps an Hypnos marble head found in Hadrian&#x27;s Villa, built around 120 AD by Emperor Hadrian in Tivoli as a retreat not far from Rome.

==Words derived from Hypnos==
The English word &quot;hypnosis&quot; is derived from his name, referring to the fact that when hypnotized, a person is put into a sleep-like state (hypnosis &quot;sleep&quot; + -osis &quot;condition&quot;). The class of medicines known as &quot;hypnotics&quot; which induce sleep also take their name from Hypnos.

== See also ==

* Aergia, a goddess of sloth and attendant of Hypnos
* Morpheus

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* Athenaeus, &quot;The Learned Banqueters, Volume V: Books 10.420e-11&quot;, edited and translated by S. Douglas Olson, Loeb Classical Library No. 274, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 2009. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Cicero, Marcus Tullius, &quot;De Natura Deorum&quot; in &quot;Cicero: On the Nature of the Gods. Academics&quot;, translated by H. Rackham, Loeb Classical Library No. 268, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, first published 1933, revised 1951. . Online version at Harvard University Press. Internet Archive.
* Hesiod, &quot;Theogony&quot;, in &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White&quot;, Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes&quot;. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae&quot; in &quot;Apollodorus&#x27; &quot;Library&quot; and Hyginus&#x27; &quot;Fabulae&quot;: Two Handbooks of Greek Mythology, Translated, with Introductions by R. Scott Smith and Stephen M. Trzaskoma&quot;, Hackett Publishing, 2007. . Google Books.
* &quot;Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae (LIMC)&quot; VII.1., Zürich and Munich, Artemis Verlag, 1994. . Internet Archive.
* Tripp, Edward, &quot;Crowell&#x27;s Handbook of Classical Mythology&quot;, Thomas Y. Crowell Co; First edition (June 1970). .

==External links==

* 3D model of &quot;Bronze head of Hypnos&quot; via laser scan of a cast of British Museum&#x27;s bronze.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189347" start="20" end="26" title="Hypnos" label="Hypnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="30" end="43" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q189347" start="80" end="86" title="Hypnos" label="Hypnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207174" start="95" end="110" title="personification" label="personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="114" end="119" title="sleep" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030618" start="145" end="151" title="Somnus" label="Somnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="188" end="196" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="198" end="207" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="256" end="261" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508757" start="312" end="331" title="Robert S. P. Beekes" label="Robert S. P. Beekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="370" end="389" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q131203" start="493" end="496" title="Nyx" label="Nyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q131122" start="560" end="566" title="Erebus" label="Erebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199647" start="638" end="646" title="Thanatos" label="Thanatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521549" start="694" end="704" title="Greek underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="706" end="711" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q161096" start="779" end="784" title="Lethe" label="Lethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q118898543" start="878" end="892" title="Land of dreams (mythology)" label="Land of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q967457" start="965" end="972" title="Poppy" label="poppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1065" end="1070" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192483" start="1095" end="1101" title="Lemnos" label="Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q199647" start="1337" end="1345" title="Thanatos" label="Thanatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521549" start="1359" end="1369" title="Greek Underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="1393" end="1396" title="Helios" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="1421" end="1427" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="1441" end="1449" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q131203" start="1491" end="1494" title="Nyx" label="Nyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q131122" start="1602" end="1608" title="Erebus" label="Erebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1674" end="1679" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1736" end="1740" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235379" start="1778" end="1786" title="Pasithea" label="Pasithea"/>
<link wikidata="Q184353" start="1818" end="1826" title="Charites" label="Charites"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="1853" end="1857" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="2018" end="2028" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="2501" end="2510" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="3195" end="3203" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q542758" start="3945" end="3955" title="river Styx" label="river Styx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421270" start="4125" end="4134" title="Mount Ida" label="Mount Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="5052" end="5060" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244416" start="5463" end="5478" title="Deipnosophistae" label="Deipnosophistae"/>
<link wikidata="Q262533" start="5502" end="5511" title="dithyramb" label="dithyramb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238134" start="5519" end="5537" title="Likymnios of Chios" label="Licymnius of Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q272047" start="5571" end="5579" title="Endymion (mythology)" label="Endymion"/>
<link wikidata="Q272777" start="6983" end="7003" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="7036" end="7043" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q159605" start="7047" end="7053" title="Tivoli, Lazio" label="Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="7140" end="7148" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="7363" end="7371" title="hypnotic" label="hypnotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844469" start="7451" end="7457" title="Aergia" label="Aergia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194012" start="7504" end="7512" title="Morpheus" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q294923" start="7550" end="7559" title="Athenaeus" label="Athenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="7668" end="7690" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="7726" end="7750" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="7806" end="7828" title="Cicero" label="Cicero, Marcus Tullius"/>
<link wikidata="Q370414" start="7836" end="7852" title="De Natura Deorum" label="De Natura Deorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="7946" end="7968" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="8004" end="8028" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="8132" end="8138" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="8146" end="8154" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="8389" end="8394" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738147" start="8628" end="8635" title="Fabulae" label="Fabulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q682373" start="8893" end="8937" title="Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae" label="Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13631" wikidata="Q662862" url="?curid=13631" title="Holy orders">
<text>In certain Christian denominations, holy orders are the ordained ministries of bishop, priest (presbyter), and deacon, and the sacrament or rite by which candidates are ordained to those orders. Churches recognizing these orders include the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox (ιερωσύνη [&quot;hierōsynē&quot;], ιεράτευμα [&quot;hierateuma&quot;], Священство [&quot;Svyashchenstvo&quot;]), Oriental Orthodox, Anglican, Assyrian, Old Catholic, Independent Catholic and some Lutheran churches. Except for Lutherans and some Anglicans, these churches regard ordination as a sacrament (the &quot;sacramentum ordinis&quot;).

Denominations have varied conceptions of holy orders. In Anglican and some Lutheran churches the traditional orders of bishop, priest and deacon are bestowed using ordination rites contained within ordinals. The extent to which ordination is considered sacramental in these traditions has, however, been a matter of some internal dispute. Baptists are among the denominations that do not consider ministry as being sacramental in nature and would not think of it in terms of &quot;holy orders&quot; as such. Historically, the word &quot;order&quot; (Latin &quot;ordo&quot;) designated an established civil body or corporation with a hierarchy, and &quot;ordinatio&quot; meant legal incorporation into an &quot;ordo&quot;. The word &quot;holy&quot; refers to the church. In context, therefore, a holy order is set apart for ministry in the church. Other positions, such as pope, patriarch, cardinal, monsignor, archbishop, archimandrite, archpriest, protopresbyter, hieromonk, protodeacon and archdeacon, are not sacramental orders but specialized ministries.

==Anglicanism==
The Anglican churches hold their bishops to be in apostolic succession, although there is some difference of opinion with regard to whether ordination is to be regarded as a sacrament. The Anglican Articles of Religion hold that only Baptism and the Lord&#x27;s Supper are to be counted as sacraments of the gospel, and assert that other rites &#x27;commonly called Sacraments&#x27; by other denominations (e.g. Catholicism), were not ordained by Christ in the Gospel. They do not have the nature of a sacrament of the Gospel in the absence of any physical matter such as the water in Baptism and the bread and wine in the Eucharist. Various editions of the &quot;Book of Common Prayer&quot; and other Anglican liturgical texts provide rites for ordination of bishops, priests and deacons. Only bishops may ordain people. Within Anglicanism, three bishops are normally required for ordination to the episcopate, while one bishop is sufficient for performing ordinations to the priesthood and diaconate.

==Catholicism==

The ministerial orders of the Catholic Church include the orders of bishops, deacons and presbyters, which in Latin is &quot;sacerdos&quot;. The ordained priesthood and common priesthood (or priesthood of all the baptized) are different in function and essence.

A distinction is made between &quot;priest&quot; and &quot;presbyter&quot;. In the 1983 Code of Canon Law, &quot;The Latin words &quot;sacerdos&quot; and &quot;sacerdotium&quot; are used to refer in general to the ministerial priesthood shared by bishops and presbyters. The words &quot;presbyter, presbyterium and presbyteratus&quot; refer to priests [in the English use of the word] and presbyters&quot;.

While the consecrated life is neither clerical nor lay by definition, clerics can be members of institutes of consecrated or secular (diocesan) life.

==Eastern Christianity==

The Eastern Orthodox Church considers ordination (known as &quot;cheirotonia&quot;, &quot;laying on of hands&quot;) to be a sacred mystery (μυστήριο, what in the West is called a sacrament). Although all other mysteries may be performed by a presbyter, ordination may only be conferred by a bishop, and the ordination of a bishop may only be performed by several bishops together. &quot;Cheirotonia&quot; always takes place during the Divine Liturgy.

It was the mission of the Apostles to go forth into all the world and preach the Gospel, baptizing those who believed in the name of the Holy Trinity. In the Early Church those who presided over congregations were referred to variously as &quot;episcopos&quot; (bishop) or &quot;presbyteros&quot; (priest). These successors of the Apostles were ordained to their office by the laying on of hands, and according to Eastern Orthodox theology formed a living, organic link with the Apostles, and through them with Jesus Christ himself.

The Eastern Orthodox Church also has ordination to minor orders (known as &quot;cheirothesia&quot;, &quot;imposition of hands&quot;) which is performed outside of the Divine Liturgy, typically by a bishop, although certain archimandrites of stavropegial monasteries may bestow cheirothesia on members of their communities.

A bishop is the collector of the money of the diocese and the living Vessel of Grace through whom the &quot;energeia&quot; (divine grace) of the Holy Spirit flows into the rest of the church. A bishop is consecrated through the laying on of hands by several bishops. (With the consent of several other bishops, a single bishop has performed the ordination of another bishop in emergency situations, such as times of persecution.) The consecration of a bishop takes place near the beginning of the Liturgy, since a bishop can, in addition to performing the Mystery of the Eucharist, also ordain priests and deacons. Before the commencement of the Holy Liturgy, the bishop-elect professes, in the middle of the church before the seated bishops who will consecrate him, in detail the doctrines of the Orthodox Christian Faith and pledges to observe the canons of the Apostles and Councils, the Typikon and customs of the Orthodox Church and to obey ecclesiastical authority. After the Little Entrance, the arch-priest and arch-deacon conduct the bishop-elect before the Royal Gates where he is met by the bishops and kneels before the altar on both knees. The Gospel Book is laid over his head and the consecrating bishops lay their hands upon the Gospel Book, while the prayers of ordination are read by the eldest bishop. After this, the newly consecrated bishop ascends the &quot;synthranon&quot; (bishop&#x27;s throne in the sanctuary) for the first time. Customarily, the newly consecrated bishop ordains a priest and a deacon at the Liturgy during which he is consecrated.

A priest may serve only at the pleasure of his bishop. A bishop bestows faculties (permission to minister within his diocese) giving a priest chrism and an antimins; he may withdraw faculties and demand the return of these items. The ordination of a priest occurs before the Anaphora (Eucharistic Prayer) in order that he may on the same day take part in the celebration of the Eucharist: During the Great Entrance, the candidate for ordination carries the Aër (chalice veil) over his head (rather than on his shoulder, as a deacon otherwise carries it then) as a symbol of giving up his diaconate, and comes last in the procession and stands at the end of the pair of lines of the priests. After the Aër is taken from the candidate to cover the chalice and diskos, a chair is brought for the bishop to sit on by the northeast corner of the Holy Table (altar). Two deacons go to priest-elect who, at that point, had been standing alone in the middle of the church, and bow him down to the west (to the people) and to the east (to the clergy), asking their consent by saying &quot;Command ye!&quot; and then lead him through the holy doors of the altar where the archdeacon asks the bishop&#x27;s consent, saying, &quot;Command, most sacred master!&quot; after which a priest escorts the candidate three times around the Holy Table, during which he kisses each corner of the Holy Table as well as the bishop&#x27;s epigonation and right hand and prostrates himself before the holy table at each circuit. The candidate is then taken to the southeast corner of the Holy Table and kneels on both knees, resting his forehead on the edge of the Holy Table. The ordaining bishop then places his omophor and right hand over the ordinand&#x27;s head and recites aloud the first &quot;Prayer of Cheirotonia&quot; and then prays silently the other two prayers of cheirotonia while a deacon quietly recites a litany and the clergy, then the congregation, chant &quot;Lord, have mercy&quot;. Afterwards, the bishop brings the newly ordained priest to stand in the Holy Doors and presents him to the faithful. He then clothes the priest in each of his sacerdotal vestments, at each of which the people sing, &quot;Worthy!&quot;. Later, after the Epiklesis of the Liturgy, the bishop hands him a portion of the Lamb (Host) saying:
A deacon may not perform any sacrament and performs no liturgical services on his own but serves only as an assistant to a priest and may not even vest without the blessing of a priest. The ordination of a deacon occurs after the Anaphora (Eucharistic Prayer) since his role is not in performing the Holy Mystery but consists only in serving; the ceremony is much the same as at the ordination of a priest, but the deacon-elect is presented to the people and escorted to the holy doors by two sub-deacons (his peers, analogous to the two deacons who so present a priest-elect), is escorted three times around the Holy Table by a deacon, and he kneels on only one knee during the &quot;Prayer of Cheirotonia&quot;. After being vested as a deacon and given a liturgical fan &quot;(ripidion or hexapterygion)&quot;, he is led to the side of the Holy Table where he uses the ripidion to gently fan the Holy Gifts (consecrated Body and Blood of Christ).

==Lutheranism==
Lutherans reject the Catholic understanding of holy orders because they do not think sacerdotalism is supported by the Bible. Martin Luther taught that each individual was expected to fulfill his God-appointed task in everyday life. The modern usage of the term vocation as a life-task was first employed by Martin Luther. In Luther&#x27;s Small Catechism, the holy orders include but are not limited to the following: bishops, pastors, preachers, governmental offices, citizens, husbands, wives, children, employees, employers, young people, and widows. However, also according to the Book of Concord: &quot;But if ordination be understood as applying to the ministry of the Word, we are not unwilling to call ordination a sacrament. For the ministry of the Word has God&#x27;s command and glorious promises, Rom. 1:16: The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth. Likewise, Isa. 55:11: So shall My Word be that goeth forth out of My mouth; it shall not return unto Me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please. ...If ordination be understood in this way, neither will we refuse to call the imposition of hands a sacrament. For the Church has the command to appoint ministers, which should be most pleasing to us, because we know that God approves this ministry, and is present in the ministry [that God will preach and work through men and those who have been chosen by men].&quot;

== Process and sequence ==
The sequence in which holy orders are received are: minor orders, deacon, priest, bishop.

For Catholics, it is typical in the years of seminary training that a man will be ordained to the diaconate, which Catholics since the Second Vatican Council sometimes call the &quot;transitional diaconate&quot; to distinguish men bound for priesthood from permanent deacons. They are licensed to preach sermons (under certain circumstances a permanent deacon may not receive faculties to preach), to perform baptisms, and to witness Catholic marriages, but to perform no other sacraments. They assist at the Eucharist or the Mass, but are not able to consecrate the bread and wine. Normally, after six months or more as a transitional deacon, a man will be ordained to the priesthood. Priests are able to preach, perform baptisms, confirm (with special dispensation from their ordinary), witness marriages, hear confessions and give absolutions, anoint the sick, and celebrate the Eucharist or the Mass.

Orthodox seminarians are typically tonsured as readers before entering the seminary, and may later be made subdeacons or deacons; customs vary between seminaries and between Orthodox jurisdictions. Some deacons remain permanently in the diaconate while most subsequently are ordained as priests. Orthodox clergy are typically either married or monastic. Monastic deacons are called hierodeacons, monastic priests are called hieromonks. Orthodox clergy who marry must do so prior to ordination to the subdiaconate (or diaconate, according to local custom) and typically one is either tonsured a monk or married before ordination. A deacon or priest may not marry, or remarry if widowed, without abandoning his clerical office. Often, widowed priests take monastic vows. Orthodox bishops are always monks; a single or widowed man may be elected a bishop but he must be tonsured a monk before consecration as a bishop.

For Anglicans, a person is usually ordained a deacon once he (or she) has completed training at a theological college. The historic practice of a bishop tutoring a candidate himself (&quot;reading for orders&quot;) is still to be found. The candidate then typically serves as an assistant curate and may later be ordained as a priest at the discretion of the bishop. Other deacons may choose to remain in this order. Anglican deacons can preach sermons, perform baptisms and conduct funerals, but, unlike priests, cannot celebrate the Eucharist. In most branches of the Anglican church, women can be ordained as priests, and in some of them, can also be ordained bishops.

Bishops are chosen from among priests in churches that adhere to Catholic usage.
In the Catholic Church, bishops, like priests, are celibate and thus unmarried; further, a bishop is said to possess the fullness of the sacrament of holy orders, empowering him to ordain deacons, priests, and – with papal consent – other bishops. If a bishop, especially one acting as an ordinary – a head of a diocese or archdiocese – is to be ordained, three bishops must usually co-consecrate him with one bishop, usually an archbishop or the bishop of the place, being the chief consecrating prelate.

Among Eastern Rite Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches, which permit married priests, bishops must either be unmarried or agree to abstain from contact with their wives. It is a common misconception that all such bishops come from religious orders; while this is generally true, it is not an absolute rule. In the case of both Catholics – (Western and) Eastern Catholic, Oriental Orthodox and Eastern Orthodox, they are usually leaders of territorial units called dioceses (or its equivalent in the east, an eparchy). Only bishops can validly administer the sacrament of holy orders.

===Recognition of other churches&#x27; orders===
The Catholic Church unconditionally recognizes the validity of ordinations in the Eastern churches. Some Eastern Orthodox churches reordain Catholic priests who convert while others accept their Catholic ordination using the concept of economia (church economy).

Anglican churches claim to have maintained apostolic succession. The succession of Anglican bishops is not universally recognized, however. The Catholic Church judged Anglican orders invalid when Pope Leo XIII in 1896 wrote in &quot;Apostolicae curae&quot; that Anglican orders lack validity because the rite by which priests were ordained was not correctly worded from 1547 to 1553 and from 1559 to the time of Archbishop William Laud (Archbishop of Canterbury 1633–1645). The papacy claimed the form and matter was inadequate to make a Catholic bishop. The actual &quot;mechanical&quot; succession, prayer and laying on hands, was not disputed. Two of the four consecrators of Matthew Parker in 1559 had been consecrated using the Edwardine Ordinals and two using the Roman Pontifical. Nonetheless, they believed that this caused a break of continuity in apostolic succession, making all further ordinations null and void.

Eastern Orthodox bishops have, on occasion, granted &quot;economy&quot; when Anglican priests convert to Orthodoxy. Various Orthodox churches have also declared Anglican orders valid subject to a finding that the bishops in question did indeed maintain the true faith, the Orthodox concept of apostolic succession being one in which the faith must be properly adhered to and transmitted, not simply that the ceremony by which a man is made a bishop is conducted correctly. 

Changes in the Anglican ordinals since King Edward VI, and a fuller appreciation of the pre-Reformation ordinals, suggest that the correctness of the enduring dismissal of Anglican orders is questionable. To reduce doubt concerning Anglican apostolic succession, especially since the 1930 Bonn agreement between the Anglican and Old Catholic churches, some Anglican bishops have included among their consecrators bishops of the Old Catholic Church, whose holy orders are recognised as valid and regular by the Catholic Church.

Neither Catholics nor Anglicans recognize the validity of ordinations of ministers in Protestant churches that do not maintain apostolic succession; but some Anglicans, especially Low Church or Evangelical ones, commonly treat Protestant ministers and their sacraments as valid. Rome also does not recognize the apostolic succession of those Lutheran bodies which retained apostolic succession.

Officially, the Anglican Communion accepts the ordinations of those denominations which are in full communion with their own churches, such as the Lutheran state churches of Scandinavia. Those clergy may preside at services requiring a priest if one is not otherwise available.

===Marriage and holy orders===
Married men may be ordained to the diaconate as permanent deacons, but in the Latin Church of the Catholic Church generally may not be ordained to the priesthood. In the Eastern Catholic Churches and in the Eastern Orthodox Church, married deacons may be ordained priests but may not become bishops. Bishops in the Eastern Rites and the Eastern Orthodox churches are almost always drawn from among monks, who have taken a vow of celibacy. They may be widowers, though; it is not required of them never to have been married.

In some cases, widowed permanent deacons have been ordained to the priesthood. There have been some situations in which men previously married and ordained to the priesthood in an Anglican church or in a Lutheran church have been ordained to the Catholic priesthood and allowed to function much as an Eastern Rite priest but in a Latin Church setting. This is never &quot;sub conditione&quot; (conditionally), as there is in Catholic canon law no true priesthood in Protestant denominations. Such ordination may only happen with the approval of the priest&#x27;s Bishop and a special permission by the Pope.

Anglican clergy may be married or may marry after ordination. In the Old Catholic Church and the Independent Catholic Churches there are no ordination restrictions related to marriage.

== Other concepts of ordination ==
Ordination ritual and procedures vary by denomination. Different churches and denominations specify more or less rigorous requirements for entering into office, and the process of ordination is likewise given more or less ceremonial pomp depending on the group. Many Protestants still communicate authority and ordain to office by having the existing overseers physically lay hands on the candidates for office.

=== Methodist churches ===
The American Methodist model is an episcopal system loosely based on the Anglican model, as the Methodist Church arose from the Anglican Church. It was first devised under the leadership of Bishops Thomas Coke and Francis Asbury of the Methodist Episcopal Church in the late 18th century. In this approach, an elder (or &#x27;presbyter&#x27;) is ordained to word (preaching and teaching), sacrament (administering Baptism and the Lord&#x27;s Supper), order (administering the life of the church and, in the case of bishops, ordaining others for mission and ministry), and service. A deacon is a person ordained only to word and service.

In the United Methodist Church, for instance, seminary graduates are examined and approved by the Conference Board of Ordained Ministry and then the Clergy Session. They are accepted as &quot;probationary (provisional) members of the conference.&quot; The resident bishop may commission them to full-time ministry as &quot;provisional&quot; ministers. (Before 1996, the graduate was ordained as a transitional deacon at this point, a provisional role since eliminated. The order of deacon is now a separate and distinct clergy order in the United Methodist Church.) After serving the probationary period, of a minimum of two years, the probationer is then examined again and either continued on probation, discontinued altogether, or approved for ordination. Upon final approval by the Clergy Session of the Conference, the probationer becomes a full member of the Conference and is then ordained as an elder or deacon by the resident bishop. Those ordained as elders are members of the Order of Elders, and those ordained deacons are members of the Order of Deacons.

John Wesley appointed Thomas Coke (above mentioned as bishop) as &#x27;Superintendent&#x27;, his translation of the Greek &quot;episcopos&quot; (&quot;overseer&quot;) – which is normally translated &#x27;bishop&#x27; in English. The British Methodist Conference has two distinct orders of presbyter and deacon. It does not have bishops as a separate order of ministry. The British Methodist Church has more than 500 superintendents, who are not a separate order of ministry but a role within the order of presbyters. The roles normally undertaken by bishops are expressed in ordaining presbyters and deacons by the annual Conference through its president (or a past president); in confirmation by all presbyters; in local oversight by superintendents; in regional oversight by chairs of Districts.

=== Presbyterian churches ===
Presbyterian churches, following their Scottish forebears, reject the traditions surrounding overseers and instead identify the offices of bishop (&quot;episkopos&quot; in Greek) and elder (&quot;presbuteros&quot; in Greek, from which the term &quot;presbyterian&quot; comes). The two terms seem to be used interchangeably in the Bible (compare Titus 1.5–9 and I Tim. 3.2–7). Their form of church governance is known as presbyterian polity. While there is increasing authority with each level of gathering of elders (&#x27;Session&#x27; over a congregation or parish, then presbytery, then possibly a synod, then the General Assembly), there is no hierarchy of elders. Each elder has an equal vote at the court on which they stand.

Elders are usually chosen at their local level, either elected by the congregation and approved by the Session, or appointed directly by the Session. Some churches place limits on the term that the elders serve, while others ordain elders for life.

Presbyterians also ordain (by laying on of hands) ministers of Word and Sacrament (sometimes known as &#x27;teaching elders&#x27;). These ministers are regarded simply as Presbyters ordained to a different function, but in practice they provide the leadership for the local Session.

Some Presbyterians identify those appointed (by the laying on of hands) to serve in practical ways (Acts 6.1–7) as deacons (&quot;diakonos&quot; in Greek, meaning &#x27;servant&#x27;). In many congregations, a group of men or women is thus set aside to deal with matters such as congregational fabric and finance, releasing elders for more &#x27;spiritual&#x27; work. These persons may be known as &#x27;deacons&#x27;, &#x27;board members&#x27; or &#x27;managers&#x27;, depending on the local tradition. Unlike elders and ministers, they are not usually &#x27;ordained&#x27;, and are often elected by the congregation for a set period of time.

Other Presbyterians have used an &#x27;order of deacons&#x27; as full-time servants of the wider Church. Unlike ministers, they do not administer sacraments or routinely preach. The Church of Scotland has recently begun ordaining deacons to this role.

Unlike the Episcopalian system, but similar to the United Methodist system described above, the two Presbyterian offices are different in &quot;kind&quot; rather than in &quot;degree&quot;, since one need not be a deacon before becoming an elder. Since there is no hierarchy, the two offices do not make up an &#x27;order&#x27; in the technical sense, but the terminology of holy orders is sometimes still developed.

=== Congregationalist churches ===
Congregationalist churches implement different schemes, but the officers usually have less authority than in the presbyterian or episcopalian forms. Some ordain only ministers and rotate members on an advisory board (sometimes called a board of elders or a board of deacons). Because the positions are by comparison less powerful, there is usually less rigor or fanfare in how officers are ordained.

=== Irvingian churches ===
Irvingian churches teach a fourfold ministry of &quot;apostles, prophets, evangelists, and pastors.&quot;

===Latter Day Saint Movement===

==== The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ====

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) accepts the legal authority of clergy to perform marriages but does not recognize any other sacraments performed by ministers not ordained to the Latter-day Saint priesthood. Although the Latter-day Saints do claim a doctrine of a certain spiritual &quot;apostolic succession,&quot; it is significantly different from that claimed by Catholics and Protestants since there is no succession or continuity between the first century and the lifetime of Joseph Smith, the founder of the LDS church. Mormons teach that the priesthood was lost in ancient times not to be restored by Christ until the nineteenth century when it was given to Joseph Smith directly.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a relatively open priesthood, ordaining nearly all worthy adult males and boys of the age of twelve and older. Latter-day Saint priesthood consists of two divisions: the Melchizedek Priesthood and Aaronic Priesthood. The Melchizedek Priesthood because Melchizedek was such a great high priest. Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God. But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek. The lesser priesthood is an appendage to the Melchizedek Priesthood. It is called the Aaronic Priesthood because it was conferred on Aaron and his sons throughout all their generations.
The offices, or ranks, of the Melchizedek order (in roughly descending order) include apostle, seventy, patriarch, high priest, and elder. The offices of the Aaronic order are bishop, priest, teacher, and deacon. The manner of ordination consists of the laying on of hands by two or more men holding at least the office being conferred while one acts as voice in conferring the priesthood or office and usually pronounces a blessing upon the recipient. Teachers and deacons do not have the authority to ordain others to the priesthood. All church members are authorized to teach and preach regardless of priesthood ordination so long as they maintain good standing within the church. The church does not use the term &quot;holy orders.&quot;

====Community of Christ====

Community of Christ has a largely volunteer priesthood, and all members of the priesthood are free to marry (as traditionally defined by the Christian community). The priesthood is divided into two orders, the Aaronic priesthood and the Melchisedec priesthood. The Aaronic order consists of the offices of deacon, teacher and priest. The Melchisedec Order consists of the offices of elder (including the specialized office of seventy) and high priest (including the specialized offices of evangelist, bishop, apostle, and prophet). Paid ministers include &quot;appointees&quot; and the general officers of the church, which include some specialized priesthood offices (such as the office of president, reserved for the three top members of the church leadership team). As of 1984, women have been eligible for priesthood, which is conferred through the sacrament of ordination by the laying-on-of-hands. While there is technically no age requirement for any office of priesthood, there is no automatic ordination or progression as in the LDS Church. Young people are occasionally ordained as deacon, and sometimes teacher or priest, but generally most priesthood members are called following completion of post secondary school education. In March 2007 a woman was ordained for the first time to the office of president.

== Ordination of women ==

The Catholic Church, in accordance with its interpretation of the theological tradition on the issue, and the definitive clarification found in the encyclical letter &quot;Ordinatio sacerdotalis&quot; (1994) written by Pope John Paul II, officially teaches that it has no authority to ordain women as priests and thus there is no possibility of women becoming priests at any time in the future. &quot;Ordaining&quot; women as deaconesses is not a possibility in any sacramental sense of the diaconate, for a deaconess is not simply a female who is a deacon but instead holds a position of lay service. As such, she does not receive the sacrament of holy orders. Many Lutheran, Anglican and other Protestant churches ordain women, but in many cases, only to the office of deacon.

Various branches of the Eastern Orthodox churches, including the Greek Orthodox, currently set aside vows of deaconesses. Some churches are internally divided on whether the Scriptures permit the ordination of women. When one considers the relative size of the traditions (1.1 billion Catholics, 300 million Orthodox, 590 million Protestants), it is a minority of Christian churches that ordain women. Protestants constitute about 27 percent of Christians worldwide, and most of their churches that do ordain women have only done so within the past century; moreover, denominations within the same tradition may differ with respect to women&#x27;s ordination. For example, in Methodism, the Primitive Methodist Church does not ordain women, while the Free Methodist Church does ordain women.

In some traditions women may be ordained to the same orders as men. In others women are restricted from certain offices. Women may be ordained bishop in the Old Catholic churches and in the Anglican/Episcopal churches in Scotland, Ireland, Wales, Cuba, Brazil, South Africa, Canada, US, Australia, Aotearoa New Zealand and Polynesia. The Church of Ireland had installed Pat Storey in 2013. On 19 September 2013, Storey was chosen by the House of Bishops to succeed Richard Clarke as Bishop of Meath and Kildare. She was consecrated to the episcopate at Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin, on 30 November 2013. She is the first woman to be elected as a bishop in the Church of Ireland and the first woman to be an Anglican Communion bishop in Ireland and Great Britain. The Church of England&#x27;s General Synod voted in 2014 to allow women to be ordained to the episcopate, with Libby Lane being the first woman to be ordained bishop. Continuing Anglican churches of the world do not permit women to be ordained. In some Protestant denominations, women may serve as assistant pastors but not as pastors in charge of congregations. In some denominations, women can be ordained to be an elder or deacon. Some denominations allow for the ordination of women for certain religious orders. Within certain traditions, such as the Anglican and Lutheran, there is a diversity of theology and practice regarding ordination of women.

== Ordination of LGBT clergy ==
The ordination of lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender clergy who are sexually active, and open about it, represents a fiercely contested subject within many mainline Protestant communities. The majority of churches are opposed to such ordinations because they view homosexuality as a sin and incompatible with Biblical teaching and traditional Christian practice. Yet there are an increasing number of Christian congregations and communities that are open to ordaining people who are gay or lesbian. These are liberal Protestant denominations, such as the Episcopal Church, the United Church of Christ, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, plus the small Metropolitan Community Church, founded as a church intending to minister primarily to LGBT people, and the Church of Sweden where such clergy may serve in senior clerical positions. The Church of Norway has for many years had both gay and lesbian priests, even bishops, and in 2006 the first woman who was appointed a bishop in Norway came out as an active homosexual herself, and that she had been a homosexual since before she joined the church.

The issue of ordination has caused particular controversy in the worldwide Anglican Communion, following the approval of Gene Robinson to be Bishop of New Hampshire in the US Episcopal Church.

==Footnotes==
== Print resources ==
* Campbell, Dennis. &quot;Yoke of Obedience&quot;, 1988. 
* Oden, Thomas. &quot;Pastoral Theology: Essentials of Ministry&quot;, 1983. 
* Willimon, William. &quot;Calling &amp; Character: Virtues of the Ordained Life&quot;, 2000. 
* Willimon, William. &quot;Pastor: The Theology and Practice of Ordained Ministry&quot;, 2002. 

==Further reading==
* Bray, Gerald L. &quot;Sacraments &amp; Ministry in Ecumenical Perspective&quot;, in series, &quot;Latimer Studies&quot;, 18. Oxford, Eng.: Latimer House, 1984. 

== External links ==
* 
* The Steps to Orders in The United Methodist Church (PDF)
* Elder&#x27;s Orders in the UMC: The Disciplinary Questions and Sample Answers by Gregory S. Neal
* VISION Vocation Guide Information on Catholic priesthood and religious life
* . Located in the United States, Europe and Brazil. A Regular Third Order Catholic congregation.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="11" end="33" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="36" end="47" title="Holy orders" label="holy orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="56" end="64" title="ordination" label="ordained"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="79" end="85" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="87" end="93" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q831474" start="95" end="104" title="presbyter" label="presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="111" end="117" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="127" end="136" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="241" end="256" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="262" end="278" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="392" end="409" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="411" end="419" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="421" end="429" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="431" end="443" title="Old Catholic" label="Old Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159108" start="445" end="465" title="Independent Catholic churches" label="Independent Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="475" end="483" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="623" end="636" title="Christian denomination" label="Denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q113987993" start="821" end="829" title="ordinal (liturgy)" label="ordinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="1020" end="1028" title="Minister of religion" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1185" end="1189" title=":wikt:ordo" label="ordo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1277" end="1286" title=":wikt:ordinatio" label="ordinatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="1495" end="1499" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="1501" end="1510" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="1512" end="1520" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q854905" start="1522" end="1531" title="monsignor" label="monsignor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="1533" end="1543" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q213159" start="1545" end="1558" title="archimandrite" label="archimandrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190552" start="1560" end="1570" title="archpriest" label="archpriest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266260" start="1572" end="1586" title="protopresbyter" label="protopresbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288557" start="1588" end="1597" title="hieromonk" label="hieromonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505768" start="1599" end="1610" title="protodeacon" label="protodeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q633730" start="1615" end="1625" title="archdeacon" label="archdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="1703" end="1711" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="1749" end="1769" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q937617" start="1897" end="1917" title="Thirty-Nine Articles" label="Articles of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q784710" start="2363" end="2384" title="Book of Common Prayer" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2750" end="2765" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="2788" end="2795" title="Bishop (Catholic Church)" label="bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="2797" end="2804" title="deacons" label="deacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q610992" start="2809" end="2819" title="Presbyterium" label="presbyters"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2830" end="2835" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="3019" end="3025" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q831474" start="3042" end="3051" title="presbyter" label="presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="3066" end="3088" title="Canon law (Catholic Church)" label="1983 Code of Canon Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="3143" end="3154" title="sacerdotium" label="sacerdotium"/>
<link wikidata="Q167847" start="3401" end="3417" title="consecrated life" label="consecrated life"/>
<link wikidata="Q924774" start="3516" end="3523" title="Secular clergy" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="3525" end="3533" title="Diocese" label="diocesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="3572" end="3595" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492902" start="3633" end="3644" title="Christian laying on of hands" label="cheirotonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076136" start="3658" end="3676" title="laying on of hands" label="laying on of hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016426" start="3692" end="3706" title="sacred mystery" label="sacred mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076567" start="4003" end="4017" title="Divine Liturgy" label="Divine Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="4046" end="4054" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="4101" end="4107" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="4157" end="4169" title="Holy Trinity" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="4178" end="4190" title="Early Church" label="Early Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="4265" end="4274" title="bishop" label="episcopos"/>
<link wikidata="Q831474" start="4299" end="4308" title="presbyter" label="presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="4351" end="4359" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076136" start="4397" end="4415" title="laying on of hands" label="laying on of hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294384" start="4434" end="4459" title="Eastern Orthodox theology" label="Eastern Orthodox theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="4531" end="4543" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243077" start="4605" end="4617" title="minor orders" label="minor orders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4634" end="4646" title="cheirothesia" label="cheirothesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213159" start="4777" end="4790" title="archimandrite" label="archimandrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269563" start="4795" end="4807" title="stavropegial" label="stavropegial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068193" start="4986" end="4994" title="energeia" label="energeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="5002" end="5014" title="divine grace" label="divine grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="5082" end="5093" title="consecrated" label="consecrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q554482" start="5294" end="5305" title="persecution of Christianity" label="persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q650027" start="5769" end="5776" title="Typikon" label="Typikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380663" start="5860" end="5875" title="Little Entrance" label="Little Entrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q690851" start="6035" end="6046" title="Gospel Book" label="Gospel Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231232" start="6077" end="6097" title="consecrator" label="consecrating bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138500" start="6258" end="6268" title="kathedra" label="synthranon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393839" start="6527" end="6536" title="Faculty (instrument)" label="faculties"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="6572" end="6579" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6597" end="6603" title="Chrism#Eastern Christianity" label="chrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16527251" start="6611" end="6619" title="antimins" label="antimins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="6689" end="6699" title="ordination" label="ordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056817" start="6730" end="6759" title="Anaphora (liturgy)" label="Anaphora (Eucharistic Prayer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380663" start="6855" end="6869" title="Great Entrance" label="Great Entrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4369457" start="6912" end="6915" title="Aër" label="Aër"/>
<link wikidata="Q210723" start="6917" end="6924" title="chalice (cup)" label="chalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497446" start="6925" end="6929" title="veil" label="veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q115665045" start="7076" end="7086" title="procession" label="procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044124" start="7213" end="7219" title="diskos" label="diskos"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="7296" end="7306" title="Holy Table" label="Holy Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q763598" start="7869" end="7880" title="epigonation" label="epigonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283961" start="8143" end="8150" title="omophor" label="omophor"/>
<link wikidata="Q240709" start="8352" end="8358" title="litany" label="litany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995749" start="8506" end="8516" title="Holy Doors" label="Holy Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501052" start="8604" end="8613" title="vestments" label="vestments"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059949" start="8655" end="8661" title="Axios (acclamation)" label="Worthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q931884" start="8687" end="8696" title="Epiklesis" label="Epiklesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481018" start="8751" end="8755" title="Lamb (liturgy)" label="Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q207104" start="8757" end="8761" title="Host (liturgy)" label="Host"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9528" end="9582" title="Hexapteryga#Eastern Christianity" label="liturgical fan &amp;quot;(ripidion or hexapterygion)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="9693" end="9717" title="Eucharist" label="Body and Blood of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="9737" end="9746" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="9822" end="9835" title="sacerdotalism" label="sacerdotalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="9863" end="9876" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q829183" start="9999" end="10007" title="vocation" label="vocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q528092" start="10063" end="10092" title="Luther&amp;#x27;s Small Catechism" label="Luther&amp;#x27;s Small Catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179115" start="10284" end="10289" title="widow" label="widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297994" start="10323" end="10338" title="Book of Concord" label="Book of Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243077" start="11239" end="11251" title="minor orders" label="minor orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="11323" end="11331" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="11535" end="11551" title="permanent deacon" label="permanent deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="11687" end="11694" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353190" start="11712" end="11729" title="Catholic marriage" label="Catholic marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="11787" end="11796" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="11804" end="11808" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="11984" end="11990" title="Preaching" label="preach"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="12000" end="12007" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188613" start="12010" end="12017" title="confirmation" label="confirm"/>
<link wikidata="Q183959" start="12091" end="12102" title="Confession (religion)" label="confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q164361" start="12112" end="12122" title="absolution" label="absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q641922" start="12125" end="12140" title="unction" label="anoint the sick"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="12160" end="12169" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q273761" start="12219" end="12226" title="tonsure" label="tonsure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433533" start="12231" end="12238" title="Reader (liturgy)" label="readers"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="12528" end="12536" title="Monasticism" label="monastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198392" start="12566" end="12577" title="hierodeacon" label="hierodeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288557" start="12608" end="12617" title="hieromonk" label="hieromonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q584157" start="12938" end="12951" title="monastic vows" label="monastic vows"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="13147" end="13153" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753370" start="13390" end="13396" title="curate" label="curate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="13428" end="13434" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="13563" end="13570" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="13636" end="13645" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="13764" end="13770" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="13774" end="13780" title="Bishop" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061186" start="14596" end="14612" title="religious orders" label="religious orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="14829" end="14836" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q285181" start="14873" end="14880" title="eparchy" label="eparchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199063" start="15235" end="15260" title="Economy (Eastern Orthodoxy)" label="economia (church economy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="15263" end="15271" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="15459" end="15472" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q619982" start="15496" end="15513" title="Apostolicae curae" label="Apostolicae curae"/>
<link wikidata="Q325408" start="15686" end="15698" title="William Laud" label="William Laud"/>
<link wikidata="Q711332" start="15942" end="15956" title="Matthew Parker" label="Matthew Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q114001190" start="15996" end="16014" title="Edwardine Ordinals" label="Edwardine Ordinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q263790" start="16033" end="16049" title="Roman Pontifical" label="Roman Pontifical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="16189" end="16205" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="16708" end="16717" title="Edward VI of England" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="16756" end="16767" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q681014" start="16953" end="16967" title="Bonn Agreement (religion)" label="Bonn agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="17092" end="17111" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="17604" end="17622" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="17735" end="17743" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="17976" end="17988" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17996" end="18011" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="18068" end="18093" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="18105" end="18128" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="18296" end="18301" title="Monasticism" label="monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="18603" end="18611" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="18627" end="18635" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18795" end="18809" title="sub conditione" label="sub conditione"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="19101" end="19120" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159108" start="19129" end="19158" title="Independent Catholic Churches" label="Independent Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="19706" end="19715" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q718439" start="19891" end="19902" title="Thomas Coke (Methodist)" label="Thomas Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q145140" start="19907" end="19921" title="Francis Asbury" label="Francis Asbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="19929" end="19955" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155908" start="20003" end="20008" title="Elder (religious)" label="elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="20276" end="20282" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="20338" end="20361" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="21400" end="21411" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="21773" end="21797" title="British Methodist Church" label="British Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147297" start="22045" end="22054" title="President of the Methodist Conference" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283382" start="22135" end="22150" title="District Superintendent (Methodism)" label="superintendents"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="22229" end="22241" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="22268" end="22276" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="22559" end="22564" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526886" start="22619" end="22636" title="Ecclesiastical polity" label="church governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="22649" end="22668" title="presbyterian polity" label="presbyterian polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="24323" end="24341" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q960252" start="24847" end="24864" title="Congregationalist church governance" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q204405" start="25275" end="25284" title="Irvingian" label="Irvingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="25474" end="25521" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="29121" end="29136" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460458" start="29289" end="29311" title="Ordinatio sacerdotalis" label="Ordinatio sacerdotalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="29336" end="29353" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="29402" end="29408" title="ordain" label="ordain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="30573" end="30582" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309308" start="30588" end="30614" title="Primitive Methodist Church" label="Primitive Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066164" start="30648" end="30669" title="Free Methodist Church" label="Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039993" start="31060" end="31070" title="Pat Storey" label="Pat Storey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324762" start="31155" end="31169" title="Richard Clarke (bishop)" label="Richard Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028586" start="31173" end="31200" title="Bishop of Meath and Kildare" label="Bishop of Meath and Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067803" start="31243" end="31274" title="Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin" label="Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="31400" end="31418" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="31429" end="31436" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="31441" end="31454" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643416" start="31567" end="31577" title="Libby Lane" label="Libby Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944747" start="31623" end="31642" title="Continuing Anglican" label="Continuing Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944747" start="31735" end="31740" title="Continuing Anglican" label="women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155908" start="31873" end="31878" title="Elder (religious)" label="elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="31882" end="31888" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="32163" end="32170" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="32172" end="32175" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="32177" end="32185" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="32189" end="32200" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="32304" end="32323" title="mainline Protestant" label="mainline Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="32412" end="32425" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="32431" end="32434" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="32657" end="32675" title="liberal Protestant" label="liberal Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="32676" end="32688" title="Christian denomination" label="denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="32703" end="32719" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="32725" end="32748" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="32758" end="32796" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230004" start="32813" end="32842" title="Metropolitan Community Church" label="Metropolitan Community Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q749243" start="32920" end="32936" title="Church of Sweden" label="Church of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q666860" start="32999" end="33015" title="Church of Norway" label="Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="33337" end="33355" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q144687" start="33383" end="33396" title="Gene Robinson" label="Gene Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q964115" start="33403" end="33426" title="Bishop of New Hampshire" label="Bishop of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="33434" end="33453" title="US Episcopal Church" label="US Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422894" start="33552" end="33564" title="Thomas Oden" label="Oden, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15513988" start="33630" end="33647" title="William Willimon" label="Willimon, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q15513988" start="33725" end="33742" title="William Willimon" label="Willimon, William"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13633" wikidata="Q6691" url="?curid=13633" title="Homer">
<text>Homer (possibly born ) may have been an Ancient Greek poet who authored the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot;, two epic poems that are foundational works of ancient Greek literature. Despite doubts about his authorship, Homer is considered one of the most revered and influential authors in history.

The &quot;Iliad&quot; centers on a quarrel between King Agamemnon and the warrior Achilles during the last year of the Trojan War. The &quot;Odyssey&quot; chronicles the ten-year journey of Odysseus, king of Ithaca, back to his home after the fall of Troy. The epics depict man&#x27;s struggle, the &quot;Odyssey&quot; especially so, as Odysseus perseveres through punishment of the gods. The poems are in Homeric Greek, also known as Epic Greek, a literary language which shows a mixture of features of the Ionic and Aeolic dialects from different centuries; the predominant influence is Eastern Ionic. Most researchers believe that the poems were originally transmitted orally. Despite being predominantly known for their tragic and serious themes, the Homeric poems also contain .

The Homeric poems shaped aspects of ancient Greek culture and education, fostering ideals of heroism, glory, and honor. To Plato, Homer was simply the one who &quot;has taught Greece&quot; (, ). In Dante Alighieri&#x27;s &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;, Virgil refers to Homer as &quot;Poet sovereign&quot;, king of all poets; in the preface to his translation of the &quot;Iliad&quot;, Alexander Pope acknowledges that Homer has always been considered the &quot;greatest of poets&quot;. From antiquity to the present day, Homeric epics have inspired many famous works of literature, music, art, and film.

The question of by whom, when, where and under what circumstances the &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey&quot; were composed continues to be debated. Scholars generally regard the two poems as the works of separate authors. It is thought that the poems were composed at some point around the late eighth or early seventh century BCE. Many accounts of Homer&#x27;s life circulated in classical antiquity, the most widespread that he was a blind bard from Ionia, a region of central coastal Anatolia in present-day Turkey. Modern scholars consider these accounts legendary.

== Works attributed to Homer ==
Today, only the &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;the&quot; &quot;Odyssey&quot; are associated with the name &quot;Homer&quot;. In antiquity, a large number of other works were sometimes attributed to him, including the &quot;Homeric Hymns&quot;, the &quot;Contest of Homer and Hesiod&quot;, several epigrams, the &quot;Little Iliad&quot;, the &quot;Nostoi&quot;, the &quot;Thebaid&quot;, the &quot;Cypria&quot;, the &quot;Epigoni&quot;, the comic mini-epic &quot;Batrachomyomachia&quot; (&quot;The Frog–Mouse War&quot;), the &quot;Margites&quot;, the &quot;Capture of Oechalia&quot;, and the &quot;Phocais&quot;. These claims are not considered authentic today and were not universally accepted in the ancient world. As with the multitude of legends surrounding Homer&#x27;s life, they indicate little more than the centrality of Homer to ancient Greek culture.

==Ancient biographical traditions==

Some ancient accounts about Homer were established early and repeated often. They include that Homer was blind (taking as self-referential a passage describing the blind bard Demodocus), that he resided at Chios, that he was the son of the river Meles and the nymph Critheïs, that he was a wandering bard, that he composed a varying list of other works (the &quot;Homerica&quot;), that he died either in Ios or after failing to solve a riddle set by fishermen, and various explanations for the name &quot;Homer&quot; (, ). Another tradition from the days of the Roman emperor Hadrian says Epicaste (daughter of Nestor) and Telemachus (son of Odysseus) were the parents of Homer.

The two best known ancient biographies of Homer are the &quot;Life of Homer&quot; by the Pseudo-Herodotus and the &quot;Contest of Homer and Hesiod&quot;.

In the early fourth century BC Alcidamas composed a fictional account of a poetry contest at Chalcis with both Homer and Hesiod. Homer was expected to win, and answered all of Hesiod&#x27;s questions and puzzles with ease. Then, each of the poets was invited to recite the best passage from their work. Hesiod selected the beginning of &quot;Works and Days&quot;: &quot;When the Pleiades born of Atlas ... all in due season&quot;. Homer chose a description of Greek warriors in formation, facing the foe, taken from the &quot;Iliad&quot;. Though the crowd acclaimed Homer victor, the judge awarded Hesiod the prize; the poet who praised husbandry, he said, was greater than the one who told tales of battles and slaughter.

== History of Homeric scholarship ==
===Ancient===

The study of Homer is one of the oldest topics in scholarship, dating back to antiquity. Nonetheless, the aims of Homeric studies have changed over the course of the millennia. The earliest preserved comments on Homer concern his treatment of the gods, which hostile critics such as the poet Xenophanes of Colophon denounced as immoral. The allegorist Theagenes of Rhegium is said to have defended Homer by arguing that the Homeric poems are allegories. The &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot; were widely used as school texts in ancient Greek and Hellenistic cultures. They were the first literary works taught to all students. The &quot;Iliad&quot;, particularly its first few books, was far more intently studied than the &quot;Odyssey&quot; during the Hellenistic and Roman periods.

As a result of the poems&#x27; prominence in classical Greek education, extensive commentaries on them developed to explain parts that were culturally or linguistically difficult. During the Hellenistic and Roman periods, many interpreters, especially the Stoics, who believed that Homeric poems conveyed Stoic doctrines, regarded them as allegories, containing hidden wisdom. Perhaps partially because of the Homeric poems&#x27; extensive use in education, many authors believed that Homer&#x27;s original purpose had been to educate. Homer&#x27;s wisdom became so widely praised that he began to acquire the image of almost a prototypical philosopher. Byzantine scholars such as Eustathius of Thessalonica and John Tzetzes produced commentaries, extensions and scholia to Homer, especially in the twelfth century. Eustathius&#x27;s commentary on the &quot;Iliad&quot; alone is massive, sprawling over nearly 4,000 oversized pages in a 21st-century printed version and his commentary on the &quot;Odyssey&quot; an additional nearly 2,000.

===Modern===

In 1488, the Greek scholar Demetrios Chalkokondyles published in Florence the &quot;editio princeps&quot; of the Homeric poems. The earliest modern Homeric scholars started with the same basic approaches towards the Homeric poems as scholars in antiquity. The allegorical interpretation of the Homeric poems that had been so prevalent in antiquity returned to become the prevailing view of the Renaissance. Renaissance humanists praised Homer as the archetypically wise poet, whose writings contain hidden wisdom, disguised through allegory. In western Europe during the Renaissance, Virgil was more widely read than Homer and Homer was often seen through a Virgilian lens.

In 1664, contradicting the widespread praise of Homer as the epitome of wisdom, François Hédelin, abbé d&#x27;Aubignac wrote a scathing attack on the Homeric poems, declaring that they were incoherent, immoral, tasteless, and without style, that Homer never existed, and that the poems were hastily cobbled together by incompetent editors from unrelated oral songs. Fifty years later, the English scholar Richard Bentley concluded that Homer did exist but that he was an obscure, prehistoric oral poet whose compositions bear little relation to the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot; as they have been passed down. According to Bentley, Homer &quot;wrote a Sequel of Songs and Rhapsodies, to be sung by himself for small Earnings and good Cheer at Festivals and other Days of Merriment; the &quot;Ilias&quot; he wrote for men, and the &quot;Odysseis&quot; for the other Sex. These loose songs were not collected together in the Form of an epic Poem till Pisistratus&#x27; time, about 500 Years after.&quot;

Friedrich August Wolf&#x27;s &quot;Prolegomena ad Homerum&quot;, published in 1795, argued that much of the material later incorporated into the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot; was originally composed in the tenth century BC in the form of short, separate oral songs, which passed through oral tradition for roughly four hundred years before being assembled into prototypical versions of the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot; in the sixth century BC by literate authors. After being written down, Wolf maintained that the two poems were extensively edited, modernized, and eventually shaped into their present state as artistic unities. Wolf and the &quot;Analyst&quot; school, which led the field in the nineteenth century, sought to recover the original, authentic poems which were thought to be concealed by later excrescences.

Within the Analyst school were two camps: proponents of the &quot;lay theory&quot;, which held that the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot; were put together from a large number of short, independent songs, and proponents of the &quot;nucleus theory&quot;, which held that Homer had originally composed shorter versions of the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot;, which later poets expanded and revised. A small group of scholars opposed to the Analysts, dubbed &quot;Unitarians&quot;, saw the later additions as superior, the work of a single inspired poet. By around 1830, the central preoccupations of Homeric scholars, dealing with whether or not &quot;Homer&quot; actually existed, when and how the Homeric poems originated, how they were transmitted, when and how they were finally written down, and their overall unity, had been dubbed &quot;the Homeric Question&quot;.

Following World War I, the Analyst school began to fall out of favor among Homeric scholars. It did not die out entirely, but it came to be increasingly seen as a discredited dead end. Starting in around 1928, Milman Parry and Albert Lord, after their studies of folk bards in the Balkans, developed the &quot;Oral-Formulaic Theory&quot; that the Homeric poems were originally composed through improvised oral performances, which relied on traditional epithets and poetic formulas. This theory found very wide scholarly acceptance and explained many previously puzzling features of the Homeric poems, including their unusually archaic language, their extensive use of stock epithets, and their other &quot;repetitive&quot; features. Many scholars concluded that the &quot;Homeric Question&quot; had finally been answered.

Meanwhile, the &#x27;Neoanalysts&#x27; sought to bridge the gap between the &#x27;Analysts&#x27; and &#x27;Unitarians&#x27;. The Neoanalysts sought to trace the relationships between the Homeric poems and other epic poems, which have now been lost, but of which modern scholars do possess some patchy knowledge. Neoanalysts hold that knowledge of earlier versions of the epics can be derived from anomalies of structure and detail in the surviving versions of the &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey&quot;. These anomalies point to earlier versions of the &quot;Iliad&quot; in which Ajax played a more prominent role, in which the Achaean embassy to Achilles comprised different characters, and in which Patroclus was actually mistaken for Achilles by the Trojans. They point to earlier versions of the &quot;Odyssey&quot; in which Telemachus went in search of news of his father not to Menelaus in Sparta but to Idomeneus in Crete, in which Telemachus met up with his father in Crete and conspired with him to return to Ithaca disguised as the soothsayer Theoclymenus, and in which Penelope recognized Odysseus much earlier in the narrative and conspired with him in the destruction of the suitors.

===Contemporary===
Most contemporary scholars, although they disagree on other questions about the genesis of the poems, agree that the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot; were not produced by the same author, based on &quot;the many differences of narrative manner, theology, ethics, vocabulary, and geographical perspective, and by the apparently imitative character of certain passages of the &quot;Odyssey&quot; in relation to the &quot;Iliad&quot;.&quot; Nearly all scholars agree that the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot; are unified poems, in that each poem shows a clear overall design and that they are not merely strung together from unrelated songs. It is also generally agreed that each poem was composed mostly by a single author, who probably relied heavily on older oral traditions. Nearly all scholars agree that the &quot;Doloneia&quot; in Book X of the &quot;Iliad&quot; is not part of the original poem, but rather a later insertion by a different poet.

Some ancient scholars believed Homer to have been an eyewitness to the Trojan War; others thought he had lived up to 500 years afterwards. Contemporary scholars continue to debate the date of the poems. A long history of oral transmission lies behind the composition of the poems, complicating the search for a precise date. At one extreme, Richard Janko has proposed a date for both poems to the eighth century BC based on linguistic analysis and statistics. Barry B. Powell dates the composition of the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot; to sometime between 800 and 750 BC, based on the statement from Herodotus, who lived in the late fifth century BC, that Homer lived four hundred years before his own time &quot;and not more&quot; () and on the fact that the poems do not mention hoplite battle tactics, inhumation, or literacy.

Martin Litchfield West has argued that the &quot;Iliad&quot; echoes the poetry of Hesiod and that it must have been composed around 660–650 BC at the earliest, with the &quot;Odyssey&quot; up to a generation later. He also interprets passages in the &quot;Iliad&quot; as showing knowledge of historical events that occurred in the ancient Near East during the middle of the seventh century BC, including the destruction of Babylon by Sennacherib in 689 BC and the Sack of Thebes by Ashurbanipal in 663/4 BC. At the other extreme, a few American scholars such as Gregory Nagy see &quot;Homer&quot; as a continually evolving tradition, which grew much more stable as the tradition progressed, but which did not fully cease to continue changing and evolving until as late as the middle of the second century BC.

&quot;&#x27;Homer&quot; is a name of unknown etymological origin, around which many theories were erected in antiquity. One such linkage was to the Greek ( or ). The explanations suggested by modern scholars tend to mirror their position on the overall Homeric Question. Nagy interprets it as &quot;he who fits (the song) together&quot;. West has advanced both possible Greek and Phoenician etymologies.

==Historicity of the Homeric epics and Homeric society==

Scholars continue to debate questions such as whether the Trojan War actually took place – and if so when and where – and to what extent the society depicted by Homer is based on his own or one which was, even at the time of the poems&#x27; composition, known only as legends. The Homeric epics are largely set in the east and center of the Mediterranean, with some scattered references to Egypt, Ethiopia and other distant lands, in a warlike society that resembles that of the Greek world slightly before the hypothesized date of the poems&#x27; composition.

In ancient Greek chronology, the sack of Troy was dated to 1184 BC. By the nineteenth century, there was widespread scholarly skepticism that the Trojan War had ever happened and that Troy had even existed, but in 1873 Heinrich Schliemann announced to the world that he had discovered the ruins of Homer&#x27;s Troy at Hisarlik in modern Turkey. Some contemporary scholars think the destruction of Troy VIIa 1220 BC was the origin of the myth of the Trojan War, others that the poem was inspired by multiple similar sieges that took place over the centuries.

Most scholars now agree that the Homeric poems depict customs and elements of the material world that are derived from different periods of Greek history. For instance, the heroes in the poems use bronze weapons, characteristic of the Bronze Age in which the poems are set, rather than the later Iron Age during which they were composed; yet the same heroes are cremated (an Iron Age practice) rather than buried (as they were in the Bronze Age). In some parts of the Homeric poems, heroes are described as carrying large shields like those used by warriors during the Mycenaean period, but, in other places, they are instead described carrying the smaller shields that were commonly used during the time when the poems were written in the early Iron Age.
In the &quot;Iliad&quot; 10.260–265, Odysseus is described as wearing a helmet made of boar&#x27;s tusks. Such helmets were not worn in Homer&#x27;s time, but were commonly worn by aristocratic warriors between 1600 and 1150 BC.

The decipherment of Linear B in the 1950s by Michael Ventris and continued archaeological investigation has increased modern scholars&#x27; understanding of the Bronze Age Aegean civilisation, which in many ways resembles the ancient Near East more than the society described by Homer. Some aspects of the Homeric world are simply made up; for instance, the &quot;Iliad&quot; 22.145–56 describes there being two springs that run near the city of Troy, one that runs steaming hot and the other that runs icy cold. It is here that Hector takes his final stand against Achilles. Archaeologists, however, have uncovered no evidence that springs of this description ever actually existed.

== Style and language ==
The Homeric epics are written in an artificial literary language or &#x27;Kunstsprache&#x27; only used in epic hexameter poetry. Homeric Greek shows features of multiple regional Greek dialects and periods, but is fundamentally based on Ionic Greek, in keeping with the tradition that Homer was from Ionia. Linguistic analysis suggests that the &quot;Iliad&quot; was composed slightly before the &quot;Odyssey&quot; and that Homeric formulae preserve features older than other parts of the poems.

The poems were composed in unrhymed dactylic hexameter; ancient Greek metre was quantity-based rather than stress-based. Homer frequently uses set phrases such as epithets (&#x27;crafty Odysseus&#x27;, &#x27;rosy-fingered Dawn&#x27;, &#x27;owl-eyed Athena&#x27;, etc.), Homeric formulae (&#x27;and then answered [him/her], Agamemnon, king of men&#x27;, &#x27;when the early-born rose-fingered Dawn came to light&#x27;, &#x27;thus he/she spoke&#x27;), simile, type scenes, ring composition and repetition. These habits aid the extemporizing bard, and are characteristic of oral poetry. For instance, the main words of a Homeric sentence are generally placed towards the beginning, whereas literate poets like Virgil or Milton use longer and more complicated syntactical structures. Homer then expands on these ideas in subsequent clauses; this technique is called parataxis.

The so-called &#x27;type scenes&#x27; (), were named by Walter Arend in 1933. He noted that Homer often, when describing frequently recurring activities such as eating, praying, fighting and dressing, used blocks of set phrases in sequence that were then elaborated by the poet. The &#x27;Analyst&#x27; school had considered these repetitions as un-Homeric, whereas Arend interpreted them philosophically. Parry and Lord noted that these conventions are found in many other cultures.

&#x27;Ring composition&#x27; or chiastic structure (when a phrase or idea is repeated at both the beginning and end of a story, or a series of such ideas first appears in the order A, B, C ... before being reversed as ... C, B, A) has been observed in the Homeric epics. Opinion differs as to whether these occurrences are a conscious artistic device, a mnemonic aid or a spontaneous feature of human storytelling.

Both of the Homeric poems begin with an invocation to the Muse. In the &quot;Iliad&quot;, the poet beseeches her to sing of &quot;the anger of Achilles&quot;, and in the &quot;Odyssey&quot;, he asks her to tell of &quot;the man of many ways&quot;. A similar opening was later employed by Virgil in his &quot;Aeneid&quot;.

== Textual transmission ==
The orally transmitted Homeric poems were put into written form at some point between the eighth and sixth centuries BCE. Some scholars believe that they were dictated to a scribe by the poet and that our inherited versions of the &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey&quot; were in origin orally dictated texts. Albert Lord noted that the Balkan bards that he was studying revised and expanded their songs in their process of dictating. Some scholars hypothesize that a similar process of revision and expansion occurred when the Homeric poems were first written down.

Other scholars hold that, after the poems were created in the eighth century, they continued to be orally transmitted with considerable revision until they were written down in the sixth century. After textualisation, the poems were each divided into 24 rhapsodes, today referred to as books, and labelled by the letters of the Greek alphabet. Most scholars attribute the book divisions to the Hellenistic scholars of Alexandria, in Egypt. Some trace the divisions back further to the Classical period. Very few credit Homer himself with the divisions.

In antiquity, it was widely held that the Homeric poems were collected and organised in Athens in the late sixth century BCE by Pisistratus (died 528/7 BCE), in what subsequent scholars have dubbed the &quot;Peisistratean recension&quot;. The idea that the Homeric poems were originally transmitted orally and first written down during the reign of Pisistratus is referenced by the first-century BCE Roman orator Cicero and is also referenced in a number of other surviving sources, including two ancient &quot;Lives of Homer&quot;. From around 150 BCE, the texts of the Homeric poems found in papyrus fragments exhibit much less variation, and the text seems to have become relatively stable. After the establishment of the Library of Alexandria, Homeric scholars such as Zenodotus of Ephesus, Aristophanes of Byzantium and in particular Aristarchus of Samothrace helped establish a canonical text.

The first printed edition of Homer was produced in 1488 in Milan, Italy by Demetrios Chalkokondyles. Today scholars use medieval manuscripts, papyri and other sources; some argue for a &quot;multi-text&quot; view, rather than seeking a single definitive text. The nineteenth-century edition of Arthur Ludwich mainly follows Aristarchus&#x27;s work, whereas van Thiel&#x27;s (1991, 1996) follows the medieval vulgate. Others, such as Martin West (1998–2000) or T. W. Allen, fall somewhere between these two extremes.

== See also ==
* Achaeans (Homer)
* Bibliomancy
* Catalogue of Ships
* Creophylus of Samos
* Cyclic Poets
* Deception of Zeus
* Early Greek cosmology
* Geography of the &quot;Odyssey&quot;
* Greek mythology
* Homeric psychology
* Homer&#x27;s Ithaca
* List of Homeric characters
* &quot;Sortes Homericae&quot;
* &quot;Tabulae Iliacae&quot;
* &quot;Telemachy&quot;
* The Golden Bough
* Trojan Battle Order
* Trojan War in literature and the arts
* Venetus A manuscript
== Notes ==
== References ==
===Sources===
* 
* 

== Selected bibliography ==

=== Editions ===
;Texts in Homeric Greek
* Demetrius Chalcondyles &quot;editio princeps&quot;, Florence, 1488
* the Aldine editions (1504 and 1517)
* 1st ed. with comments, Micyllus and Camerarius, Basel, 1535, 1541 (improved text), 1551 (incl. the Batrachomyomachia)
* Th. Ridel, Strasbourg, c. 1572, 1588 and 1592.
* Wolf (Halle, 1794–1795; Leipzig, 1804 1807)
* Spitzner (Gotha, 1832–1836)
* Bekker (Berlin, 1843; Bonn, 1858)
* La Roche (&quot;Odyssey&quot;, 1867–1868; &quot;Iliad&quot;, 1873–1876, both at Leipzig)
* Ludwich (&quot;Odyssey&quot;, Leipzig, 1889–1891; &quot;Iliad&quot;, 2 vols., 1901 and 1907)
* W. Leaf (&quot;Iliad&quot;, London, 1886–1888; 2nd ed. 1900–1902)
* William Walter Merry and James Riddell (&quot;Odyssey&quot; i–xii., 2nd ed., Oxford, 1886)
* Monro, D. B. (&quot;Odyssey&quot; xiii–xxiv. with appendices, Oxford, 1901)
* Monro, D. B. and Allen, T. W. (&quot;Iliad&quot;), and Allen (&quot;Odyssey&quot;, 1908, Oxford).
* D. B. Monro and T. W. Allen 1917–1920, &quot;Homeri Opera&quot; (5 volumes: &quot;Iliad&quot;=3rd edition, &quot;Odyssey&quot;=2nd edition), Oxford. 
* H. van Thiel 1991, &quot;Homeri Odyssea&quot;, Hildesheim. , 1996, &quot;Homeri Ilias&quot;, Hildesheim. 
* P. von der Mühll 1993, &quot;Homeri Odyssea&quot;, Munich/Leipzig. 
* M. L. West 1998–2000, &quot;Homeri Ilias&quot; (2 volumes), Munich/Leipzig. 
* M. L. West 2017, &quot;Homerus Odyssea&quot;, Berlin/Boston. 

=== Interlinear translations ===
* &quot;The Iliad of Homer a Parsed Interlinear&quot;, Handheldclassics.com (2008) Text 

=== English translations ===

This is a partial list of translations into English of Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey&quot;.
* Robert Fitzgerald (1910–1985)
** &quot;The Iliad&quot;, Farrar, Straus and Giroux (2004) 
** &quot;The Odyssey&quot;, Farrar, Straus and Giroux (1998) 
* Robert Fagles (1933–2008)
** &quot;The Iliad&quot;, Penguin Classics (1998) 
** &quot;The Odyssey&quot;, Penguin Classics (1999) 
* Stanley Lombardo (b. 1943)
** &quot;Iliad&quot;, Hackett Publishing Company (1997) 
** &quot;Odyssey&quot;, Hackett Publishing Company (2000) 
** &quot;Iliad&quot;, (Audiobook) Parmenides (2006) 
** &quot;Odyssey&quot;, (Audiobook) Parmenides (2006) 
** &quot;The Essential Homer&quot;, (Audiobook) Parmenides (2006) 
** &quot;The Essential Iliad&quot;, (Audiobook) Parmenides (2006) 
* Barry B. Powell (b. 1942)
** &quot;Iliad&quot;, Oxford University Press (2013) 
** &quot;Odyssey&quot;, Oxford University PressI (2014) 
** &quot;Homer&#x27;s Iliad and Odyssey: The Essential Books&quot;, Oxford University Press (2014) 
* Samuel Butler (1835–1902)
** &quot;The Iliad&quot;, Red and Black Publishers (2008) 
** &quot;The Odyssey&quot;, Red and Black Publishers (2008) 
* Emily Wilson (b. 1971)
** &quot;The Odyssey&quot;, W. W. Norton (2017) 
** &quot;The Iliad&quot;, W. W. Norton (2023) 

=== General works on Homer ===
* 
* In German, 5th updated and expanded edition, Leipzig, 2005. In Spanish, 2003, . In modern Greek, 2005, .
* 
* 

=== Influential readings and interpretations ===
* (orig. publ. in German, 1946, Bern)
* 
* 
* 
* Reece, Steve. &quot;The Stranger&#x27;s Welcome: Oral Theory and the Aesthetics of the Homeric Hospitality Scene.&quot; Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993.

=== Commentaries ===
* &quot;Iliad&quot;:
** P.V. Jones (ed.) 2003, &quot;Homer&#x27;s Iliad. A Commentary on Three Translations&quot;, London. 
** G. S. Kirk (gen. ed.) 1985–1993, &quot;The Iliad: A Commentary&quot; (6 volumes), Cambridge. 
** J. Latacz (gen. ed.) 2002 &quot;Homers Ilias. Gesamtkommentar. Auf der Grundlage der Ausgabe von Ameis-Hentze-Cauer (1868–1913)&quot; (6 volumes published so far, of an estimated 15), Munich/Leipzig. , 
** N. Postlethwaite (ed.) 2000, &quot;Homer&#x27;s Iliad: A Commentary on the Translation of Richmond Lattimore&quot;, Exeter. 
** M. W. Willcock (ed.) 1976, &quot;A Companion to the Iliad&quot;, Chicago. 
* &quot;Odyssey&quot;:
** A. Heubeck (gen. ed.) 1990–1993, &quot;A Commentary on Homer&#x27;s Odyssey&quot; (3 volumes; orig. publ. 1981–1987 in Italian), Oxford. , , 
** P. Jones (ed.) 1988, &quot;Homer&#x27;s Odyssey: A Commentary based on the English Translation of Richmond Lattimore&quot;, Bristol. 
** I. J. F. de Jong (ed.) 2001, &quot;A Narratological Commentary on the Odyssey&quot;, Cambridge. 

=== Dating the Homeric poems ===


== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==


* Works by Homer at Perseus Digital Library
* 
* 
* The Chicago Homer 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="0" end="5" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="40" end="53" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="82" end="87" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="108" end="115" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="127" end="136" title="epic poem" label="epic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q657246" start="169" end="193" title="ancient Greek literature" label="ancient Greek literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626057" start="203" end="230" title="Homeric Question" label="doubts about his authorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="323" end="328" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="369" end="378" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="395" end="403" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="432" end="442" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="503" end="511" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060492" start="521" end="527" title="Homer&amp;#x27;s Ithaca" label="Ithaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q990062" start="719" end="732" title="Homeric Greek" label="Homeric Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097949" start="762" end="779" title="literary language" label="literary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q504165" start="821" end="826" title="Ionic Greek" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q406373" start="831" end="837" title="Aeolic Greek" label="Aeolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="973" end="991" title="Oral tradition" label="transmitted orally"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="1221" end="1226" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="1296" end="1311" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="1325" end="1338" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="1346" end="1352" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="1479" end="1493" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626057" start="1699" end="1711" title="Homeric Question" label="The question"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752936" start="2039" end="2068" title="ancient accounts of Homer" label="accounts of Homer&amp;#x27;s life"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="2083" end="2102" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q215144" start="2144" end="2148" title="bard" label="bard"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="2154" end="2159" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2189" end="2197" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="2261" end="2267" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="2525" end="2538" title="Homeric Hymns" label="Homeric Hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q918515" start="2556" end="2583" title="Contest of Homer and Hesiod" label="Contest of Homer and Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25207824" start="2599" end="2607" title="epigrams (Homer)" label="epigrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087365" start="2619" end="2631" title="Little Iliad" label="Little Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999875" start="2649" end="2655" title="Nostoi" label="Nostoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q478880" start="2673" end="2680" title="Thebaid (Greek poem)" label="Thebaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075630" start="2698" end="2704" title="Cypria" label="Cypria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067424" start="2722" end="2729" title="Epigoni (epic)" label="Epigoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328064" start="2763" end="2780" title="Batrachomyomachia" label="Batrachomyomachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711488" start="2831" end="2839" title="Margites" label="Margites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403804" start="2857" end="2876" title="Capture of Oechalia" label="Capture of Oechalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186628" start="2898" end="2905" title="Phocais" label="Phocais"/>
<link wikidata="Q215144" start="3370" end="3374" title="bard" label="bard"/>
<link wikidata="Q844808" start="3375" end="3384" title="Demodocus (Odyssey character)" label="Demodocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="3406" end="3411" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337631" start="3440" end="3451" title="river Meles" label="river Meles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697745" start="3466" end="3474" title="Critheïs" label="Critheïs"/>
<link wikidata="Q216993" start="3604" end="3607" title="Ios (island)" label="Ios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="3776" end="3783" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726833" start="3789" end="3797" title="Epicaste" label="Epicaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q193267" start="3811" end="3817" title="Nestor (mythology)" label="Nestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192482" start="3823" end="3833" title="Telemachus" label="Telemachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="3842" end="3850" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12902606" start="3942" end="3955" title="Life of Homer (Pseudo-Herodotus)" label="Life of Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q918515" start="4000" end="4027" title="Contest of Homer and Hesiod" label="Contest of Homer and Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q444459" start="4067" end="4076" title="Alcidamas" label="Alcidamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="4157" end="4163" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="4378" end="4392" title="Works and Days" label="Works and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q922942" start="4415" end="4423" title="Pleiades (Greek mythology)" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="4432" end="4437" title="Atlas (mythology)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="4562" end="4567" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="4673" end="4682" title="husbandry" label="husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131671" start="5104" end="5114" title="Xenophanes" label="Xenophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q666209" start="5164" end="5184" title="Theagenes of Rhegium" label="Theagenes of Rhegium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="5254" end="5264" title="Allegory" label="allegories"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="5655" end="5670" title="classical Greek" label="classical Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="5801" end="5812" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="5866" end="5872" title="Stoicism" label="Stoics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="6264" end="6273" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q453465" start="6291" end="6317" title="Eustathius of Thessalonica" label="Eustathius of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="6322" end="6334" title="John Tzetzes" label="John Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="6373" end="6380" title="scholia" label="scholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q983661" start="6692" end="6716" title="Demetrios Chalkokondyles" label="Demetrios Chalkokondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="6730" end="6738" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249682" start="6749" end="6764" title="editio princeps" label="editio princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="7059" end="7070" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="7236" end="7247" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="7249" end="7255" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q714015" start="7420" end="7458" title="François Hédelin, abbé d&amp;#x27;Aubignac" label="François Hédelin, abbé d&amp;#x27;Aubignac"/>
<link wikidata="Q712899" start="7745" end="7760" title="Richard Bentley" label="Richard Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q242172" start="8305" end="8316" title="Pisistratus" label="Pisistratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65337" start="8359" end="8380" title="Friedrich August Wolf" label="Friedrich August Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10125" end="10136" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q463948" start="10325" end="10337" title="Milman Parry" label="Milman Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q762270" start="10342" end="10353" title="Albert Lord" label="Albert Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="13207" end="13217" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326826" start="13477" end="13490" title="Richard Janko" label="Richard Janko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863988" start="13596" end="13611" title="Barry B. Powell" label="Barry B. Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="13751" end="13760" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="13932" end="13939" title="hoplite" label="hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="13956" end="13966" title="Burial" label="inhumation"/>
<link wikidata="Q669908" start="13982" end="14004" title="Martin Litchfield West" label="Martin Litchfield West"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="14064" end="14070" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="14405" end="14412" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207140" start="14416" end="14427" title="Sennacherib" label="Sennacherib"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643354" start="14446" end="14460" title="Sack of Thebes" label="Sack of Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q171191" start="14464" end="14476" title="Ashurbanipal" label="Ashurbanipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634647" start="14544" end="14556" title="Gregory Nagy" label="Gregory Nagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="15596" end="15609" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="15645" end="15650" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="15652" end="15660" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57106" start="16036" end="16055" title="Heinrich Schliemann" label="Heinrich Schliemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="16136" end="16144" title="Hisarlik" label="Hisarlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q941943" start="16215" end="16224" title="Troy VIIa" label="Troy VIIa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="16612" end="16622" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="16673" end="16681" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="16946" end="16962" title="Mycenaean period" label="Mycenaean period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243176" start="17205" end="17237" title="Boar&amp;#x27;s tusk helmet" label="helmet made of boar&amp;#x27;s tusks"/>
<link wikidata="Q190102" start="17383" end="17391" title="Linear B" label="Linear B"/>
<link wikidata="Q259378" start="17408" end="17423" title="Michael Ventris" label="Michael Ventris"/>
<link wikidata="Q192530" start="17535" end="17554" title="Aegean civilisation" label="Aegean civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="17892" end="17898" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097949" start="18120" end="18137" title="literary language" label="literary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548" start="18184" end="18193" title="hexameter" label="hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q504165" start="18310" end="18321" title="Ionic Greek" label="Ionic Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254470" start="18607" end="18625" title="dactylic hexameter" label="dactylic hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192624" start="18641" end="18646" title="metre (poetry)" label="metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142448" start="18734" end="18742" title="Epithets in Homer" label="epithets"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="18757" end="18765" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178417" start="18793" end="18797" title="Eos" label="Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="18820" end="18826" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180696" start="19022" end="19028" title="Homeric simile" label="simile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="19279" end="19285" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="19289" end="19295" title="John Milton" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479098" start="19434" end="19443" title="parataxis" label="parataxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860913" start="19466" end="19476" title="type scene" label="type scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890316" start="19615" end="19622" title="Homeric prayer" label="praying"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450873" start="19963" end="19981" title="chiastic structure" label="chiastic structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="20405" end="20409" title="Muse" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="20655" end="20661" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q916292" start="20870" end="20876" title="scribe" label="scribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q762270" start="21008" end="21019" title="Albert Lord" label="Albert Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="21594" end="21608" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="21684" end="21694" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q242172" start="21948" end="21959" title="Pisistratus" label="Pisistratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="22233" end="22239" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="22545" end="22566" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q189718" start="22593" end="22602" title="Zenodotus" label="Zenodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313018" start="22615" end="22640" title="Aristophanes of Byzantium" label="Aristophanes of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q312114" start="22659" end="22684" title="Aristarchus of Samothrace" label="Aristarchus of Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q983661" start="22796" end="22820" title="Demetrios Chalkokondyles" label="Demetrios Chalkokondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="22863" end="22869" title="papyri" label="papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q710472" start="23015" end="23029" title="Arthur Ludwich" label="Arthur Ludwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q669908" start="23154" end="23165" title="Martin Litchfield West" label="Martin West"/>
<link wikidata="Q15850824" start="23181" end="23192" title="Thomas William Allen" label="T. W. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="23255" end="23271" title="Achaeans (Homer)" label="Achaeans (Homer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q282244" start="23274" end="23285" title="Bibliomancy" label="Bibliomancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233048" start="23288" end="23306" title="Catalogue of Ships" label="Catalogue of Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q608224" start="23309" end="23328" title="Creophylus of Samos" label="Creophylus of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077736" start="23331" end="23343" title="Cyclic Poets" label="Cyclic Poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249103" start="23346" end="23363" title="Deception of Zeus" label="Deception of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125784610" start="23366" end="23387" title="Early Greek cosmology" label="Early Greek cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535270" start="23390" end="23426" title="Geography of the Odyssey" label="Geography of the &amp;quot;Odyssey&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="23429" end="23444" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q106432551" start="23447" end="23465" title="Homeric psychology" label="Homeric psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060492" start="23468" end="23487" title="Homer&amp;#x27;s Ithaca" label="Homer&amp;#x27;s Ithaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573384" start="23490" end="23516" title="List of Homeric characters" label="List of Homeric characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473760" start="23525" end="23541" title="Sortes Homericae" label="Sortes Homericae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699758" start="23556" end="23571" title="Tabulae Iliacae" label="Tabulae Iliacae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982865" start="23586" end="23595" title="Telemachy" label="Telemachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737006" start="23604" end="23620" title="The Golden Bough (mythology)" label="The Golden Bough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941638" start="23623" end="23642" title="Trojan Battle Order" label="Trojan Battle Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845118" start="23645" end="23682" title="Trojan War in literature and the arts" label="Trojan War in literature and the arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512863" start="23685" end="23694" title="Venetus A" label="Venetus A"/>
<link wikidata="Q983661" start="23828" end="23850" title="Demetrius Chalcondyles" label="Demetrius Chalcondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q567488" start="23901" end="23916" title="Aldine editions" label="Aldine editions"/>
<link wikidata="Q84776" start="23958" end="23966" title="Jacob Micyllus" label="Micyllus"/>
<link wikidata="Q64361" start="23971" end="23981" title="Joachim Camerarius" label="Camerarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328064" start="24034" end="24051" title="Batrachomyomachia" label="Batrachomyomachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019969" start="24470" end="24490" title="William Walter Merry" label="William Walter Merry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142094" start="24495" end="24508" title="James Riddell (scholar)" label="James Riddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231416" start="24563" end="24575" title="David Monro (scholar)" label="Monro, D. B."/>
<link wikidata="Q15850824" start="24658" end="24670" title="Thomas William Allen" label="Allen, T. W."/>
<link wikidata="Q669908" start="25071" end="25081" title="Martin Litchfield West" label="M. L. West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344366" start="25479" end="25496" title="Robert Fitzgerald" label="Robert Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344237" start="25633" end="25646" title="Robert Fagles" label="Robert Fagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599755" start="25765" end="25781" title="Stanley Lombardo" label="Stanley Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637282" start="25814" end="25840" title="Hackett Publishing Company" label="Hackett Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637282" start="25873" end="25899" title="Hackett Publishing Company" label="Hackett Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863988" start="26152" end="26167" title="Barry B. Powell" label="Barry B. Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q312829" start="26391" end="26404" title="Samuel Butler (novelist)" label="Samuel Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372429" start="26539" end="26551" title="Emily Wilson (classicist)" label="Emily Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364785" start="27221" end="27231" title="Geoffrey Kirk" label="G. S. Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q90190" start="27318" end="27327" title="Joachim Latacz" label="J. Latacz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13635" wikidata="Q312242" url="?curid=13635" title="Hugo Gernsback">
<text>Hugo Gernsback (; born Hugo Gernsbacher, August 16, 1884 – August 19, 1967) was a Luxembourgish American editor and magazine publisher whose publications included the first science fiction magazine, &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. His contributions to the genre as publisher were so significant that, along with the novelists Jules Verne and H. G. Wells, he is sometimes called &quot;The Father of Science Fiction&quot;. In his honor, annual awards presented at the World Science Fiction Convention are named the &quot;Hugos&quot;.

Gernsback emigrated to the U.S. in 1904 and later became a citizen. He was also a significant figure in the electronics and radio industries, even starting a radio station, WRNY, and the world&#x27;s first magazine about electronics and radio, &quot;Modern Electrics&quot;. Gernsback died in New York City in 1967.

== Personal life ==
Gernsback was born in 1884 in Luxembourg City, to Berta (Dürlacher), a housewife, and Moritz Gernsbacher, a winemaker. His family was Jewish. Gernsback emigrated to the United States in 1904 and later became a naturalized citizen. He married three times: to Rose Harvey in 1906, Dorothy Kantrowitz in 1921, and Mary Hancher (1914–1985) in 1951. In 1925, he founded radio station WRNY, which was broadcast from the 18th floor of the Roosevelt Hotel in New York City. In 1928, WRNY aired some of the first television broadcasts. During the show, audio stopped and each artist waved or bowed onscreen. When audio resumed, they performed. Gernsback is also considered a pioneer in amateur radio.

Before helping to create science fiction, Gernsback was an entrepreneur in the electronics industry, importing radio parts from Europe to the United States and helping to popularize amateur &quot;wireless&quot;. In April 1908 he founded &quot;Modern Electrics&quot;, the world&#x27;s first magazine about both electronics and radio, called &quot;wireless&quot; at the time. While the cover of the magazine itself states it was a catalog, most historians note that it contained articles, features, and plotlines, qualifying it as a magazine.

Under its auspices, in January 1909, he founded the Wireless Association of America, which had 10,000 members within a year. In 1912, Gernsback said that he estimated 400,000 people in the U.S. were involved in amateur radio. In 1913, he founded a similar magazine, &quot;The Electrical Experimenter&quot;, which became &quot;Science and Invention&quot; in 1920. It was in these magazines that he began including scientific fiction stories alongside science journalism, including his novel &quot;Ralph 124C 41+&quot;, which he ran for 12 months from April 1911 in &quot;Modern Electrics&quot;.

Hugo Gernsback started the &quot;Radio News&quot; magazine for amateur radio enthusiasts in 1919.

He died at Roosevelt Hospital (Mount Sinai West as of 2020) in New York City on August 19, 1967, at age 83.

==Science fiction==

Gernsback provided a forum for the modern genre of science fiction in 1926 by founding the first magazine dedicated to it, &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. The inaugural April issue comprised a one-page editorial and reissues of six stories, three less than ten years old and three by Poe, Verne, and Wells. He said he became interested in the concept after reading a translation of the work of Percival Lowell as a child. His idea of a perfect science fiction story was &quot;75 percent literature interwoven with 25 percent science&quot;. As an editor, he valued the goal of scientific accuracy in science fiction stories: &quot;Not only did Gernsback establish a panel of experts——all reputable professionals from universities, museums, and institutes—to pass judgment on the accuracy of the science; he also encouraged his writers to elaborate on the scientific details they employed in their stories, comment on the impossibilities in each other&#x27;s stories, and even offered his readers prize money for identifying scientific errors.&quot; He also played an important role in starting science fiction fandom, by organizing the Science Fiction League and by publishing the addresses of people who wrote letters to his magazines. Fans began to organize, and became aware of themselves as a movement, a social force; this was probably decisive for the subsequent history of the genre.

Gernsback created his preferred term for the emerging genre, &quot;scientifiction&quot;, in 1916. He is sometimes also credited with coining &quot;science fiction&quot; in 1929 in the preface of the first &quot;Science Wonder Stories&quot;, although instances of &quot;science-fiction&quot; (mostly, but not always, hyphenated) have been found as far back as 1851, and the preface itself makes no mention of it being a new term.

In 1929, he lost ownership of his first magazines after a bankruptcy lawsuit. There is some debate about whether this process was genuine, manipulation by publisher Bernarr Macfadden, or a Gernsback scheme to begin another company. After losing control of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, Gernsback founded two new science fiction magazines, &quot;Science Wonder Stories&quot; and &quot;Air Wonder Stories&quot;. A year later, due to Depression-era financial troubles, the two were merged into &quot;Wonder Stories&quot;, which Gernsback continued to publish until 1936, when it was sold to Thrilling Publications and renamed &quot;Thrilling Wonder Stories&quot;. Gernsback returned in 1952–53 with &quot;Science-Fiction Plus&quot;.

Gernsback was noted for sharp, sometimes shady, business practices, and for paying his writers extremely low fees or not paying them at all. H. P. Lovecraft and Clark Ashton Smith referred to him as &quot;Hugo the Rat&quot;.

Barry Malzberg has said:

Gernsback&#x27;s venality and corruption, his sleaziness and his utter disregard for the financial rights of authors, have been well documented and discussed in critical and fan literature. That the founder of genre science fiction who gave his name to the field&#x27;s most prestigious award and who was the Guest of Honor at the 1952 Worldcon was pretty much a crook (and a contemptuous crook who stiffed his writers but paid himself $100K a year as President of Gernsback Publications) has been clearly established. 

Jack Williamson, who had to hire an attorney associated with the American Fiction Guild to force Gernsback to pay him, summed up his importance for the genre:

At any rate, his main influence in the field was simply to start Amazing and Wonder Stories and get SF out to the public newsstands—and to name the genre he had earlier called &quot;scientifiction.&quot;

== Fiction ==
Frederik Pohl said in 1965 that Gernsback&#x27;s &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; published &quot;the kind of stories Gernsback himself used to write: a sort of animated catalogue of gadgets&quot;. Gernsback&#x27;s fiction includes the novel &quot;Ralph 124C 41+&quot;; the title is a pun on the phrase &quot;one to foresee for many&quot; (&quot;one plus&quot;). Even though &quot;Ralph 124C 41+&quot; has been described as pioneering many ideas and themes found in later SF work, it has often been neglected due to what most critics deem poor artistic quality. Author Brian Aldiss called the story a &quot;tawdry illiterate tale&quot; and a &quot;sorry concoction&quot;, while author and editor Lester del Rey called it &quot;simply dreadful.&quot; While most other modern critics have little positive to say about the story&#x27;s writing, &quot;Ralph 124C 41+&quot; is considered by science fiction critic Gary Westfahl as &quot;essential text for all studies of science fiction.&quot;

Gernsback&#x27;s second novel, &quot;Baron Münchausen&#x27;s Scientific Adventures&quot;, was serialized in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; in 1928.

Gernsback&#x27;s third (and final) novel, &quot;Ultimate World&quot;, written , was not published until 1971. Lester del Rey described it simply as &quot;a bad book&quot;, marked more by routine social commentary than by scientific insight or extrapolation. James Blish, in a caustic review, described the novel as &quot;incompetent, pedantic, graceless, incredible, unpopulated and boring&quot; and concluded that its publication &quot;accomplishes nothing but the placing of a blot on the memory of a justly honored man.&quot;

Gernsback combined his fiction and science into &quot;Everyday Science and Mechanics&quot; magazine, serving as the editor in the 1930s.

== Legacy ==
In 1954, Gernsback was awarded an Officer of Luxembourg&#x27;s Order of the Oak Crown, an honor equivalent to being knighted.

The Hugo Awards or &quot;Hugos&quot; are the annual achievement awards presented at the World Science Fiction Convention, selected in a process that ends with vote by current Convention members. They originated and acquired the &quot;Hugo&quot; nickname during the 1950s and were formally defined as a convention responsibility under the name &quot;Science Fiction Achievement Awards&quot; early in the 1960s. The nickname soon became almost universal and its use legally protected; &quot;Hugo Award(s)&quot; replaced the longer name in all official uses after the 1991 cycle.

In 1960 Gernsback received a special Hugo Award as &quot;The Father of Magazine Science Fiction&quot;.

The Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 1996, its inaugural class of two deceased and two living persons.

Science fiction author Brian W. Aldiss held a contrary view about Gernsback&#x27;s contributions: &quot;It is easy to argue that Hugo Gernsback ... was one of the worst disasters to hit the science fiction field ... Gernsback himself was utterly without any literary understanding. He created dangerous precedents which many later editors in the field followed.&quot;

Gernsback made significant contributions to the growth of early broadcasting, mostly through his efforts as a publisher. He originated the industry of specialized publications for radio with &quot;Modern Electrics&quot; and &quot;Electrical Experimenter&quot;. Later on, and more influentially, he published &quot;Radio News&quot;, which would have the largest readership among radio magazines in radio broadcasting&#x27;s formative years. He edited &quot;Radio News&quot; until 1929. For a short time he hired John F. Rider to be editor. Rider was a former engineer working with the US Army Signal Corps and a radio engineer for Alfred H. Grebe, a radio manufacturer. However, Rider would soon leave Gernsback and form his own publishing company, John F. Rider Publisher, New York around 1931.

Gernsback made use of the magazine to promote his interests, including having his radio station&#x27;s call letters on the cover starting in 1925. WRNY and &quot;Radio News&quot; were used to cross-promote each other, with programs on his station often used to discuss articles he had published, and articles in the magazine often covering program activities at WRNY. He also advocated for future directions in innovation and regulation of radio. The magazine contained many drawings and diagrams, encouraging radio listeners of the 1920s to experiment themselves to improve the technology. WRNY was often used as a laboratory to see if various radio inventions were worthwhile.

Articles that were published about television were also tested in this manner when the radio station was used to send pictures to experimental television receivers in August 1928. The technology, however, required sending sight and sound one after the other rather than sending both at the same time, as WRNY only broadcast on one channel. Such experiments were expensive, eventually contributing to Gernsback&#x27;s Experimenter Publishing Company going into bankruptcy in 1929. WRNY was sold to Aviation Radio, who maintained the channel part-time to broadcast aviation weather reports and related feature programs. Along with other stations sharing the same frequency, it was acquired by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and consolidated into that company&#x27;s WHN in 1934.

In 2020, Eric Schockmel directed the documentary feature film &quot;Tune Into the Future&quot;, which explores the life of Hugo Gernsback.

== Patents and inventions ==
Gernsback held 80 patents by the time of his death in New York City on August 19, 1967.

His first patent was a new method for manufacturing dry cell batteries, a patent applied for on June 28, 1906, and granted February 5, 1907.

Among his inventions are a combined electric hair brush and comb (), 1912; an ear cushion () in 1927; and a hydraulic fishery (), in 1955.

Gernsback published a work entitled &quot;Music for the Deaf&quot; in &quot;The Electrical Experimenter&quot; describing the Physiophone, a device which converted audio into electrical impulses that could be detected by humans. He advocated this device as a method for allowing the deaf to experience music.

Other patents held by Gernsback are related to: Incandescent Lamp, Electrorheostat Regulator, Electro Adjustable Condenser, Detectorium, Relay, Potentiometer, Electrolytic Interrupter, Rotary Variable Condenser, Luminous Electric Mirror, Transmitter, Postal Card, Telephone Headband, Electromagnetic Sounding Device, Submersible Amusement Device, The Isolator, Apparatus for Landing Flying Machines, Tuned Telephone Receiver, Electric Valve, Detector, Acoustic Apparatus, Electrically Operated Fountain, Cord Terminal, Coil Mounting, Radio Horn, Variable Condenser, Switch, Telephone Receiver, Crystal Detector, Process for Mounting Inductances, Depilator, Code Learner&#x27;s Instrument.

== Bibliography ==

Novels:

* &quot;Ralph 124C 41+&quot; (1911)
* &quot;Baron Münchausen&#x27;s Scientific Adventures&quot; (1928)
* &quot;Ultimate World&quot; (1971)

Short stories:

* &quot;The Electric Duel&quot; (1927)
* &quot;The Killing Flash (fr)&quot; (1929)
* &quot;The Cosmatomic Flyer&quot; Science-Fiction Plus (March 1953)

Magazines edited or published:
* &quot;Air Wonder Stories&quot; – July 1929 to May 1930, merged with &quot;Science Wonder Stories&quot; to form &quot;Wonder Stories&quot;
* &quot;Amazing Detective Stories&quot;
* &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;
* &quot;Aviation Mechanics&quot;
* &quot;Electrical Experimenter&quot; – 1913 to 1920; became &quot;Science and Invention&quot;
* &quot;Everyday Mechanics&quot; – from 1929; changed to &quot;Everyday Science and Mechanics&quot; as of October 1931 issue
* &quot;Everyday Science and Mechanics&quot; – see &quot;Science and Mechanics&quot;
* &quot;The Experimenter&quot; – originally &quot;Practical Electrics&quot;, the first issue under this title was November 1924; merged into &quot;Science and Invention&quot; in 1926
* &quot;Facts of Life&quot;
* &quot;Flight&quot;
* &quot;Fotocraft&quot;
* &quot;French Humor&quot; – became &quot;Tidbits&quot;
* &quot;Gadgets&quot;
* &quot;High Seas Adventures&quot;
* &quot;Know Yourself&quot;
* &quot;Life Guide&quot;
* &quot;Light&quot;
* &quot;Luz&quot;
* &quot;Milady&quot;
* &quot;Modern Electrics&quot; – 1908 to 1914 (sold in 1913; new owners merged it with &quot;Electrician and Mechanic&quot;)
* &quot;Moneymaking&quot;
* &quot;Motor Camper &amp; Tourist&quot;
* &quot;New Ideas for Everybody&quot;
* &quot;Pirate Stories&quot;
* &quot;Popular Medicine&quot;
* &quot;Popular Microscopy&quot; – at least thru May–June 1935 (vol 1 #6)
* &quot;Practical Electrics&quot; – Dec. 1921 to Oct. 1924, became &quot;The Experimenter&quot;
* &quot;Radio Amateur News&quot; – July 1919 to July 1920, dropped the word &quot;amateur&quot; and became just &quot;Radio News&quot;
* &quot;Radio and Television&quot;
* &quot;Radio-Craft&quot; — July 1929 to September 1948, became &quot;Radio-Electronics&quot;
* &quot;Radio-Electronics&quot; — October 1948 to June 1992, became &quot;Electronics Now&quot;
* &quot;Radio Electronics Weekly Business Letter&quot;
* &quot;Radio Listeners Guide and Call Book&quot; [title varies]
* &quot;Radio News&quot; — July 1919 (as &quot;Radio Amateur News&quot;) to July 1948
* &quot;Radio Program Weekly&quot;
* &quot;Radio Review&quot;
* &quot;Science and Invention&quot; – formerly &quot;Electrical Experimenter&quot;; published August 1920 to August 1931
* &quot;Science and Mechanics&quot; – originally &quot;Everyday Mechanics&quot;; changed to &quot;Everyday Science and Mechanics&quot; in 1931. &quot;Everyday&quot; dropped as March 1937 issue, and published as &quot;Science and Mechanics&quot; until 1976
* &quot;Science Fiction Plus&quot; – March to Dec. 1953
* &quot;Science Wonder Stories&quot; – June 1929 to May 1930, merged with &quot;Air Wonder Stories&quot; to form &quot;Wonder Stories&quot;
* &quot;Science Wonder Quarterly&quot; – Fall 1929 to Spring 1930, renamed &quot;Wonder Stories Quarterly&quot; and continuing to Winter 1933
* &quot;Scientific Detective Monthly&quot;
* &quot;Sexologia&quot;
* &quot;Sexology&quot;
* &quot;Short-Wave and Television&quot;
* &quot;Short-Wave Craft&quot; – merged into &quot;Radio-Craft&quot;
* &quot;Short-Wave Listener&quot;
* &quot;Superworld Comics&quot;
* &quot;Technocracy Review&quot;
* &quot;Television&quot; – 1928
* &quot;Television News&quot; – March 1931 to October 1932; merged into &quot;Radio Review&quot;, then into &quot;Radio News&quot; as of March 1933
* &quot;Tidbits&quot;, originally &quot;French Humor&quot;
* &quot;Woman&#x27;s Digest&quot;
* &quot;Wonder Stories&quot; – June 1930 to April 1936
* &quot;Your Body&quot;
* &quot;Your Dreams&quot;
== See also ==
* List of science fiction editors
* Pulp magazine

== Notes ==
==References==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* &quot;Textes d&#x27;Hugo Gernsback sur la télévision&quot; on the website &quot;Histoire de la télévision&quot;
* Radio Before Radio at the web site of the American Radio Relay League
* Gernsback interviewed on &quot;Horizon&quot;, 1965
* Hugo Gernsback Library &amp; Publications, AmericanRadioHistory.Com
* &quot;Boys of Wireless&quot; at American Experience (PBS)—Contains information about Gernsback&#x27;s role in early amateur radio
* Hugo Gernsback, Publisher – discussion of Gernsback as a magazine publisher, with links to cover images of most of his technical and other non-fiction magazines
* 
* Hugo Gernsback Papers – description of his papers in the Special Collections Research Center of the Syracuse University Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312242" start="0" end="14" title="Hugo Gernsback" label="Hugo Gernsback"/>
<link wikidata="Q312242" start="23" end="39" title="Hugo Gernsback" label="Hugo Gernsbacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272184" start="82" end="104" title="Luxembourgish American" label="Luxembourgish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399338" start="173" end="197" title="science fiction magazine" label="science fiction magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="205" end="220" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="323" end="334" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="339" end="350" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q617378" start="463" end="495" title="World Science Fiction Convention" label="World Science Fiction Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="516" end="521" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960276" start="780" end="796" title="Modern Electrics" label="Modern Electrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="896" end="911" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg City"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="1076" end="1095" title="naturalized citizen" label="naturalized citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090581" start="1245" end="1249" title="WRNY (New York City)" label="WRNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761492" start="1294" end="1313" title="Roosevelt Hotel (New York)" label="the Roosevelt Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="1543" end="1556" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358497" start="1638" end="1658" title="electronics industry" label="electronics industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960276" start="1802" end="1818" title="Modern Electrics" label="Modern Electrics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2153" end="2184" title="Wireless Association of America" label="Wireless Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037977" start="2373" end="2400" title="The Electrical Experimenter" label="The Electrical Experimenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q937389" start="2597" end="2611" title="Ralph 124C 41+" label="Ralph 124C 41+"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280931" start="2729" end="2739" title="Radio News" label="Radio News"/>
<link wikidata="Q41559869" start="2826" end="2842" title="Mount Sinai West" label="Mount Sinai West"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="3054" end="3069" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="3206" end="3209" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="3211" end="3216" title="Jules Verne" label="Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="3222" end="3227" title="H. G. Wells" label="Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q218575" start="3316" end="3331" title="Percival Lowell" label="Percival Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085171" start="4015" end="4037" title="science fiction fandom" label="science fiction fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356064" start="4057" end="4079" title="Science Fiction League" label="Science Fiction League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4755" end="4792" title="Experimenter Publishing#Bankruptcy" label="lost ownership of his first magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356411" start="4908" end="4925" title="Bernarr Macfadden" label="Bernarr Macfadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706756" start="5239" end="5253" title="Wonder Stories" label="Wonder Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798206" start="5330" end="5352" title="Thrilling Publications" label="Thrilling Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143683" start="5444" end="5464" title="Science-Fiction Plus" label="Science-Fiction Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="5614" end="5629" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q555298" start="5634" end="5652" title="Clark Ashton Smith" label="Clark Ashton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q113554" start="5699" end="5713" title="Barry N. Malzberg" label="Barry Malzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547193" start="6056" end="6069" title="10th World Science Fiction Convention" label="1952 Worldcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q316788" start="6246" end="6261" title="Jack Williamson" label="Jack Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312641" start="6625" end="6638" title="Frederik Pohl" label="Frederik Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q937389" start="6868" end="6882" title="Ralph 124C 41+" label="Ralph 124C 41+"/>
<link wikidata="Q238702" start="7189" end="7201" title="Brian Aldiss" label="Brian Aldiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q684748" start="7316" end="7330" title="Lester del Rey" label="Lester del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526134" start="7529" end="7542" title="Gary Westfahl" label="Gary Westfahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q248867" start="8014" end="8025" title="James Blish" label="James Blish"/>
<link wikidata="Q94093" start="8500" end="8522" title="Order of the Oak Crown" label="Order of the Oak Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="8553" end="8561" title="knighthood" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="8568" end="8578" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q617378" start="8652" end="8684" title="World Science Fiction Convention" label="World Science Fiction Convention"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9250" end="9290" title="EMP Museum#Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q238702" start="9397" end="9412" title="Brian W. Aldiss" label="Brian W. Aldiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280931" start="10057" end="10067" title="Radio News" label="Radio News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232528" start="10254" end="10267" title="John F. Rider" label="John F. Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q736213" start="10327" end="10347" title="US Army Signal Corps" label="US Army Signal Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722766" start="10373" end="10388" title="Alfred H. Grebe" label="Alfred H. Grebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232528" start="10491" end="10514" title="John F. Rider" label="John F. Rider Publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090581" start="10686" end="10690" title="WRNY (New York City)" label="WRNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038447" start="11636" end="11659" title="Experimenter Publishing" label="Experimenter Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="11910" end="11929" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564667" start="11972" end="11975" title="WEPN (AM)" label="WHN"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="12209" end="12222" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13559828" start="12296" end="12304" title="dry cell" label="dry cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="12979" end="12992" title="Potentiometer" label="Potentiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q118948495" start="13182" end="13194" title="The Isolator (helmet)" label="The Isolator"/>
<link wikidata="Q625145" start="13481" end="13490" title="hair removal" label="Depilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q937389" start="13562" end="13576" title="Ralph 124C 41+" label="Ralph 124C 41+"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13757" end="13774" title="The Killing Flash" label="The Killing Flash"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13776" end="13778" title=":fr:L&amp;#x27;Éclair mortel" label="fr"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="14082" end="14097" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037977" start="14145" end="14168" title="Electrical Experimenter" label="Electrical Experimenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428742" start="14661" end="14667" title="Flight International" label="Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960276" start="14931" end="14947" title="Modern Electrics" label="Modern Electrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357770" start="15016" end="15040" title="Electrician and Mechanic" label="Electrician and Mechanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816640" start="15561" end="15572" title="Radio-Craft" label="Radio-Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816640" start="15655" end="15672" title="Radio-Electronics" label="Radio-Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280931" start="15871" end="15881" title="Radio News" label="Radio News"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143683" start="16396" end="16416" title="Science Fiction Plus" label="Science Fiction Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074095" start="16801" end="16809" title="Sexology (magazine)" label="Sexology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706756" start="17305" end="17319" title="Wonder Stories" label="Wonder Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q12733420" start="17419" end="17450" title="List of science fiction editors" label="List of science fiction editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="17453" end="17466" title="Pulp magazine" label="Pulp magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q466576" start="17709" end="17736" title="American Radio Relay League" label="American Radio Relay League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112475" start="17770" end="17777" title="Horizon (UK TV series)" label="Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="18260" end="18279" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13636" wikidata="Q186148" url="?curid=13636" title="History of computing hardware">
<text>The history of computing hardware spans the developments from early devices used for simple calculations to today&#x27;s complex computers, encompassing advancements in both analog and digital technology.

The first aids to computation were purely mechanical devices which required the operator to set up the initial values of an elementary arithmetic operation, then manipulate the device to obtain the result. In later stages, computing devices began representing numbers in continuous forms, such as by distance along a scale, rotation of a shaft, or a specific voltage level. Numbers could also be represented in the form of digits, automatically manipulated by a mechanism. Although this approach generally required more complex mechanisms, it greatly increased the precision of results. The development of transistor technology, followed by the invention of integrated circuit chips, led to revolutionary breakthroughs. Transistor-based computers and, later, integrated circuit-based computers enabled digital systems to gradually replace analog systems, increasing both efficiency and processing power. Metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) large-scale integration (LSI) then enabled semiconductor memory and the microprocessor, leading to another key breakthrough, the miniaturized personal computer (PC), in the 1970s. The cost of computers gradually became so low that personal computers by the 1990s, and then mobile computers (smartphones and tablets) in the 2000s, became ubiquitous.

==Early devices==
===Ancient and medieval===
Devices have been used to aid computation for thousands of years, mostly using one-to-one correspondence with fingers. The earliest counting device was probably a form of tally stick. The Lebombo bone from the mountains between Eswatini and South Africa may be the oldest known mathematical artifact. It dates from 35,000 BCE and consists of 29 distinct notches that were deliberately cut into a baboon&#x27;s fibula. Later record keeping aids throughout the Fertile Crescent included calculi (clay spheres, cones, etc.) which represented counts of items, probably livestock or grains, sealed in hollow unbaked clay containers. The use of counting rods is one example. The abacus was early used for arithmetic tasks. What we now call the Roman abacus was used in Babylonia as early as –2300 BC. Since then, many other forms of reckoning boards or tables have been invented. In a medieval European counting house, a checkered cloth would be placed on a table, and markers moved around on it according to certain rules, as an aid to calculating sums of money.

Several analog computers were constructed in ancient and medieval times to perform astronomical calculations. These included the astrolabe and Antikythera mechanism from the Hellenistic world (c. 150–100 BC). In Roman Egypt, Hero of Alexandria (c. 10–70 AD) made mechanical devices including automata and a programmable cart. The steam-powered automatic flute described by the &quot;Book of Ingenious Devices&quot; (850) by the Persian-Baghdadi Banū Mūsā brothers may have been the first programmable device.

Other early mechanical devices used to perform one or another type of calculations include the planisphere and other mechanical computing devices invented by Al-Biruni (c. AD 1000); the equatorium and universal latitude-independent astrolabe by Al-Zarqali (c. AD 1015); the astronomical analog computers of other medieval Muslim astronomers and engineers; and the astronomical clock tower of Su Song (1094) during the Song dynasty. The castle clock, a hydropowered mechanical astronomical clock invented by Ismail al-Jazari in 1206, was the first programmable analog computer. Ramon Llull invented the Lullian Circle: a notional machine for calculating answers to philosophical questions (in this case, to do with Christianity) via logical combinatorics. This idea was taken up by Leibniz centuries later, and is thus one of the founding elements in computing and information science.

=== Renaissance calculating tools===
Scottish mathematician and physicist John Napier discovered that the multiplication and division of numbers could be performed by the addition and subtraction, respectively, of the logarithms of those numbers. While producing the first logarithmic tables, Napier needed to perform many tedious multiplications. It was at this point that he designed his &#x27;Napier&#x27;s bones&#x27;, an abacus-like device that greatly simplified calculations that involved multiplication and division.
Since real numbers can be represented as distances or intervals on a line, the slide rule was invented in the 1620s, shortly after Napier&#x27;s work, to allow multiplication and division operations to be carried out significantly faster than was previously possible. Edmund Gunter built a calculating device with a single logarithmic scale at the University of Oxford. His device greatly simplified arithmetic calculations, including multiplication and division. William Oughtred greatly improved this in 1630 with his circular slide rule. He followed this up with the modern slide rule in 1632, essentially a combination of two Gunter rules, held together with the hands. Slide rules were used by generations of engineers and other mathematically involved professional workers, until the invention of the pocket calculator.

===Mechanical calculators===
In 1609, Guidobaldo del Monte made a mechanical multiplier to calculate fractions of a degree. Based on a system of four gears, the rotation of an index on one quadrant corresponds to 60 rotations of another index on an opposite quadrant. Thanks to this machine, errors in the calculation of first, second, third and quarter degrees can be avoided. Guidobaldo is the first to document the use of gears for mechanical calculation.

Wilhelm Schickard, a German polymath, designed a calculating machine in 1623 which combined a mechanized form of Napier&#x27;s rods with the world&#x27;s first mechanical adding machine built into the base. Because it made use of a single-tooth gear there were circumstances in which its carry mechanism would jam. A fire destroyed at least one of the machines in 1624 and it is believed Schickard was too disheartened to build another.
In 1642, while still a teenager, Blaise Pascal started some pioneering work on calculating machines and after three years of effort and 50 prototypes he invented a mechanical calculator. He built twenty of these machines (called Pascal&#x27;s calculator or Pascaline) in the following ten years. Nine Pascalines have survived, most of which are on display in European museums. A continuing debate exists over whether Schickard or Pascal should be regarded as the &quot;inventor of the mechanical calculator&quot; and the range of issues to be considered is discussed elsewhere.
Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz invented the stepped reckoner and his famous stepped drum mechanism around 1672. He attempted to create a machine that could be used not only for addition and subtraction but would use a moveable carriage to enable multiplication and division. Leibniz once said &quot;It is unworthy of excellent men to lose hours like slaves in the labour of calculation which could safely be relegated to anyone else if machines were used.&quot; However, Leibniz did not incorporate a fully successful carry mechanism. Leibniz also described the binary numeral system, a central ingredient of all modern computers. However, up to the 1940s, many subsequent designs (including Charles Babbage&#x27;s machines of 1822 and even ENIAC of 1945) were based on the decimal system.

Around 1820, Charles Xavier Thomas de Colmar created what would over the rest of the century become the first successful, mass-produced mechanical calculator, the Thomas Arithmometer. It could be used to add and subtract, and with a moveable carriage the operator could also multiply, and divide by a process of long multiplication and long division. It utilised a stepped drum similar in conception to that invented by Leibniz. Mechanical calculators remained in use until the 1970s.

===Punched-card data processing===
In 1804, French weaver Joseph Marie Jacquard developed a loom in which the pattern being woven was controlled by a paper tape constructed from punched cards. The paper tape could be changed without changing the mechanical design of the loom. This was a landmark achievement in programmability. His machine was an improvement over similar weaving looms. Punched cards were preceded by punch bands, as in the machine proposed by Basile Bouchon. These bands would inspire information recording for automatic pianos and more recently numerical control machine tools.
In the late 1880s, the American Herman Hollerith invented data storage on punched cards that could then be read by a machine. To process these punched cards, he invented the tabulator and the keypunch machine. His machines used electromechanical relays and counters. Hollerith&#x27;s method was used in the 1890 United States census. That census was processed two years faster than the prior census had been. Hollerith&#x27;s company eventually became the core of IBM.

By 1920, electromechanical tabulating machines could add, subtract, and print accumulated totals. Machine functions were directed by inserting dozens of wire jumpers into removable control panels. When the United States instituted Social Security in 1935, IBM punched-card systems were used to process records of 26 million workers. Punched cards became ubiquitous in industry and government for accounting and administration.

Leslie Comrie&#x27;s articles on punched-card methods and W. J. Eckert&#x27;s publication of &quot;Punched Card Methods in Scientific Computation&quot; in 1940, described punched-card techniques sufficiently advanced to solve some differential equations or perform multiplication and division using floating-point representations, all on punched cards and unit record machines. Such machines were used during World War II for cryptographic statistical processing, as well as a vast number of administrative uses. The Astronomical Computing Bureau of Columbia University performed astronomical calculations representing the state of the art in computing.

===Calculators===
By the 20th century, earlier mechanical calculators, cash registers, accounting machines, and so on were redesigned to use electric motors, with gear position as the representation for the state of a variable. The word &quot;computer&quot; was a job title assigned to primarily women who used these calculators to perform mathematical calculations. By the 1920s, British scientist Lewis Fry Richardson&#x27;s interest in weather prediction led him to propose human computers and numerical analysis to model the weather; to this day, the most powerful computers on Earth are needed to adequately model its weather using the Navier–Stokes equations.

Companies like Friden, Marchant Calculator and Monroe made desktop mechanical calculators from the 1930s that could add, subtract, multiply and divide. In 1948, the Curta was introduced by Austrian inventor Curt Herzstark. It was a small, hand-cranked mechanical calculator and as such, a descendant of Gottfried Leibniz&#x27;s Stepped Reckoner and Thomas&#x27; Arithmometer.

The world&#x27;s first &quot;all-electronic desktop&quot; calculator was the British Bell Punch ANITA, released in 1961. It used vacuum tubes, cold-cathode tubes and Dekatrons in its circuits, with 12 cold-cathode &quot;Nixie&quot; tubes for its display. The ANITA sold well since it was the only electronic desktop calculator available, and was silent and quick. The tube technology was superseded in June 1963 by the U.S. manufactured Friden EC-130, which had an all-transistor design, a stack of four 13-digit numbers displayed on a CRT, and introduced reverse Polish notation (RPN).

==First proposed general-purpose computing device==
The Industrial Revolution (late 18th to early 19th century) had a significant impact on the evolution of computing hardware, as the era&#x27;s rapid advancements in machinery and manufacturing laid the groundwork for mechanized and automated computing. Industrial needs for precise, large-scale calculations—especially in fields such as navigation, engineering, and finance—prompted innovations in both design and function, setting the stage for devices like Charles Babbage&#x27;s difference engine (1822). This mechanical device was intended to automate the calculation of polynomial functions and represented one of the earliest applications of computational logic.

Babbage, often regarded as the &quot;father of the computer,&quot; envisioned a fully mechanical system of gears and wheels, powered by steam, capable of handling complex calculations that previously required intensive manual labor. His difference engine, designed to aid navigational calculations, ultimately led him to conceive the analytical engine in 1833. This concept, far more advanced than his difference engine, included an arithmetic logic unit, control flow through conditional branching and loops, and integrated memory. Babbage&#x27;s plans made his analytical engine the first general-purpose design that could be described as Turing-complete in modern terms.

The analytical engine was programmed using punched cards, a method adapted from the Jacquard loom invented by Joseph Marie Jacquard in 1804, which controlled textile patterns with a sequence of punched cards. These cards became foundational in later computing systems as well. Babbage&#x27;s machine would have featured multiple output devices, including a printer, a curve plotter, and even a bell, demonstrating his ambition for versatile computational applications beyond simple arithmetic.

Ada Lovelace expanded on Babbage&#x27;s vision by conceptualizing algorithms that could be executed by his machine. Her notes on the analytical engine, written in the 1840s, are now recognized as the earliest examples of computer programming. Lovelace saw potential in computers to go beyond numerical calculations, predicting that they might one day generate complex musical compositions or perform tasks like language processing.

Though Babbage&#x27;s designs were never fully realized due to technical and financial challenges, they influenced a range of subsequent developments in computing hardware. Notably, in the 1890s, Herman Hollerith adapted the idea of punched cards for automated data processing, which was utilized in the U.S. Census and sped up data tabulation significantly, bridging industrial machinery with data processing.

The Industrial Revolution&#x27;s advancements in mechanical systems demonstrated the potential for machines to conduct complex calculations, influencing engineers like Leonardo Torres Quevedo and Vannevar Bush in the early 20th century. Torres Quevedo designed an electromechanical machine with floating-point arithmetic, while Bush&#x27;s later work explored electronic digital computing. By the mid-20th century, these innovations paved the way for the first fully electronic computers.

==Analog computers==

In the first half of the 20th century, analog computers were considered by many to be the future of computing. These devices used the continuously changeable aspects of physical phenomena such as electrical, mechanical, or hydraulic quantities to model the problem being solved, in contrast to digital computers that represented varying quantities symbolically, as their numerical values change. As an analog computer does not use discrete values, but rather continuous values, processes cannot be reliably repeated with exact equivalence, as they can with Turing machines.

The first modern analog computer was a tide-predicting machine, invented by Sir William Thomson, later Lord Kelvin, in 1872. It used a system of pulleys and wires to automatically calculate predicted tide levels for a set period at a particular location and was of great utility to navigation in shallow waters. His device was the foundation for further developments in analog computing.

The differential analyser, a mechanical analog computer designed to solve differential equations by integration using wheel-and-disc mechanisms, was conceptualized in 1876 by James Thomson, the brother of the more famous Lord Kelvin. He explored the possible construction of such calculators, but was stymied by the limited output torque of the ball-and-disk integrators. In a differential analyzer, the output of one integrator drove the input of the next integrator, or a graphing output.

A notable series of analog calculating machines were developed by Leonardo Torres Quevedo since 1895, including one that was able to compute the roots of arbitrary polynomials of order eight, including the complex ones, with a precision down to thousandths.
An important advance in analog computing was the development of the first fire-control systems for long range ship gunlaying. When gunnery ranges increased dramatically in the late 19th century it was no longer a simple matter of calculating the proper aim point, given the flight times of the shells. Various spotters on board the ship would relay distance measures and observations to a central plotting station. There the fire direction teams fed in the location, speed and direction of the ship and its target, as well as various adjustments for Coriolis effect, weather effects on the air, and other adjustments; the computer would then output a firing solution, which would be fed to the turrets for laying. In 1912, British engineer Arthur Pollen developed the first electrically powered mechanical analogue computer (called at the time the Argo Clock). It was used by the Imperial Russian Navy in World War I. The alternative Dreyer Table fire control system was fitted to British capital ships by mid-1916.

Mechanical devices were also used to aid the accuracy of aerial bombing. Drift Sight was the first such aid, developed by Harry Wimperis in 1916 for the Royal Naval Air Service; it measured the wind speed from the air, and used that measurement to calculate the wind&#x27;s effects on the trajectory of the bombs. The system was later improved with the Course Setting Bomb Sight, and reached a climax with World War II bomb sights, Mark XIV bomb sight (RAF Bomber Command) and the Norden (United States Army Air Forces).

The art of mechanical analog computing reached its zenith with the differential analyzer, built by H. L. Hazen and Vannevar Bush at MIT starting in 1927, which built on the mechanical integrators of James Thomson and the torque amplifiers invented by H. W. Nieman. A dozen of these devices were built before their obsolescence became obvious; the most powerful was constructed at the University of Pennsylvania&#x27;s Moore School of Electrical Engineering, where the ENIAC was built.

A fully electronic analog computer was built by Helmut Hölzer in 1942 at Peenemünde Army Research Center.

By the 1950s the success of digital electronic computers had spelled the end for most analog computing machines, but hybrid analog computers, controlled by digital electronics, remained in substantial use into the 1950s and 1960s, and later in some specialized applications.

==Advent of the digital computer==

The principle of the modern computer was first described by computer scientist Alan Turing, who set out the idea in his seminal 1936 paper, &quot;On Computable Numbers&quot;. Turing reformulated Kurt Gödel&#x27;s 1931 results on the limits of proof and computation, replacing Gödel&#x27;s universal arithmetic-based formal language with the formal and simple hypothetical devices that became known as Turing machines. He proved that some such machine would be capable of performing any conceivable mathematical computation if it were representable as an algorithm. He went on to prove that there was no solution to the &quot;Entscheidungsproblem&quot; by first showing that the halting problem for Turing machines is undecidable: in general, it is not possible to decide algorithmically whether a given Turing machine will ever halt.

He also introduced the notion of a &quot;universal machine&quot; (now known as a universal Turing machine), with the idea that such a machine could perform the tasks of any other machine, or in other words, it is provably capable of computing anything that is computable by executing a program stored on tape, allowing the machine to be programmable. Von Neumann acknowledged that the central concept of the modern computer was due to this paper. Turing machines are to this day a central object of study in theory of computation. Except for the limitations imposed by their finite memory stores, modern computers are said to be Turing-complete, which is to say, they have algorithm execution capability equivalent to a universal Turing machine.

===Electromechanical computers===

The era of modern computing began with a flurry of development before and during World War II. Most digital computers built in this period were built with electromechanical – electric switches drove mechanical relays to perform the calculation. These mechanical components had a low operating speed due to their mechanical nature and were eventually superseded by much faster all-electric components, originally using vacuum tubes and later transistors.

The Z2 was one of the earliest examples of an electric operated digital computer built with electromechanical relays and was created by civil engineer Konrad Zuse in 1940 in Germany. It was an improvement on his earlier, mechanical Z1; although it used the same mechanical memory, it replaced the arithmetic and control logic with electrical relay circuits.

In the same year, electro-mechanical devices called bombes were built by British cryptologists to help decipher German Enigma-machine-encrypted secret messages during World War II. The bombe&#x27;s initial design was created in 1939 at the UK Government Code and Cypher School (GC&amp;CS) at Bletchley Park by Alan Turing, with an important refinement devised in 1940 by Gordon Welchman. The engineering design and construction was the work of Harold Keen of the British Tabulating Machine Company. It was a substantial development from a device that had been designed in 1938 by Polish Cipher Bureau cryptologist Marian Rejewski, and known as the &quot;cryptologic bomb&quot; (Polish: &quot;bomba kryptologiczna&quot;).
In 1941, Zuse followed his earlier machine up with the Z3, the world&#x27;s first working electromechanical programmable, fully automatic digital computer. The Z3 was built with 2000 relays, implementing a 22-bit word length that operated at a clock frequency of about 5–10 Hz. Program code and data were stored on punched film. It was quite similar to modern machines in some respects, pioneering numerous advances such as floating-point numbers. Replacement of the hard-to-implement decimal system (used in Charles Babbage&#x27;s earlier design) by the simpler binary system meant that Zuse&#x27;s machines were easier to build and potentially more reliable, given the technologies available at that time. The Z3 was proven to have been a Turing-complete machine in 1998 by Raúl Rojas. In two 1936 patent applications, Zuse also anticipated that machine instructions could be stored in the same storage used for data—the key insight of what became known as the von Neumann architecture, first implemented in 1948 in America in the electromechanical IBM SSEC and in Britain in the fully electronic Manchester Baby.

Zuse suffered setbacks during World War II when some of his machines were destroyed in the course of Allied bombing campaigns. Apparently his work remained largely unknown to engineers in the UK and US until much later, although at least IBM was aware of it as it financed his post-war startup company in 1946 in return for an option on Zuse&#x27;s patents.

In 1944, the Harvard Mark I was constructed at IBM&#x27;s Endicott laboratories. It was a similar general purpose electro-mechanical computer to the Z3, but was not quite Turing-complete.

===Digital computation===
The term digital was first suggested by George Robert Stibitz and refers to where a signal, such as a voltage, is not used to directly represent a value (as it would be in an analog computer), but to encode it. In November 1937, Stibitz, then working at Bell Labs (1930–1941), completed a relay-based calculator he later dubbed the &quot;Model K&quot; (for &quot;kitchen table&quot;, on which he had assembled it), which became the first binary adder. Typically signals have two states – low (usually representing 0) and high (usually representing 1), but sometimes three-valued logic is used, especially in high-density memory. Modern computers generally use binary logic, but many early machines were decimal computers. In these machines, the basic unit of data was the decimal digit, encoded in one of several schemes, including binary-coded decimal or BCD, bi-quinary, excess-3, and two-out-of-five code.

The mathematical basis of digital computing is Boolean algebra, developed by the British mathematician George Boole in his work &quot;The Laws of Thought&quot;, published in 1854. His Boolean algebra was further refined in the 1860s by William Jevons and Charles Sanders Peirce, and was first presented systematically by Ernst Schröder and A. N. Whitehead. In 1879 Gottlob Frege develops the formal approach to logic and proposes the first logic language for logical equations.

In the 1930s and working independently, American electronic engineer Claude Shannon and Soviet logician Victor Shestakov both showed a one-to-one correspondence between the concepts of Boolean logic and certain electrical circuits, now called logic gates, which are now ubiquitous in digital computers. They showed that electronic relays and switches can realize the expressions of Boolean algebra. This thesis essentially founded practical digital circuit design. In addition Shannon&#x27;s paper gives a correct circuit diagram for a 4 bit digital binary adder.

===Electronic data processing===

Purely electronic circuit elements soon replaced their mechanical and electromechanical equivalents, at the same time that digital calculation replaced analog. Machines such as the Z3, the Atanasoff–Berry Computer, the Colossus computers, and the ENIAC were built by hand, using circuits containing relays or valves (vacuum tubes), and often used punched cards or punched paper tape for input and as the main (non-volatile) storage medium.

Engineer Tommy Flowers joined the telecommunications branch of the General Post Office in 1926. While working at the research station in Dollis Hill in the 1930s, he began to explore the possible use of electronics for the telephone exchange. Experimental equipment that he built in 1934 went into operation 5 years later, converting a portion of the telephone exchange network into an electronic data processing system, using thousands of vacuum tubes.

In the US, in 1940 Arthur Dickinson (IBM) invented the first digital electronic computer. This calculating device was fully electronic – control, calculations and output (the first electronic display). John Vincent Atanasoff and Clifford E. Berry of Iowa State University developed the Atanasoff–Berry Computer (ABC) in 1942, the first binary electronic digital calculating device. This design was semi-electronic (electro-mechanical control and electronic calculations), and used about 300 vacuum tubes, with capacitors fixed in a mechanically rotating drum for memory. However, its paper card writer/reader was unreliable and the regenerative drum contact system was mechanical. The machine&#x27;s special-purpose nature and lack of changeable, stored program distinguish it from modern computers.

Computers whose logic was primarily built using vacuum tubes are now known as first generation computers.

===The electronic programmable computer===
During World War II, British codebreakers at Bletchley Park, north of London, achieved a number of successes at breaking encrypted enemy military communications. The German encryption machine, Enigma, was first attacked with the help of the electro-mechanical bombes. They ruled out possible Enigma settings by performing chains of logical deductions implemented electrically. Most possibilities led to a contradiction, and the few remaining could be tested by hand.

The Germans also developed a series of teleprinter encryption systems, quite different from Enigma. The Lorenz SZ 40/42 machine was used for high-level Army communications, code-named &quot;Tunny&quot; by the British. The first intercepts of Lorenz messages began in 1941. As part of an attack on Tunny, Max Newman and his colleagues developed the Heath Robinson, a fixed-function machine to aid in code breaking. Tommy Flowers, a senior engineer at the Post Office Research Station was recommended to Max Newman by Alan Turing and spent eleven months from early February 1943 designing and building the more flexible Colossus computer (which superseded the Heath Robinson). After a functional test in December 1943, Colossus was shipped to Bletchley Park, where it was delivered on 18 January 1944 and attacked its first message on 5 February. By the time Germany surrendered in May 1945, there were ten Colossi working at Bletchley Park.
Colossus was the world&#x27;s first electronic digital programmable computer. It used a large number of valves (vacuum tubes). It had paper-tape input and was capable of being configured to perform a variety of Boolean logical operations on its data, but it was not Turing-complete. Data input to Colossus was by photoelectric reading of a paper tape transcription of the enciphered intercepted message. This was arranged in a continuous loop so that it could be read and re-read multiple times – there being no internal store for the data. The reading mechanism ran at 5,000 characters per second with the paper tape moving at . Colossus Mark 1 contained 1500 thermionic valves (tubes), but Mark 2 with 2400 valves and five processors in parallel, was both 5 times faster and simpler to operate than Mark 1, greatly speeding the decoding process. Mark 2 was designed while Mark 1 was being constructed. Allen Coombs took over leadership of the Colossus Mark 2 project when Tommy Flowers moved on to other projects. The first Mark 2 Colossus became operational on 1 June 1944, just in time for the Allied Invasion of Normandy on D-Day.

Most of the use of Colossus was in determining the start positions of the Tunny rotors for a message, which was called &quot;wheel setting&quot;. Colossus included the first-ever use of shift registers and systolic arrays, enabling five simultaneous tests, each involving up to 100 Boolean calculations. This enabled five different possible start positions to be examined for one transit of the paper tape. As well as wheel setting some later Colossi included mechanisms intended to help determine pin patterns known as &quot;wheel breaking&quot;. Both models were programmable using switches and plug panels in a way their predecessors had not been.
Without the use of these machines, the Allies would have been deprived of the very valuable intelligence that was obtained from reading the vast quantity of enciphered high-level telegraphic messages between the German High Command (OKW) and their army commands throughout occupied Europe. Details of their existence, design, and use were kept secret well into the 1970s. Winston Churchill personally issued an order for their destruction into pieces no larger than a man&#x27;s hand, to keep secret that the British were capable of cracking Lorenz SZ cyphers (from German rotor stream cipher machines) during the oncoming Cold War. Two of the machines were transferred to the newly formed GCHQ and the others were destroyed. As a result, the machines were not included in many histories of computing. A reconstructed working copy of one of the Colossus machines is now on display at Bletchley Park.

The ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer) was the first electronic programmable computer built in the US. Although the ENIAC used similar technology to the Colossi, it was much faster and more flexible and was Turing-complete. Like the Colossi, a &quot;program&quot; on the ENIAC was defined by the states of its patch cables and switches, a far cry from the stored-program electronic machines that came later. Once a program was ready to be run, it had to be mechanically set into the machine with manual resetting of plugs and switches. The programmers of the ENIAC were women who had been trained as mathematicians.

It combined the high speed of electronics with the ability to be programmed for many complex problems. It could add or subtract 5000 times a second, a thousand times faster than any other machine. It also had modules to multiply, divide, and square root. High-speed memory was limited to 20 words (equivalent to about 80 bytes). Built under the direction of John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert at the University of Pennsylvania, ENIAC&#x27;s development and construction lasted from 1943 to full operation at the end of 1945. The machine was huge, weighing 30 tons, using 200 kilowatts of electric power and contained over 18,000 vacuum tubes, 1,500 relays, and hundreds of thousands of resistors, capacitors, and inductors. One of its major engineering feats was to minimize the effects of tube burnout, which was a common problem in machine reliability at that time. The machine was in almost constant use for the next ten years.

==Stored-program computer==

The theoretical basis for the stored-program computer was proposed by Alan Turing in his 1936 paper &quot;On Computable Numbers&quot;. Whilst Turing was at Princeton working on his PhD, John von Neumann got to know him and became intrigued by his concept of a universal computing machine.

Early computing machines executed the set sequence of steps, known as a &#x27;program&#x27;, that could be altered by changing electrical connections using switches or a patch panel (or plugboard). However, this process of &#x27;reprogramming&#x27; was often difficult and time-consuming, requiring engineers to create flowcharts and physically re-wire the machines. Stored-program computers, by contrast, were designed to store a set of instructions (a program), in memory – typically the same memory as stored data.

ENIAC inventors John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert proposed, in August 1944, the construction of a machine called the Electronic Discrete Variable Automatic Computer (EDVAC) and design work for it commenced at the University of Pennsylvania&#x27;s Moore School of Electrical Engineering, before the ENIAC was fully operational. The design implemented a number of important architectural and logical improvements conceived during the ENIAC&#x27;s construction, and a high-speed serial-access memory. However, Eckert and Mauchly left the project and its construction floundered.

In 1945, von Neumann visited the Moore School and wrote notes on what he saw, which he sent to the project. The U.S. Army liaison there had them typed and circulated as the &quot;First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC&quot;. The draft did not mention Eckert and Mauchly and, despite its incomplete nature and questionable lack of attribution of the sources of some of the ideas, the computer architecture it outlined became known as the &#x27;von Neumann architecture&#x27;.

In 1945, Turing joined the UK National Physical Laboratory and began work on developing an electronic stored-program digital computer. His late-1945 report &#x27;Proposed Electronic Calculator&#x27; was the first reasonably detailed specification for such a device. Turing presented a more detailed paper to the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) Executive Committee in March 1946, giving the first substantially complete design of a stored-program computer, a device that was called the Automatic Computing Engine (ACE).

Turing considered that the speed and the size of computer memory were crucial elements, so he proposed a high-speed memory of what would today be called 25 KB, accessed at a speed of 1 MHz. The ACE implemented subroutine calls, whereas the EDVAC did not, and the ACE also used &quot;Abbreviated Computer Instructions,&quot; an early form of programming language.

===Manchester Baby===
The Manchester Baby (Small Scale Experimental Machine, SSEM) was the world&#x27;s first electronic stored-program computer. It was built at the Victoria University of Manchester by Frederic C. Williams, Tom Kilburn and Geoff Tootill, and ran its first program on 21 June 1948.

The machine was not intended to be a practical computer but was instead designed as a testbed for the Williams tube, the first random-access digital storage device. Invented by Freddie Williams and Tom Kilburn at the University of Manchester in 1946 and 1947, it was a cathode-ray tube that used an effect called secondary emission to temporarily store electronic binary data, and was used successfully in several early computers.

Described as small and primitive in a 1998 retrospective, the Baby was the first working machine to contain all of the elements essential to a modern electronic computer. As soon as it had demonstrated the feasibility of its design, a project was initiated at the university to develop the design into a more usable computer, the Manchester Mark 1. The Mark 1 in turn quickly became the prototype for the Ferranti Mark 1, the world&#x27;s first commercially available general-purpose computer.

The Baby had a 32-bit word length and a memory of 32 words. As it was designed to be the simplest possible stored-program computer, the only arithmetic operations implemented in hardware were subtraction and negation; other arithmetic operations were implemented in software. The first of three programs written for the machine found the highest proper divisor of 218 (262,144), a calculation that was known would take a long time to run—and so prove the computer&#x27;s reliability—by testing every integer from 218 − 1 downwards, as division was implemented by repeated subtraction of the divisor. The program consisted of 17 instructions and ran for 52 minutes before reaching the correct answer of 131,072, after the Baby had performed 3.5 million operations (for an effective CPU speed of 1.1 kIPS). The successive approximations to the answer were displayed as a pattern of dots on the output CRT which mirrored the pattern held on the Williams tube used for storage.

===Manchester Mark 1===
The SSEM led to the development of the Manchester Mark 1 at the University of Manchester. Work began in August 1948, and the first version was operational by April 1949; a program written to search for Mersenne primes ran error-free for nine hours on the night of 16/17 June 1949. The machine&#x27;s successful operation was widely reported in the British press, which used the phrase &quot;electronic brain&quot; in describing it to their readers.

The computer is especially historically significant because of its pioneering inclusion of index registers, an innovation which made it easier for a program to read sequentially through an array of words in memory. Thirty-four patents resulted from the machine&#x27;s development, and many of the ideas behind its design were incorporated in subsequent commercial products such as the and 702 as well as the Ferranti Mark 1. The chief designers, Frederic C. Williams and Tom Kilburn, concluded from their experiences with the Mark 1 that computers would be used more in scientific roles than in pure mathematics. In 1951 they started development work on Meg, the Mark 1&#x27;s successor, which would include a floating-point unit.

===EDSAC===

The other contender for being the first recognizably modern digital stored-program computer was the EDSAC, designed and constructed by Maurice Wilkes and his team at the University of Cambridge Mathematical Laboratory in England at the University of Cambridge in 1949. The machine was inspired by John von Neumann&#x27;s seminal &quot;First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC&quot; and was one of the first usefully operational electronic digital stored-program computers.

EDSAC ran its first programs on 6 May 1949, when it calculated a table of squares and a list of prime numbers.The EDSAC also served as the basis for the first commercially applied computer, the LEO I, used by food manufacturing company J. Lyons &amp; Co. Ltd. EDSAC 1 was finally shut down on 11 July 1958, having been superseded by EDSAC 2 which stayed in use until 1965.

===EDVAC===

ENIAC inventors John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert proposed the EDVAC&#x27;s construction in August 1944, and design work for the EDVAC commenced at the University of Pennsylvania&#x27;s Moore School of Electrical Engineering, before the ENIAC was fully operational. The design implemented a number of important architectural and logical improvements conceived during the ENIAC&#x27;s construction, and a high-speed serial-access memory. However, Eckert and Mauchly left the project and its construction floundered.

It was finally delivered to the U.S. Army&#x27;s Ballistics Research Laboratory at the Aberdeen Proving Ground in August 1949, but due to a number of problems, the computer only began operation in 1951, and then only on a limited basis.

===Commercial computers===
The first commercial computer was the Ferranti Mark 1, built by Ferranti and delivered to the University of Manchester in February 1951. It was based on the Manchester Mark 1. The main improvements over the Manchester Mark 1 were in the size of the primary storage (using random access Williams tubes), secondary storage (using a magnetic drum), a faster multiplier, and additional instructions. The basic cycle time was 1.2 milliseconds, and a multiplication could be completed in about 2.16 milliseconds. The multiplier used almost a quarter of the machine&#x27;s 4,050 vacuum tubes (valves). A second machine was purchased by the University of Toronto, before the design was revised into the Mark 1 Star. At least seven of these later machines were delivered between 1953 and 1957, one of them to Shell labs in Amsterdam.

In October 1947, the directors of J. Lyons &amp; Company, a British catering company famous for its teashops but with strong interests in new office management techniques, decided to take an active role in promoting the commercial development of computers. The LEO I computer (Lyons Electronic Office) became operational in April 1951 and ran the world&#x27;s first regular routine office computer job. On 17 November 1951, the J. Lyons company began weekly operation of a bakery valuations job on the LEO – the first business application to go live on a stored-program computer.

In June 1951, the UNIVAC I (Universal Automatic Computer) was delivered to the U.S. Census Bureau. Remington Rand eventually sold 46 machines at more than each ($ as of 2025). UNIVAC was the first &quot;mass-produced&quot; computer. It used 5,200 vacuum tubes and consumed of power. Its primary storage was serial-access mercury delay lines capable of storing 1,000 words of 11 decimal digits plus sign (72-bit words).

In 1952, Compagnie des Machines Bull released the Gamma 3 computer, which became a large success in Europe, eventually selling more than 1,200 units, and the first computer produced in more than 1,000 units. The Gamma 3 had innovative features for its time including a dual-mode, software switchable, BCD and binary ALU, as well as a hardwired floating-point library for scientific computing. In its E.T configuration, the Gamma 3 drum memory could fit about 50,000 instructions for a capacity of 16,384 words (around 100 kB), a large amount for the time.
Compared to the UNIVAC, IBM introduced a smaller, more affordable computer in 1954 that proved very popular. The IBM 650 weighed over , the attached power supply weighed around and both were held in separate cabinets of roughly 1.50.9. The system cost ($ as of 2025) or could be leased for a month ($ as of 2025). Its drum memory was originally 2,000 ten-digit words, later expanded to 4,000 words. Memory limitations such as this were to dominate programming for decades afterward. The program instructions were fetched from the spinning drum as the code ran. Efficient execution using drum memory was provided by a combination of hardware architecture – the instruction format included the address of the next instruction – and software: the Symbolic Optimal Assembly Program, SOAP, assigned instructions to the optimal addresses (to the extent possible by static analysis of the source program). Thus many instructions were, when needed, located in the next row of the drum to be read and additional wait time for drum rotation was reduced.

===Microprogramming===
In 1951, British scientist Maurice Wilkes developed the concept of microprogramming from the realisation that the central processing unit of a computer could be controlled by a miniature, highly specialized computer program in high-speed ROM. Microprogramming allows the base instruction set to be defined or extended by built-in programs (now called firmware or microcode). This concept greatly simplified CPU development. He first described this at the University of Manchester Computer Inaugural Conference in 1951, then published in expanded form in &quot;IEEE Spectrum&quot; in 1955.

It was widely used in the CPUs and floating-point units of mainframe and other computers; it was implemented for the first time in EDSAC 2, which also used multiple identical &quot;bit slices&quot; to simplify design. Interchangeable, replaceable tube assemblies were used for each bit of the processor.

==Magnetic memory==

Magnetic drum memories were developed for the US Navy during WW II with the work continuing at Engineering Research Associates (ERA) in 1946 and 1947. ERA, then a part of Univac included a drum memory in its 1103, announced in February 1953. The first mass-produced computer, the IBM 650, also announced in 1953 had about 8.5 kilobytes of drum memory.

Magnetic-core memory patented in 1949 with its first usage demonstrated for the Whirlwind computer in August 1953. Commercialization followed quickly. Magnetic core was used in peripherals of the IBM 702 delivered in July 1955, and later in the 702 itself. The IBM 704 (1955) and the Ferranti Mercury (1957) used magnetic-core memory. It went on to dominate the field into the 1970s, when it was replaced with semiconductor memory. Magnetic core peaked in volume about 1975 and declined in usage and market share thereafter.

As late as 1980, PDP-11/45 machines using magnetic-core main memory and drums for swapping were still in use at many of the original UNIX sites.

==Early digital computer characteristics==

==Transistor computers==

The bipolar transistor was invented in 1947. From 1955 onward transistors replaced vacuum tubes in computer designs, giving rise to the &quot;second generation&quot; of computers. Compared to vacuum tubes, transistors have many advantages: they are smaller, and require less power than vacuum tubes, so give off less heat. Silicon junction transistors were much more reliable than vacuum tubes and had longer service life. Transistorized computers could contain tens of thousands of binary logic circuits in a relatively compact space. Transistors greatly reduced computers&#x27; size, initial cost, and operating cost. Typically, second-generation computers were composed of large numbers of printed circuit boards such as the IBM Standard Modular System, each carrying one to four logic gates or flip-flops.

At the University of Manchester, a team under the leadership of Tom Kilburn designed and built a machine using the newly developed transistors instead of valves. Initially the only devices available were germanium point-contact transistors, less reliable than the valves they replaced but which consumed far less power. Their first transistorized computer, and the first in the world, was operational by 1953, and a second version was completed there in April 1955. The 1955 version used 200 transistors, 1,300 solid-state diodes, and had a power consumption of 150 watts. However, the machine did make use of valves to generate its 125 kHz clock waveforms and in the circuitry to read and write on its magnetic drum memory, so it was not the first completely transistorized computer.

That distinction goes to the Harwell CADET of 1955, built by the electronics division of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell. The design featured a 64-kilobyte magnetic drum memory store with multiple moving heads that had been designed at the National Physical Laboratory, UK. By 1953 this team had transistor circuits operating to read and write on a smaller magnetic drum from the Royal Radar Establishment. The machine used a low clock speed of only 58 kHz to avoid having to use any valves to generate the clock waveforms.

CADET used 324-point-contact transistors provided by the UK company Standard Telephones and Cables; 76 junction transistors were used for the first stage amplifiers for data read from the drum, since point-contact transistors were too noisy. From August 1956, CADET was offering a regular computing service, during which it often executed continuous computing runs of 80 hours or more. Problems with the reliability of early batches of point contact and alloyed junction transistors meant that the machine&#x27;s mean time between failures was about 90 minutes, but this improved once the more reliable bipolar junction transistors became available.

The Manchester University Transistor Computer&#x27;s design was adopted by the local engineering firm of Metropolitan-Vickers in their Metrovick 950, the first commercial transistor computer anywhere. Six Metrovick 950s were built, the first completed in 1956. They were successfully deployed within various departments of the company and were in use for about five years. A second generation computer, the IBM 1401, captured about one third of the world market. IBM installed more than ten thousand 1401s between 1960 and 1964.

===Transistor peripherals===
Transistorized electronics improved not only the CPU (Central Processing Unit), but also the peripheral devices. The second generation disk data storage units were able to store tens of millions of letters and digits. Next to the fixed disk storage units, connected to the CPU via high-speed data transmission, were removable disk data storage units. A removable disk pack can be easily exchanged with another pack in a few seconds. Even if the removable disks&#x27; capacity is smaller than fixed disks, their interchangeability guarantees a nearly unlimited quantity of data close at hand. Magnetic tape provided archival capability for this data, at a lower cost than disk.

Many second-generation CPUs delegated peripheral device communications to a secondary processor. For example, while the communication processor controlled card reading and punching, the main CPU executed calculations and binary branch instructions. One databus would bear data between the main CPU and core memory at the CPU&#x27;s fetch-execute cycle rate, and other databusses would typically serve the peripheral devices. On the PDP-1, the core memory&#x27;s cycle time was 5 microseconds; consequently most arithmetic instructions took 10 microseconds (100,000 operations per second) because most operations took at least two memory cycles; one for the instruction, one for the operand data fetch.

During the second generation remote terminal units (often in the form of Teleprinters like a Friden Flexowriter) saw greatly increased use. Telephone connections provided sufficient speed for early remote terminals and allowed hundreds of kilometers separation between remote-terminals and the computing center. Eventually these stand-alone computer networks would be generalized into an interconnected &quot;network of networks&quot;—the Internet.

===Transistor supercomputers===

The early 1960s saw the advent of supercomputing. The Atlas was a joint development between the University of Manchester, Ferranti, and Plessey, and was first installed at Manchester University and officially commissioned in 1962 as one of the world&#x27;s first supercomputers – considered to be the most powerful computer in the world at that time. It was said that whenever Atlas went offline half of the United Kingdom&#x27;s computer capacity was lost. It was a second-generation machine, using discrete germanium transistors. Atlas also pioneered the Atlas Supervisor, &quot;considered by many to be the first recognisable modern operating system&quot;.

In the US, a series of computers at Control Data Corporation (CDC) were designed by Seymour Cray to use innovative designs and parallelism to achieve superior computational peak performance. The CDC 6600, released in 1964, is generally considered the first supercomputer. The CDC 6600 outperformed its predecessor, the IBM 7030 Stretch, by about a factor of 3. With performance of about 1 megaFLOPS, the CDC 6600 was the world&#x27;s fastest computer from 1964 to 1969, when it relinquished that status to its successor, the CDC 7600.

==Integrated circuit computers==

The &quot;third-generation&quot; of digital electronic computers used integrated circuit (IC) chips as the basis of their logic.

The idea of an integrated circuit was conceived by a radar scientist working for the Royal Radar Establishment of the Ministry of Defence, Geoffrey W.A. Dummer.

The first working integrated circuits were invented by Jack Kilby at Texas Instruments and Robert Noyce at Fairchild Semiconductor. Kilby recorded his initial ideas concerning the integrated circuit in July 1958, successfully demonstrating the first working integrated example on 12 September 1958. Kilby&#x27;s invention was a hybrid integrated circuit (hybrid IC). It had external wire connections, which made it difficult to mass-produce.

Noyce came up with his own idea of an integrated circuit half a year after Kilby. Noyce&#x27;s invention was a monolithic integrated circuit (IC) chip. His chip solved many practical problems that Kilby&#x27;s had not. Produced at Fairchild Semiconductor, it was made of silicon, whereas Kilby&#x27;s chip was made of germanium. The basis for Noyce&#x27;s monolithic IC was Fairchild&#x27;s planar process, which allowed integrated circuits to be laid out using the same principles as those of printed circuits. The planar process was developed by Noyce&#x27;s colleague Jean Hoerni in early 1959, based on Mohamed M. Atalla&#x27;s work on semiconductor surface passivation by silicon dioxide at Bell Labs in the late 1950s.

Third generation (integrated circuit) computers first appeared in the early 1960s in computers developed for government purposes, and then in commercial computers beginning in the mid-1960s. The first silicon IC computer was the Apollo Guidance Computer or AGC. Although not the most powerful computer of its time, the extreme constraints on size, mass, and power of the Apollo spacecraft required the AGC to be much smaller and denser than any prior computer, weighing in at only . Each lunar landing mission carried two AGCs, one each in the command and lunar ascent modules.

==Semiconductor memory==
The MOSFET (metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor, or MOS transistor) was invented by Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959. In addition to data processing, the MOSFET enabled the practical use of MOS transistors as memory cell storage elements, a function previously served by magnetic cores. Semiconductor memory, also known as MOS memory, was cheaper and consumed less power than magnetic-core memory. MOS random-access memory (RAM), in the form of static RAM (SRAM), was developed by John Schmidt at Fairchild Semiconductor in 1964. In 1966, Robert Dennard at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center developed MOS dynamic RAM (DRAM). In 1967, Dawon Kahng and Simon Sze at Bell Labs developed the floating-gate MOSFET, the basis for MOS non-volatile memory such as EPROM, EEPROM and flash memory.

==Microprocessor computers==

The &quot;fourth-generation&quot; of digital electronic computers used microprocessors as the basis of their logic. The microprocessor has origins in the MOS integrated circuit (MOS IC) chip. Due to rapid MOSFET scaling, MOS IC chips rapidly increased in complexity at a rate predicted by Moore&#x27;s law, leading to large-scale integration (LSI) with hundreds of transistors on a single MOS chip by the late 1960s. The application of MOS LSI chips to computing was the basis for the first microprocessors, as engineers began recognizing that a complete computer processor could be contained on a single MOS LSI chip.

The subject of exactly which device was the first microprocessor is contentious, partly due to lack of agreement on the exact definition of the term &quot;microprocessor&quot;. The earliest multi-chip microprocessors were the Four-Phase Systems AL-1 in 1969 and Garrett AiResearch MP944 in 1970, developed with multiple MOS LSI chips. The first single-chip microprocessor was the Intel 4004, developed on a single PMOS LSI chip. It was designed and realized by Ted Hoff, Federico Faggin, Masatoshi Shima and Stanley Mazor at Intel, and released in 1971. Tadashi Sasaki and Masatoshi Shima at Busicom, a calculator manufacturer, had the initial insight that the CPU could be a single MOS LSI chip, supplied by Intel.
While the earliest microprocessor ICs literally contained only the processor, i.e. the central processing unit, of a computer, their progressive development naturally led to chips containing most or all of the internal electronic parts of a computer. The integrated circuit in the image on the right, for example, an Intel 8742, is an 8-bit microcontroller that includes a CPU running at 12 MHz, 128 bytes of RAM, 2048 bytes of EPROM, and I/O in the same chip.

During the 1960s, there was considerable overlap between second and third generation technologies. IBM implemented its IBM Solid Logic Technology modules in hybrid circuits for the IBM System/360 in 1964. As late as 1975, Sperry Univac continued the manufacture of second-generation machines such as the UNIVAC 494. The Burroughs large systems such as the B5000 were stack machines, which allowed for simpler programming. These pushdown automatons were also implemented in minicomputers and microprocessors later, which influenced programming language design. Minicomputers served as low-cost computer centers for industry, business and universities. It became possible to simulate analog circuits with the &quot;simulation program with integrated circuit emphasis&quot;, or SPICE (1971) on minicomputers, one of the programs for electronic design automation (EDA). The microprocessor led to the development of microcomputers, small, low-cost computers that could be owned by individuals and small businesses. Microcomputers, the first of which appeared in the 1970s, became ubiquitous in the 1980s and beyond.
While which specific product is considered the first microcomputer system is a matter of debate, one of the earliest is R2E&#x27;s Micral N (François Gernelle, André Truong) launched &quot;early 1973&quot; using the Intel 8008. The first commercially available microcomputer kit was the Intel 8080-based Altair 8800, which was announced in the January 1975 cover article of &quot;Popular Electronics&quot;. However, the Altair 8800 was an extremely limited system in its initial stages, having only 256 bytes of DRAM in its initial package and no input-output except its toggle switches and LED register display. Despite this, it was initially surprisingly popular, with several hundred sales in the first year, and demand rapidly outstripped supply. Several early third-party vendors such as Cromemco and Processor Technology soon began supplying additional S-100 bus hardware for the Altair 8800.

In April 1975, at the Hannover Fair, Olivetti presented the P6060, the world&#x27;s first complete, pre-assembled personal computer system. The central processing unit consisted of two cards, code named PUCE1 and PUCE2, and unlike most other personal computers was built with TTL components rather than a microprocessor. It had one or two 8&quot; floppy disk drives, a 32-character plasma display, 80-column graphical thermal printer, 48 Kbytes of RAM, and BASIC language. It weighed . As a complete system, this was a significant step from the Altair, though it never achieved the same success. It was in competition with a similar product by IBM that had an external floppy disk drive.

From 1975 to 1977, most microcomputers, such as the MOS Technology KIM-1, the Altair 8800, and some versions of the Apple I, were sold as kits for do-it-yourselfers. Pre-assembled systems did not gain much ground until 1977, with the introduction of the Apple II, the Tandy TRS-80, the first SWTPC computers, and the Commodore PET. Computing has evolved with microcomputer architectures, with features added from their larger brethren, now dominant in most market segments.

A NeXT Computer and its object-oriented development tools and libraries were used by Tim Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau at CERN to develop the world&#x27;s first web server software, CERN httpd, and also used to write the first web browser, WorldWideWeb.

Systems as complicated as computers require very high reliability. ENIAC remained on, in continuous operation from 1947 to 1955, for eight years before being shut down. Although a vacuum tube might fail, it would be replaced without bringing down the system. By the simple strategy of never shutting down ENIAC, the failures were dramatically reduced. The vacuum-tube SAGE air-defense computers became remarkably reliable – installed in pairs, one off-line, tubes likely to fail did so when the computer was intentionally run at reduced power to find them. Hot-pluggable hard disks, like the hot-pluggable vacuum tubes of yesteryear, continue the tradition of repair during continuous operation. Semiconductor memories routinely have no errors when they operate, although operating systems like Unix have employed memory tests on start-up to detect failing hardware. Today, the requirement of reliable performance is made even more stringent when server farms are the delivery platform. Google has managed this by using fault-tolerant software to recover from hardware failures, and is even working on the concept of replacing entire server farms on-the-fly, during a service event.

In the 21st century, multi-core CPUs became commercially available. Content-addressable memory (CAM) has become inexpensive enough to be used in networking, and is frequently used for on-chip cache memory in modern microprocessors, although no computer system has yet implemented hardware CAMs for use in programming languages. Currently, CAMs (or associative arrays) in software are programming-language-specific. Semiconductor memory cell arrays are very regular structures, and manufacturers prove their processes on them; this allows price reductions on memory products. During the 1980s, CMOS logic gates developed into devices that could be made as fast as other circuit types; computer power consumption could therefore be decreased dramatically. Unlike the continuous current draw of a gate based on other logic types, a CMOS gate only draws significant current, except for leakage, during the &#x27;transition&#x27; between logic states.

CMOS circuits have allowed computing to become a commodity which is now ubiquitous, embedded in many forms, from greeting cards and telephones to satellites. The thermal design power which is dissipated during operation has become as essential as computing speed of operation. In 2006 servers consumed 1.5% of the total energy budget of the U.S. The energy consumption of computer data centers was expected to double to 3% of world consumption by 2011. The SoC (system on a chip) has compressed even more of the integrated circuitry into a single chip; SoCs are enabling phones and PCs to converge into single hand-held wireless mobile devices.

Quantum computing is an emerging technology in the field of computing. &quot;MIT Technology Review&quot; reported 10 November 2017 that IBM has created a 50-qubit computer; currently its quantum state lasts 50 microseconds. Google researchers have been able to extend the 50 microsecond time limit, as reported 14 July 2021 in &quot;Nature&quot;; stability has been extended 100-fold by spreading a single logical qubit over chains of data qubits for quantum error correction. &quot;Physical Review X&quot; reported a technique for &#x27;single-gate sensing as a viable readout method for spin qubits&#x27; (a singlet-triplet spin state in silicon) on 26 November 2018. A Google team has succeeded in operating their RF pulse modulator chip at 3 kelvins, simplifying the cryogenics of their 72-qubit computer, which is set up to operate at 0.3 K; but the readout circuitry and another driver remain to be brought into the cryogenics. &quot;See: Quantum supremacy&quot; Silicon qubit systems have demonstrated entanglement at non-local distances.

Computing hardware and its software have even become a metaphor for the operation of the universe.

==Epilogue==
An indication of the rapidity of development of this field can be inferred from the history of the seminal 1947 article by Burks, Goldstine and von Neumann. By the time that anyone had time to write anything down, it was obsolete. After 1945, others read John von Neumann&#x27;s &quot;First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC&quot;, and immediately started implementing their own systems. To this day, the rapid pace of development has continued, worldwide.

==See also==
* Antikythera mechanism
* History of computing
* History of computing hardware (1960s–present)
* History of laptops
* History of personal computers
* History of software
* Information Age
* IT History Society
* Retrocomputing
* Timeline of computing
* List of pioneers in computer science
* Vacuum-tube computer

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* With notes upon the Memoir by the Translator.
* German to English translation, M.I.T., 1969.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Pages 220–226 are annotated references and guide for further reading.
* 
* Stibitz, George 
* 
** Other online sources:
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Translated from: &quot;Der Computer. Mein Lebenswerk&quot; (1984).
==Further reading==
* 
* Computers and Automation Magazine – Pictorial Report on the Computer Field:
** &quot;A PICTORIAL INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTERS&quot; – 06/1957
** &quot;A PICTORIAL MANUAL ON COMPUTERS&quot; – 12/1957
** &quot;A PICTORIAL MANUAL ON COMPUTERS, Part 2&quot; – 01/1958
** 1958–1967 Pictorial Report on the Computer Field – December issues (195812.pdf, ..., 196712.pdf)
* &quot;Bit by Bit: An Illustrated History of Computers&quot;, Stan Augarten, 1984. OCR with permission of the author

==External links==
*Obsolete Technology – Old Computers
*&quot;Things That Count&quot;
*Historic Computers in Japan
*The History of Japanese Mechanical Calculating Machines
*Computer History — a collection of articles by Bob Bemer
*25 Microchips that shook the world (archived) – a collection of articles by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
*Columbia University Computing History
*Computer Histories – An introductory course on the history of computing
*Revolution – The First 2000 Years Of Computing, Computer History Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186148" start="4" end="33" title="History of computing hardware" label="history of computing hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="341" end="351" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="1110" end="1135" title="MOSFET" label="Metal-oxide-semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="1142" end="1165" title="large-scale integration" label="large-scale integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143031" start="1185" end="1205" title="semiconductor memory" label="semiconductor memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="1214" end="1228" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="1284" end="1301" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738570" start="1415" end="1431" title="mobile computing" label="mobile computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="1433" end="1443" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="1449" end="1456" title="tablet computer" label="tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="1616" end="1641" title="one-to-one correspondence" label="one-to-one correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417141" start="1647" end="1654" title="finger-counting" label="fingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q933008" start="1708" end="1719" title="tally stick" label="tally stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q581731" start="1725" end="1737" title="Lebombo bone" label="Lebombo bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="1765" end="1773" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1778" end="1790" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159429" start="1933" end="1939" title="baboon" label="baboon"/>
<link wikidata="Q302896" start="1947" end="1953" title="fibula" label="fibula"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="1996" end="2012" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q583473" start="2176" end="2189" title="counting rods" label="counting rods"/>
<link wikidata="Q12806" start="2210" end="2216" title="abacus" label="abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302817" start="2275" end="2287" title="Roman abacus" label="Roman abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="2300" end="2309" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177150" start="2434" end="2448" title="counting house" label="counting house"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="2604" end="2619" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="2725" end="2734" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182324" start="2739" end="2760" title="Antikythera mechanism" label="Antikythera mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="2770" end="2787" title="Hellenistic world" label="Hellenistic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="2808" end="2819" title="Roman Egypt" label="Roman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q161853" start="2821" end="2839" title="Hero of Alexandria" label="Hero of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q787116" start="2888" end="2896" title="Automaton" label="automata"/>
<link wikidata="Q234668" start="2916" end="2920" title="cart" label="cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116191" start="2979" end="3004" title="Book of Ingenious Devices" label="Book of Ingenious Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q423210" start="3041" end="3059" title="Banū Mūsā brothers" label="Banū Mūsā brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344642" start="3201" end="3212" title="planisphere" label="planisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="3264" end="3273" title="Al-Biruni" label="Al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q255849" start="3292" end="3302" title="equatorium" label="equatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133" start="3351" end="3361" title="Al-Zarqali" label="Al-Zarqali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="3428" end="3446" title="Islamic astronomy" label="Muslim astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q853854" start="3483" end="3494" title="clock tower" label="clock tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265657" start="3498" end="3505" title="Su Song" label="Su Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="3524" end="3536" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q853854" start="3542" end="3554" title="castle clock" label="castle clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="3558" end="3568" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275" start="3582" end="3600" title="astronomical clock" label="astronomical clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q81627" start="3613" end="3629" title="Ismail al-Jazari" label="Ismail al-Jazari"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="3653" end="3665" title="Computer programming" label="programmable"/>
<link wikidata="Q193660" start="3683" end="3694" title="Ramon Llull" label="Ramon Llull"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="3887" end="3894" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387" start="3970" end="3989" title="information science" label="information science"/>
<link wikidata="Q159592" start="4066" end="4077" title="John Napier" label="John Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="4210" end="4219" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358538" start="4388" end="4407" title="Napier&amp;#x27;s bones" label="Napier&amp;#x27;s bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="4523" end="4534" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q190667" start="4596" end="4606" title="slide rule" label="slide rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q726699" start="4785" end="4798" title="Edmund Gunter" label="Edmund Gunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="4865" end="4885" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q311491" start="4981" end="4997" title="William Oughtred" label="William Oughtred"/>
<link wikidata="Q726699" start="5147" end="5158" title="Gunter&amp;#x27;s scale" label="Gunter rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="5324" end="5341" title="pocket calculator" label="pocket calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q266017" start="5382" end="5402" title="Guidobaldo del Monte" label="Guidobaldo del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q57403" start="5804" end="5821" title="Wilhelm Schickard" label="Wilhelm Schickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="5832" end="5840" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="6274" end="6287" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211586" start="6405" end="6426" title="mechanical calculator" label="mechanical calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q873501" start="6470" end="6494" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s calculator" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="6819" end="6848" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968697" start="6862" end="6878" title="stepped reckoner" label="stepped reckoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8713451" start="6887" end="6916" title="Leibniz wheel" label="famous stepped drum mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="7380" end="7401" title="binary numeral system" label="binary numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="7510" end="7525" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="7559" end="7564" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066523" start="7622" end="7653" title="Charles Xavier Thomas" label="Charles Xavier Thomas de Colmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q669329" start="7779" end="7791" title="Arithmometer" label="Arithmometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q310833" start="8153" end="8174" title="Joseph Marie Jacquard" label="Joseph Marie Jacquard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369967" start="8185" end="8191" title="Jacquard loom" label="a loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="8273" end="8286" title="punched cards" label="punched cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886850" start="8557" end="8571" title="Basile Bouchon" label="Basile Bouchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190247" start="8660" end="8677" title="numerical control" label="numerical control"/>
<link wikidata="Q192145" start="8725" end="8741" title="Herman Hollerith" label="Herman Hollerith"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="8767" end="8779" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413513" start="8867" end="8876" title="tabulating machine" label="tabulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040518" start="8885" end="8893" title="keypunch" label="keypunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="8939" end="8944" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041416" start="8950" end="8958" title="Mechanical counter" label="counters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095711" start="9000" end="9025" title="1890 United States census" label="1890 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="9157" end="9160" title="International Business Machines" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q844783" start="9344" end="9357" title="plugboard" label="control panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="9394" end="9409" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q328362" start="9591" end="9604" title="Leslie Comrie" label="Leslie Comrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q914112" start="9649" end="9661" title="W. J. Eckert" label="W. J. Eckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927915" start="9947" end="9967" title="unit record equipment" label="unit record machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="10141" end="10160" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="10234" end="10243" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q163016" start="10645" end="10665" title="Lewis Fry Richardson" label="Lewis Fry Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11202952" start="10723" end="10737" title="human computer" label="human computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="10743" end="10761" title="numerical analysis" label="numerical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="10828" end="10833" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201321" start="10887" end="10910" title="Navier–Stokes equations" label="Navier–Stokes equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503567" start="10928" end="10934" title="Friden, Inc." label="Friden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845746" start="10936" end="10955" title="Marchant Calculator" label="Marchant Calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902126" start="10960" end="10966" title="Monroe Calculator Company" label="Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145419" start="11078" end="11083" title="Curta calculator" label="Curta"/>
<link wikidata="Q85964" start="11120" end="11134" title="Curt Herzstark" label="Curt Herzstark"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="11216" end="11233" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968697" start="11241" end="11257" title="Stepped Reckoner" label="Stepped Reckoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066523" start="11262" end="11268" title="Charles Xavier Thomas" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q669329" start="11275" end="11287" title="Arithmometer" label="Arithmometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883237" start="11375" end="11385" title="Bell Punch" label="Bell Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q966756" start="11386" end="11391" title="Sumlock ANITA calculator" label="ANITA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="11419" end="11430" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q247225" start="11456" end="11464" title="Dekatron" label="Dekatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q289241" start="11504" end="11521" title="Nixie tube" label="&amp;quot;Nixie&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q966756" start="11549" end="11554" title="Sumlock ANITA calculator" label="ANITA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503567" start="11727" end="11733" title="Friden, Inc." label="Friden"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="11826" end="11829" title="Cathode-ray tube" label="CRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q379695" start="11846" end="11869" title="reverse Polish notation" label="reverse Polish notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="11934" end="11955" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="12389" end="12411" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q628007" start="12412" end="12429" title="difference engine" label="difference engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q485257" start="12934" end="12951" title="analytical engine" label="analytical engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="13033" end="13054" title="arithmetic logic unit" label="arithmetic logic unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="13241" end="13256" title="Turing completeness" label="Turing-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867361" start="13318" end="13331" title="Punched card input/output" label="punched cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369967" start="13359" end="13372" title="Jacquard machine" label="Jacquard loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q310833" start="13385" end="13406" title="Joseph Marie Jacquard" label="Joseph Marie Jacquard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259" start="13770" end="13782" title="Ada Lovelace" label="Ada Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q192145" start="14399" end="14415" title="Herman Hollerith" label="Herman Hollerith"/>
<link wikidata="Q716862" start="14783" end="14806" title="Leonardo Torres Quevedo" label="Leonardo Torres Quevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q299595" start="14811" end="14824" title="Vannevar Bush" label="Vannevar Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="15166" end="15181" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="15323" end="15333" title="Electrical network" label="electrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="15335" end="15345" title="Mechanics" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="15350" end="15359" title="hydraulic" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116876" start="15374" end="15379" title="Scientific modelling" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="15421" end="15437" title="digital computer" label="digital computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="15684" end="15698" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q387847" start="15741" end="15764" title="tide-predicting machine" label="tide-predicting machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="15778" end="15797" title="Lord Kelvin" label="Sir William Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q953377" start="16095" end="16116" title="differential analyser" label="differential analyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q937399" start="16266" end="16279" title="James Thomson (engineer)" label="James Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851172" start="16436" end="16460" title="ball-and-disk integrator" label="ball-and-disk integrator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16649" end="16672" title="Leonardo Torres Quevedo#Analogue calculating machines" label="Leonardo Torres Quevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="16747" end="16757" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="16915" end="16934" title="fire-control system" label="fire-control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="16951" end="16955" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131496" start="16956" end="16965" title="Gun laying" label="gunlaying"/>
<link wikidata="Q169973" start="17391" end="17406" title="Coriolis effect" label="Coriolis effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799997" start="17581" end="17594" title="Arthur Pollen" label="Arthur Pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="17647" end="17664" title="analogue computer" label="analogue computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q583941" start="17721" end="17742" title="Imperial Russian Navy" label="Imperial Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17746" end="17757" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17775" end="17787" title="Frederic Charles Dreyer#Dreyer Fire Control Table" label="Dreyer Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093065" start="17903" end="17929" title="bombsight" label="accuracy of aerial bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307448" start="17931" end="17942" title="Drift Sight" label="Drift Sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673446" start="17980" end="17994" title="Harry Wimperis" label="Harry Wimperis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="18011" end="18034" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464943" start="18052" end="18062" title="wind speed" label="wind speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178175" start="18211" end="18236" title="Course Setting Bomb Sight" label="Course Setting Bomb Sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18264" end="18276" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770459" start="18290" end="18309" title="Mark XIV bomb sight" label="Mark XIV bomb sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="18311" end="18329" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707691" start="18339" end="18345" title="Norden bombsight" label="Norden"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="18347" end="18376" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q953377" start="18447" end="18468" title="differential analyzer" label="differential analyzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q299595" start="18495" end="18508" title="Vannevar Bush" label="Vannevar Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="18512" end="18515" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q937399" start="18579" end="18592" title="James Thomson (engineer)" label="James Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826792" start="18601" end="18617" title="torque amplifier" label="torque amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="18764" end="18790" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908229" start="18798" end="18836" title="Moore School of Electrical Engineering" label="Moore School of Electrical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="18848" end="18853" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q103690" start="18914" end="18927" title="Helmut Hölzer" label="Helmut Hölzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q897509" start="18939" end="18970" title="Peenemünde Army Research Center" label="Peenemünde Army Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341206" start="19090" end="19113" title="hybrid computer" label="hybrid analog computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="19345" end="19363" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="19364" end="19375" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="19480" end="19490" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="19686" end="19700" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="19839" end="19848" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030584" start="19910" end="19930" title="Entscheidungsproblem" label="Entscheidungsproblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q622849" start="19963" end="19978" title="halting problem" label="halting problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="20002" end="20013" title="Decision problem" label="undecidable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703890" start="20201" end="20225" title="universal Turing machine" label="universal Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="20471" end="20482" title="John von Neumann" label="Von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q844718" start="20628" end="20649" title="theory of computation" label="theory of computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="20749" end="20764" title="Turing-complete" label="Turing-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="20793" end="20802" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703890" start="20840" end="20864" title="universal Turing machine" label="universal Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="21320" end="21331" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="21343" end="21353" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q230811" start="21361" end="21363" title="Z2 (computer)" label="Z2"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="21429" end="21437" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60093" start="21508" end="21519" title="Konrad Zuse" label="Konrad Zuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q230810" start="21589" end="21591" title="Z1 (computer)" label="Z1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="21630" end="21636" title="computer memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="21699" end="21704" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q480476" start="21768" end="21773" title="bombe" label="bombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q779391" start="21797" end="21809" title="cryptologist" label="cryptologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="21828" end="21834" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="21835" end="21849" title="Enigma machine" label="Enigma-machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21883" end="21895" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21959" end="22004" title="Government Communications Headquarters#Government Code and Cypher School (GC&amp;amp;CS)" label="Government Code and Cypher School (GC&amp;amp;CS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="22008" end="22022" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="22026" end="22037" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q466055" start="22087" end="22102" title="Gordon Welchman" label="Gordon Welchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661349" start="22160" end="22171" title="Harold Keen" label="Harold Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971132" start="22179" end="22213" title="British Tabulating Machine Company" label="British Tabulating Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q267599" start="22296" end="22316" title="Polish Cipher Bureau" label="Polish Cipher Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q160411" start="22330" end="22345" title="Marian Rejewski" label="Marian Rejewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654691" start="22370" end="22386" title="Bomba (cryptography)" label="cryptologic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="22394" end="22400" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q222419" start="22492" end="22494" title="Z3 (computer)" label="Z3"/>
<link wikidata="Q533188" start="22527" end="22544" title="electromechanical" label="electromechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="22545" end="22557" title="Computer programming" label="programmable"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="22620" end="22625" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="22646" end="22649" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="22650" end="22661" title="Word (computer architecture)" label="word length"/>
<link wikidata="Q911691" start="22681" end="22696" title="clock rate" label="clock frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="22711" end="22713" title="Hertz" label="Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q146612" start="22760" end="22764" title="celluloid" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="22861" end="22883" title="floating-point arithmetic" label="floating-point numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="22946" end="22961" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="23000" end="23006" title="binary number" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="23178" end="23201" title="Turing machine" label="Turing-complete machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q88626" start="23213" end="23223" title="Raúl Rojas" label="Raúl Rojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="23237" end="23243" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="23400" end="23424" title="von Neumann architecture" label="von Neumann architecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23470" end="23487" title="Mechanical computer#Electro-mechanical computers" label="electromechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q362849" start="23488" end="23496" title="IBM SSEC" label="IBM SSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q514818" start="23536" end="23551" title="Manchester Baby" label="Manchester Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="23655" end="23661" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q776823" start="23926" end="23940" title="Harvard Mark I" label="Harvard Mark I"/>
<link wikidata="Q92839" start="24168" end="24189" title="George Stibitz" label="George Robert Stibitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="24303" end="24318" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888248" start="24466" end="24473" title="Model K (calculator)" label="Model K"/>
<link wikidata="Q376953" start="24566" end="24578" title="binary adder" label="binary adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q185443" start="24694" end="24712" title="three-valued logic" label="three-valued logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="24788" end="24800" title="Boolean logic" label="binary logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207371" start="24831" end="24847" title="decimal computer" label="decimal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="24960" end="24980" title="binary-coded decimal" label="binary-coded decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q864961" start="24989" end="24999" title="Bi-quinary coded decimal" label="bi-quinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076814" start="25001" end="25009" title="excess-3" label="excess-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778226" start="25015" end="25035" title="two-out-of-five code" label="two-out-of-five code"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="25085" end="25100" title="Boolean algebra" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q134661" start="25141" end="25153" title="George Boole" label="George Boole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746455" start="25172" end="25191" title="The Laws of Thought" label="The Laws of Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q312546" start="25274" end="25288" title="William Jevons" label="William Jevons"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="25293" end="25315" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q77297" start="25359" end="25373" title="Ernst Schröder (mathematician)" label="Ernst Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="25378" end="25393" title="A. N. Whitehead" label="A. N. Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q126095" start="25566" end="25585" title="electronic engineer" label="electronic engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="25586" end="25600" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="25612" end="25620" title="logician" label="logician"/>
<link wikidata="Q4523291" start="25621" end="25637" title="Victor Shestakov" label="Victor Shestakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="25652" end="25677" title="one-to-one correspondence" label="one-to-one correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="25702" end="25715" title="Boolean logic" label="Boolean logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="25760" end="25770" title="logic gate" label="logic gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498784" start="25884" end="25894" title="expression (mathematics)" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="25899" end="25914" title="Boolean algebra (logic)" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121567" start="25958" end="25973" title="digital circuit" label="digital circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="26123" end="26141" title="electronic circuit" label="electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q222419" start="26297" end="26299" title="Z3 (computer)" label="Z3"/>
<link wikidata="Q522906" start="26305" end="26329" title="Atanasoff–Berry Computer" label="Atanasoff–Berry Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q770597" start="26335" end="26352" title="Colossus computer" label="Colossus computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="26363" end="26368" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="26463" end="26475" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="26480" end="26498" title="punched tape" label="punched paper tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q954437" start="26566" end="26579" title="Tommy Flowers" label="Tommy Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="26624" end="26643" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233690" start="26674" end="26690" title="Post Office Research Station" label="research station"/>
<link wikidata="Q146440" start="26694" end="26705" title="Dollis Hill" label="Dollis Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="26780" end="26798" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="26908" end="26926" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="26997" end="27008" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134867" start="27759" end="27773" title="stored-program computer" label="stored program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202298" start="27891" end="27917" title="vacuum-tube computer" label="first generation computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="28008" end="28022" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="28156" end="28162" title="Enigma (machine)" label="Enigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q480476" start="28223" end="28228" title="bombe" label="bombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q695493" start="28535" end="28550" title="Lorenz SZ 40/42" label="Lorenz SZ 40/42"/>
<link wikidata="Q707155" start="28735" end="28745" title="Max Newman" label="Max Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693526" start="28779" end="28793" title="Heath Robinson (codebreaking machine)" label="Heath Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q954437" start="28845" end="28858" title="Tommy Flowers" label="Tommy Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233690" start="28885" end="28913" title="Post Office Research Station" label="Post Office Research Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q770597" start="29049" end="29066" title="Colossus computer" label="Colossus computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693526" start="29089" end="29103" title="Heath Robinson (codebreaking machine)" label="Heath Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q770597" start="29336" end="29343" title="Colossus computer" label="Colossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="29407" end="29417" title="electronics" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173156" start="29418" end="29425" title="digital electronics" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="29426" end="29438" title="Computer programming" label="programmable"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="29439" end="29447" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="29582" end="29595" title="Boolean logic" label="Boolean logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="29637" end="29652" title="Turing-complete" label="Turing-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823535" start="29684" end="29697" title="photoelectric sensor" label="photoelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731594" start="30275" end="30287" title="Allen Coombs" label="Allen Coombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q954437" start="30345" end="30358" title="Tommy Flowers" label="Tommy Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="30476" end="30496" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="30500" end="30505" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q746165" start="30694" end="30708" title="shift register" label="shift register"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377218" start="30714" end="30728" title="systolic array" label="systolic array"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="30790" end="30810" title="Boolean algebra" label="Boolean calculations"/>
<link wikidata="Q770597" start="30951" end="30958" title="Colossus computer" label="Colossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="31198" end="31204" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="31251" end="31263" title="military intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="31316" end="31324" title="encipher" label="encipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="31338" end="31349" title="telegraphy" label="telegraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="31371" end="31396" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="German High Command (OKW)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="31407" end="31411" title="Wehrmacht" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="31531" end="31548" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q695493" start="31701" end="31718" title="Lorenz cipher" label="Lorenz SZ cyphers"/>
<link wikidata="Q220798" start="31849" end="31853" title="GCHQ" label="GCHQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="32064" end="32069" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q770597" start="32231" end="32238" title="Colossus computer" label="Colossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134867" start="32434" end="32448" title="stored-program computer" label="stored-program"/>
<link wikidata="Q522162" start="33053" end="33065" title="John Mauchly" label="John Mauchly"/>
<link wikidata="Q457906" start="33070" end="33087" title="J. Presper Eckert" label="J. Presper Eckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="33726" end="33737" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="33842" end="33858" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="34024" end="34031" title="computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570652" start="34116" end="34127" title="patch panel" label="patch panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q844783" start="34132" end="34141" title="plugboard" label="plugboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="34400" end="34407" title="computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="34465" end="34470" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q522162" start="34481" end="34493" title="John Mauchly" label="John Mauchly"/>
<link wikidata="Q457906" start="34498" end="34515" title="J. Presper Eckert" label="J. Presper Eckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q834849" start="34632" end="34637" title="EDVAC" label="EDVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="34679" end="34705" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908229" start="34713" end="34751" title="Moore School of Electrical Engineering" label="Moore School of Electrical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778158" start="34942" end="34962" title="Delay-line memory" label="serial-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452926" start="35222" end="35258" title="First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC" label="First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="35484" end="35508" title="von Neumann architecture" label="von Neumann architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="35544" end="35575" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="UK National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="35829" end="35857" title="National Physical Laboratory, UK" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134867" start="35951" end="35974" title="stored-program computer" label="stored-program computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428206" start="36005" end="36031" title="Automatic Computing Engine" label="Automatic Computing Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="36089" end="36104" title="computer memory" label="computer memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="36196" end="36198" title="Kibibyte" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="36225" end="36228" title="Hertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="36250" end="36260" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="36381" end="36401" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q514818" start="36430" end="36445" title="Manchester Baby" label="Manchester Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134867" start="36525" end="36548" title="stored-program computer" label="stored-program computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q867530" start="36570" end="36603" title="Victoria University of Manchester" label="Victoria University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q238798" start="36607" end="36627" title="Frederic Calland Williams" label="Frederic C. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q92786" start="36629" end="36640" title="Tom Kilburn" label="Tom Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318674" start="36790" end="36797" title="testbed" label="testbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424528" start="36806" end="36819" title="Williams tube" label="Williams tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="36831" end="36844" title="random-access memory" label="random-access"/>
<link wikidata="Q238798" start="36881" end="36897" title="Frederic Calland Williams" label="Freddie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q92786" start="36902" end="36913" title="Tom Kilburn" label="Tom Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="36973" end="36989" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q905140" start="37017" end="37035" title="secondary emission" label="secondary emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913888" start="37068" end="37079" title="binary data" label="binary data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463814" start="37466" end="37483" title="Manchester Mark 1" label="Manchester Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q675128" start="37541" end="37556" title="Ferranti Mark 1" label="Ferranti Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="37646" end="37652" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="37653" end="37657" title="word (data type)" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="37671" end="37677" title="computer memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="37809" end="37817" title="Computer hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q40754" start="37823" end="37834" title="subtraction" label="subtraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="37839" end="37847" title="negation" label="negation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="37977" end="37991" title="proper divisor" label="proper divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q71486" start="38429" end="38433" title="instructions per second" label="kIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="38530" end="38533" title="cathode-ray tube" label="CRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463814" start="38669" end="38686" title="Manchester Mark 1" label="Manchester Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q186875" start="38832" end="38846" title="Mersenne prime" label="Mersenne prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661183" start="39171" end="39185" title="index register" label="index register"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="39278" end="39283" title="Word (data type)" label="words"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653097" start="39469" end="39472" title="IBM 702" label="702"/>
<link wikidata="Q238798" start="39526" end="39546" title="Frederic Calland Williams" label="Frederic C. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q92786" start="39551" end="39562" title="Tom Kilburn" label="Tom Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747576" start="39734" end="39737" title="Meg (computer)" label="Meg"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="39790" end="39809" title="floating-point unit" label="floating-point unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q863565" start="39925" end="39930" title="EDSAC" label="EDSAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q62857" start="39960" end="39974" title="Maurice Wilkes" label="Maurice Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895212" start="39995" end="40042" title="University of Cambridge Mathematical Laboratory" label="University of Cambridge Mathematical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="40046" end="40053" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="40061" end="40084" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="40122" end="40138" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452926" start="40160" end="40196" title="First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC" label="First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="40268" end="40282" title="Von Neumann architecture" label="stored-program"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="40391" end="40403" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991842" start="40489" end="40494" title="LEO (computer)" label="LEO I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106384" start="40531" end="40554" title="J. Lyons and Co." label="J. Lyons &amp;amp; Co. Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="40682" end="40687" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q522162" start="40698" end="40710" title="John Mauchly" label="John Mauchly"/>
<link wikidata="Q457906" start="40715" end="40732" title="J. Presper Eckert" label="J. Presper Eckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q834849" start="40746" end="40751" title="EDVAC" label="EDVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="40835" end="40861" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908229" start="40869" end="40907" title="Moore School of Electrical Engineering" label="Moore School of Electrical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="40920" end="40925" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778158" start="41098" end="41118" title="Delay-line memory" label="serial-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="41231" end="41240" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851787" start="41248" end="41278" title="Ballistics Research Laboratory" label="Ballistics Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q319506" start="41286" end="41309" title="Aberdeen Proving Ground" label="Aberdeen Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q675128" start="41502" end="41517" title="Ferranti Mark 1" label="Ferranti Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407586" start="41528" end="41536" title="Ferranti" label="Ferranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="41558" end="41582" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463814" start="41621" end="41638" title="Manchester Mark 1" label="Manchester Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="41713" end="41728" title="primary storage" label="primary storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="41736" end="41749" title="Random-access memory" label="random access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424528" start="41750" end="41764" title="Williams tubes" label="Williams tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="41767" end="41784" title="secondary storage" label="secondary storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q908463" start="41794" end="41807" title="drum memory" label="magnetic drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="42097" end="42118" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42159" end="42170" title="Ferranti Mark 1#Mark 1 Star" label="Mark 1 Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="42264" end="42269" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106384" start="42324" end="42346" title="J. Lyons and Co." label="J. Lyons &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991842" start="42551" end="42556" title="LEO computer" label="LEO I"/>
<link wikidata="Q25211948" start="42688" end="42691" title="job (software)" label="job"/>
<link wikidata="" start="42817" end="42828" title=":Category:Application software" label="application"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044055" start="42889" end="42897" title="UNIVAC I" label="UNIVAC I"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="42950" end="42968" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067705" start="43178" end="43191" title="Sequential access" label="serial-access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004175" start="43300" end="43327" title="Groupe Bull" label="Compagnie des Machines Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q113833918" start="43341" end="43348" title="Bull Gamma 3" label="Gamma 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q628643" start="43960" end="43967" title="IBM 650" label="IBM 650"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841895" start="44591" end="44624" title="Symbolic Optimal Assembly Program" label="Symbolic Optimal Assembly Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q62857" start="44942" end="44956" title="Maurice Wilkes" label="Maurice Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="44982" end="44998" title="microcode" label="microprogramming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="45029" end="45052" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="45122" end="45138" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="45153" end="45156" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="45266" end="45274" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="45278" end="45287" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="45370" end="45394" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509689" start="45475" end="45488" title="IEEE Spectrum" label="IEEE Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="45540" end="45554" title="floating-point" label="floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="45564" end="45573" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322872" start="45636" end="45643" title="EDSAC 2" label="EDSAC 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q908463" start="45840" end="45853" title="drum memory" label="drum memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258746" start="45926" end="45957" title="Engineering Research Associates" label="Engineering Research Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q684957" start="46039" end="46043" title="UNIVAC 1103" label="1103"/>
<link wikidata="Q628643" start="46111" end="46118" title="IBM 650" label="IBM 650"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088161" start="46184" end="46197" title="Magnetic core" label="Magnetic-core"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46264" end="46282" title="Whirlwind I#The memory subsystem" label="Whirlwind computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25826" start="46445" end="46452" title="IBM 704" label="IBM 704"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="46938" end="46948" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="47009" end="47020" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362005" start="47530" end="47544" title="operating cost" label="operating cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="47619" end="47640" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928064" start="47654" end="47681" title="Standard Modular System" label="IBM Standard Modular System"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="47709" end="47719" title="logic gate" label="logic gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="47724" end="47734" title="Flip-flop (electronics)" label="flip-flops"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="47744" end="47768" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q92786" start="47801" end="47812" title="Tom Kilburn" label="Tom Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="47868" end="47878" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="47941" end="47950" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515631" start="47951" end="47975" title="point-contact transistor" label="point-contact transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834322" start="48069" end="48092" title="transistor computer" label="transistorized computer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48126" end="48145" title="Manchester computers#Transistor Computer" label="operational by 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="48248" end="48259" title="Solid-state electronics" label="solid-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="48260" end="48265" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677823" start="48552" end="48565" title="Harwell CADET" label="Harwell CADET"/>
<link wikidata="Q757600" start="48616" end="48652" title="Atomic Energy Research Establishment" label="Atomic Energy Research Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q986049" start="48656" end="48663" title="Harwell, Oxfordshire" label="Harwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="48783" end="48815" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="National Physical Laboratory, UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q632106" start="48923" end="48948" title="Royal Radar Establishment" label="Royal Radar Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330305" start="49136" end="49166" title="Standard Telephones and Cables" label="Standard Telephones and Cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="49171" end="49190" title="Bipolar junction transistor" label="junction transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q754940" start="49581" end="49607" title="mean time between failures" label="mean time between failures"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="49671" end="49698" title="bipolar junction transistor" label="bipolar junction transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468032" start="49824" end="49844" title="Metropolitan-Vickers" label="Metropolitan-Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825393" start="49854" end="49867" title="Metrovick 950" label="Metrovick 950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066933" start="50126" end="50134" title="IBM 1401" label="IBM 1401"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="50371" end="50389" title="peripheral" label="peripheral devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046817" start="50413" end="50436" title="disk storage" label="disk data storage units"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="50508" end="50518" title="fixed disk" label="fixed disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282316" start="50641" end="50650" title="disk pack" label="disk pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502645" start="50870" end="50883" title="Magnetic-tape data storage" label="Magnetic tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927915" start="51111" end="51136" title="Unit record equipment" label="card reading and punching"/>
<link wikidata="Q813911" start="51184" end="51203" title="branch (computer science)" label="branch instructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="51209" end="51216" title="Bus (computing)" label="databus"/>
<link wikidata="Q814190" start="51288" end="51307" title="fetch-execute cycle" label="fetch-execute cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758866" start="51388" end="51393" title="PDP-1" label="PDP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q719375" start="51638" end="51645" title="operand" label="operand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312105" start="51688" end="51703" title="Remote Digital Terminal" label="remote terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="51732" end="51743" title="Teleprinter" label="Teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249638" start="51752" end="51770" title="Friden Flexowriter" label="Friden Flexowriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193315" start="52068" end="52087" title="history of the Internet" label="network of networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="52176" end="52190" title="Supercomputer" label="supercomputing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816782" start="52196" end="52201" title="Atlas (computer)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q867530" start="52238" end="52262" title="Victoria University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407586" start="52264" end="52272" title="Ferranti" label="Ferranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204713" start="52278" end="52285" title="Plessey" label="Plessey"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="52405" end="52418" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="52642" end="52650" title="Discrete device" label="discrete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52651" end="52660" title="Bipolar junction transistor#Germanium transistors" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="52661" end="52671" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710907" start="52699" end="52715" title="Atlas Supervisor" label="Atlas Supervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="52778" end="52794" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129191" start="52839" end="52863" title="Control Data Corporation" label="Control Data Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q92765" start="52887" end="52899" title="Seymour Cray" label="Seymour Cray"/>
<link wikidata="Q683851" start="52998" end="53006" title="CDC 6600" label="CDC 6600"/>
<link wikidata="Q984038" start="53122" end="53138" title="IBM 7030 Stretch" label="IBM 7030 Stretch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188768" start="53192" end="53201" title="FLOPS" label="megaFLOPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060028" start="53328" end="53336" title="CDC 7600" label="CDC 7600"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="53443" end="53461" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q632106" start="53588" end="53613" title="Royal Radar Establishment" label="Royal Radar Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="53621" end="53640" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502981" start="53642" end="53662" title="Geoffrey Dummer" label="Geoffrey W.A. Dummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182031" start="53720" end="53730" title="Jack Kilby" label="Jack Kilby"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="53734" end="53751" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q241735" start="53756" end="53768" title="Robert Noyce" label="Robert Noyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096013" start="53772" end="53795" title="Fairchild Semiconductor" label="Fairchild Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210109" start="53993" end="54018" title="hybrid integrated circuit" label="hybrid integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="54219" end="54248" title="monolithic integrated circuit" label="monolithic integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="54379" end="54386" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="54426" end="54435" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520588" start="54499" end="54513" title="planar process" label="planar process"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="54602" end="54617" title="printed circuit" label="printed circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q952816" start="54679" end="54690" title="Jean Hoerni" label="Jean Hoerni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759109" start="54715" end="54732" title="Mohamed M. Atalla" label="Mohamed M. Atalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="54804" end="54813" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q138875" start="55063" end="55087" title="Apollo Guidance Computer" label="Apollo Guidance Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="55442" end="55448" title="MOSFET" label="MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759109" start="55536" end="55553" title="Mohamed M. Atalla" label="Mohamed M. Atalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q249228" start="55558" end="55569" title="Dawon Kahng" label="Dawon Kahng"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="55573" end="55582" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343761" start="55683" end="55694" title="memory cell (computing)" label="memory cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088161" start="55745" end="55759" title="magnetic cores" label="magnetic cores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143031" start="55761" end="55781" title="Semiconductor memory" label="Semiconductor memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143031" start="55797" end="55807" title="MOS memory" label="MOS memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="55850" end="55870" title="magnetic-core memory" label="magnetic-core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="55876" end="55896" title="random-access memory" label="random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="55919" end="55929" title="static RAM" label="static RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096013" start="55971" end="55994" title="Fairchild Semiconductor" label="Fairchild Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q289023" start="56013" end="56027" title="Robert Dennard" label="Robert Dennard"/>
<link wikidata="Q476208" start="56035" end="56071" title="IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center" label="IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="56086" end="56097" title="dynamic RAM" label="dynamic RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q711761" start="56131" end="56140" title="Simon Sze" label="Simon Sze"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="56168" end="56188" title="floating-gate MOSFET" label="floating-gate MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997658" start="56208" end="56227" title="non-volatile memory" label="non-volatile memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="56236" end="56241" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="56243" end="56249" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="56254" end="56266" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="56370" end="56384" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777977" start="56453" end="56475" title="MOS integrated circuit" label="MOS integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="56504" end="56518" title="MOSFET scaling" label="MOSFET scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="56588" end="56604" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="56617" end="56640" title="large-scale integration" label="large-scale integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="56752" end="56761" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466064" start="56854" end="56872" title="computer processor" label="computer processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474890" start="57145" end="57163" title="Four-Phase Systems" label="Four-Phase Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494445" start="57181" end="57199" title="Garrett AiResearch" label="Garrett AiResearch"/>
<link wikidata="Q902535" start="57200" end="57205" title="MP944" label="MP944"/>
<link wikidata="Q205509" start="57299" end="57309" title="Intel 4004" label="Intel 4004"/>
<link wikidata="Q173605" start="57333" end="57337" title="PMOS logic" label="PMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q462096" start="57380" end="57388" title="Marcian Hoff" label="Ted Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q667095" start="57390" end="57405" title="Federico Faggin" label="Federico Faggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414244" start="57407" end="57422" title="Masatoshi Shima" label="Masatoshi Shima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442751" start="57427" end="57440" title="Stanley Mazor" label="Stanley Mazor"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="57444" end="57449" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674369" start="57473" end="57487" title="Tadashi Sasaki (engineer)" label="Tadashi Sasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414244" start="57492" end="57507" title="Masatoshi Shima" label="Masatoshi Shima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017523" start="57511" end="57518" title="Busicom" label="Busicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="57952" end="57957" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="57970" end="57975" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="57976" end="57991" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="58044" end="58047" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="58063" end="58068" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="58074" end="58077" title="input/output" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040980" start="58216" end="58242" title="IBM Solid Logic Technology" label="IBM Solid Logic Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210109" start="58254" end="58268" title="hybrid circuit" label="hybrid circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359776" start="58417" end="58440" title="Burroughs large systems" label="Burroughs large systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740397" start="58464" end="58477" title="stack machine" label="stack machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q751443" start="58525" end="58543" title="pushdown automaton" label="pushdown automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q174907" start="58872" end="58877" title="SPICE" label="SPICE"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58957" end="58960" title=":Category:Electronic design automation software" label="EDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="59008" end="59021" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59339" end="59347" title="Micral#Micral N" label="Micral N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401099" start="59349" end="59366" title="François Gernelle" label="François Gernelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848724" start="59368" end="59380" title="André Truong Trong Thi" label="André Truong"/>
<link wikidata="Q324610" start="59495" end="59505" title="Intel 8080" label="Intel 8080"/>
<link wikidata="Q223493" start="59512" end="59523" title="Altair 8800" label="Altair 8800"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263882" start="59588" end="59607" title="Popular Electronics" label="Popular Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="59720" end="59724" title="DRAM" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140841" start="60001" end="60009" title="Cromemco" label="Cromemco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922428" start="60014" end="60034" title="Processor Technology" label="Processor Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546156" start="60067" end="60076" title="S-100 bus" label="S-100 bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q640826" start="60130" end="60143" title="Hannover Messe" label="Hannover Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q673267" start="60145" end="60153" title="Olivetti" label="Olivetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350692" start="60168" end="60173" title="Olivetti P6060" label="P6060"/>
<link wikidata="Q173451" start="60384" end="60387" title="Transistor–transistor logic" label="TTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="60455" end="60466" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q185146" start="60490" end="60504" title="plasma display" label="plasma display"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166429" start="60526" end="60541" title="thermal printer" label="thermal printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="60556" end="60559" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="60565" end="60570" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q151863" start="60849" end="60869" title="KIM-1" label="MOS Technology KIM-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q223493" start="60875" end="60886" title="Altair 8800" label="Altair 8800"/>
<link wikidata="Q18981" start="60913" end="60920" title="Apple I" label="Apple I"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="61051" end="61059" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q610305" start="61071" end="61077" title="TRS-80" label="TRS-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395211" start="61089" end="61094" title="SWTPC" label="SWTPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q946661" start="61114" end="61127" title="Commodore PET" label="Commodore PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="61296" end="61311" title="object-oriented" label="object-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="61357" end="61372" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q92749" start="61377" end="61392" title="Robert Cailliau" label="Robert Cailliau"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="61396" end="61400" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="61435" end="61445" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q570945" start="61456" end="61466" title="CERN httpd" label="CERN httpd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="61501" end="61512" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q590890" start="61514" end="61526" title="WorldWideWeb" label="WorldWideWeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193887" start="61583" end="61594" title="reliability engineering" label="reliability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935523" start="61897" end="61901" title="Semi-Automatic Ground Environment" label="SAGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q630802" start="62086" end="62099" title="Hot plugging" label="Hot-pluggable"/>
<link wikidata="Q261645" start="62476" end="62487" title="server farm" label="server farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="62734" end="62744" title="multi-core" label="multi-core"/>
<link wikidata="Q745101" start="62781" end="62807" title="Content-addressable memory" label="Content-addressable memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="62905" end="62917" title="cache memory" label="cache memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="63306" end="63310" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="63311" end="63322" title="logic gates" label="logic gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="63710" end="63719" title="commodity" label="commodity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="63757" end="63767" title="embedded system" label="many forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="63793" end="63802" title="Mobile phone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63807" end="63817" title="Satellite communications#History" label="satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053879" start="63823" end="63843" title="thermal design power" label="thermal design power"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="64118" end="64121" title="System on a chip" label="SoC"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="64173" end="64191" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738570" start="64290" end="64303" title="mobile computing" label="mobile device"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="64307" end="64324" title="Quantum computing" label="Quantum computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q378201" start="64464" end="64469" title="qubit" label="qubit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536431" start="64758" end="64782" title="quantum error correction" label="quantum error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="65053" end="65059" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="65151" end="65152" title="kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086255" start="65252" end="65269" title="Quantum supremacy" label="Quantum supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215675" start="65316" end="65328" title="quantum entanglement" label="entanglement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407429" start="65332" end="65341" title="action at a distance" label="non-local"/>
<link wikidata="Q182324" start="65937" end="65958" title="Antikythera mechanism" label="Antikythera mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735691" start="65961" end="65981" title="History of computing" label="History of computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920631" start="65984" end="66029" title="History of computing hardware (1960s–present)" label="History of computing hardware (1960s–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12348943" start="66032" end="66050" title="History of laptops" label="History of laptops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359420" start="66053" end="66082" title="History of personal computers" label="History of personal computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155144" start="66085" end="66104" title="History of software" label="History of software"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="66107" end="66122" title="Information Age" label="Information Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="66125" end="66143" title="IT History Society" label="IT History Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q389525" start="66146" end="66160" title="Retrocomputing" label="Retrocomputing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586120" start="66163" end="66184" title="Timeline of computing" label="Timeline of computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q82529" start="66187" end="66223" title="List of pioneers in computer science" label="List of pioneers in computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202298" start="66226" end="66246" title="Vacuum-tube computer" label="Vacuum-tube computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q92953" start="67385" end="67394" title="Bob Bemer" label="Bob Bemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="67476" end="67525" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13637" wikidata="Q326908" url="?curid=13637" title="Hausdorff space">
<text>In topology and related branches of mathematics, a Hausdorff space ( , ), T2 space or separated space, is a topological space where distinct points have disjoint neighbourhoods. Of the many separation axioms that can be imposed on a topological space, the &quot;Hausdorff condition&quot; (T2) is the most frequently used and discussed. It implies the uniqueness of limits of sequences, nets, and filters.

Hausdorff spaces are named after Felix Hausdorff, one of the founders of topology. Hausdorff&#x27;s original definition of a topological space (in 1914) included the Hausdorff condition as an axiom.

== Definitions ==
Points formula_1 and formula_2 in a topological space formula_3 can be &quot;separated by neighbourhoods&quot; if there exists a neighbourhood formula_4 of formula_1 and a neighbourhood formula_6 of formula_2 such that formula_4 and formula_6 are disjoint formula_10. formula_3 is a Hausdorff space if any two distinct points in formula_3 are separated by neighbourhoods. This condition is the third separation axiom (after T0 and T1), which is why Hausdorff spaces are also called T2 spaces. The name &quot;separated space&quot; is also used.

A related, but weaker, notion is that of a preregular space. formula_3 is a preregular space if any two topologically distinguishable points can be separated by disjoint neighbourhoods. A preregular space is also called an R1 space.

The relationship between these two conditions is as follows. A topological space is Hausdorff if and only if it is both preregular (i.e. topologically distinguishable points are separated by neighbourhoods) and Kolmogorov (i.e. distinct points are topologically distinguishable). A topological space is preregular if and only if its Kolmogorov quotient is Hausdorff.

== Equivalences ==
For a topological space &quot;formula_3&quot;, the following are equivalent:

* formula_3 is a Hausdorff space.
* Limits of nets in &quot;formula_3&quot; are unique.
* Limits of filters on &quot;formula_3&quot; are unique.
* Any singleton set formula_18 is equal to the intersection of all closed neighbourhoods of &quot;formula_1&quot;. (A closed neighbourhood of formula_1 is a closed set that contains an open set containing formula_1.)
* The diagonal &quot;formula_22&quot; is closed as a subset of the product space &quot;formula_23&quot;.
* Any injection from the discrete space with two points to &quot;formula_3&quot; has the lifting property with respect to the map from the finite topological space with two open points and one closed point to a single point.

== Examples of Hausdorff and non-Hausdorff spaces ==
Almost all spaces encountered in analysis are Hausdorff; most importantly, the real numbers (under the standard metric topology on real numbers) are a Hausdorff space. More generally, all metric spaces are Hausdorff. In fact, many spaces of use in analysis, such as topological groups and topological manifolds, have the Hausdorff condition explicitly stated in their definitions.

A simple example of a topology that is T1 but is not Hausdorff is the cofinite topology defined on an infinite set, as is the cocountable topology defined on an uncountable set.

Pseudometric spaces typically are not Hausdorff, but they are preregular, and their use in analysis is usually only in the construction of Hausdorff gauge spaces. Indeed, when analysts run across a non-Hausdorff space, it is still probably at least preregular, and then they simply replace it with its Kolmogorov quotient, which is Hausdorff.

In contrast, non-preregular spaces are encountered much more frequently in abstract algebra and algebraic geometry, in particular as the Zariski topology on an algebraic variety or the spectrum of a ring. They also arise in the model theory of intuitionistic logic: every complete Heyting algebra is the algebra of open sets of some topological space, but this space need not be preregular, much less Hausdorff, and in fact usually is neither. The related concept of Scott domain also consists of non-preregular spaces.

While the existence of unique limits for convergent nets and filters implies that a space is Hausdorff, there are non-Hausdorff T1 spaces in which every convergent sequence has a unique limit. Such spaces are called &quot;US spaces&quot;. For sequential spaces, this notion is equivalent to being weakly Hausdorff.

== Properties ==
Subspaces and products of Hausdorff spaces are Hausdorff, but quotient spaces of Hausdorff spaces need not be Hausdorff. In fact, &quot;every&quot; topological space can be realized as the quotient of some Hausdorff space.

Hausdorff spaces are T1, meaning that each singleton is a closed set. Similarly, preregular spaces are R0. Every Hausdorff space is a Sober space although the converse is in general not true. 

Another property of Hausdorff spaces is that each compact set is a closed set. For non-Hausdorff spaces, it can be that each compact set is a closed set (for example, the cocountable topology on an uncountable set) or not (for example, the cofinite topology on an infinite set and the Sierpiński space). 

The definition of a Hausdorff space says that points can be separated by neighborhoods. It turns out that this implies something which is seemingly stronger: in a Hausdorff space every pair of disjoint compact sets can also be separated by neighborhoods, in other words there is a neighborhood of one set and a neighborhood of the other, such that the two neighborhoods are disjoint. This is an example of the general rule that compact sets often behave like points.

Compactness conditions together with preregularity often imply stronger separation axioms. For example, any locally compact preregular space is completely regular. Compact preregular spaces are normal, meaning that they satisfy Urysohn&#x27;s lemma and the Tietze extension theorem and have partitions of unity subordinate to locally finite open covers. The Hausdorff versions of these statements are: every locally compact Hausdorff space is Tychonoff, and every compact Hausdorff space is normal Hausdorff.

The following results are some technical properties regarding maps (continuous and otherwise) to and from Hausdorff spaces.

Let &quot;formula_25&quot; be a continuous function and suppose formula_26 is Hausdorff. Then the graph of &quot;formula_27&quot;, formula_28, is a closed subset of &quot;formula_29&quot;.

Let &quot;formula_25&quot; be a function and let formula_31 be its kernel regarded as a subspace of &quot;formula_23&quot;.
*If &quot;formula_27&quot; is continuous and &quot;formula_26&quot; is Hausdorff then &quot;formula_35&quot; is a closed set.
*If &quot;formula_27&quot; is an open surjection and &quot;formula_35&quot; is a closed set then &quot;formula_26&quot; is Hausdorff.
*If &quot;formula_27&quot; is a continuous, open surjection (i.e. an open quotient map) then &quot;formula_26&quot; is Hausdorff if and only if &quot;formula_35&quot; is a closed set.

If &quot;formula_42&quot; are continuous maps and &quot;formula_26&quot; is Hausdorff then the equalizer formula_44 is a closed set in &quot;formula_3&quot;. It follows that if &quot;formula_26&quot; is Hausdorff and &quot;formula_27&quot; and &quot;formula_48&quot; agree on a dense subset of &quot;formula_3&quot; then &quot;formula_50&quot;. In other words, continuous functions into Hausdorff spaces are determined by their values on dense subsets.

Let &quot;formula_25&quot; be a closed surjection such that &quot;formula_52&quot; is compact for all &quot;formula_53&quot;. Then if &quot;formula_3&quot; is Hausdorff so is &quot;formula_26&quot;.

Let &quot;formula_25&quot; be a quotient map with &quot;formula_3&quot; a compact Hausdorff space. Then the following are equivalent:
*&quot;formula_26&quot; is Hausdorff.
*&quot;formula_27&quot; is a closed map.
*&quot;formula_35&quot; is a closed set.

== Preregularity versus regularity ==
All regular spaces are preregular, as are all Hausdorff spaces. There are many results for topological spaces that hold for both regular and Hausdorff spaces.
Most of the time, these results hold for all preregular spaces; they were listed for regular and Hausdorff spaces separately because the idea of preregular spaces came later.
On the other hand, those results that are truly about regularity generally do not also apply to nonregular Hausdorff spaces.

There are many situations where another condition of topological spaces (such as paracompactness or local compactness) will imply regularity if preregularity is satisfied. Such conditions often come in two versions: a regular version and a Hausdorff version. Although Hausdorff spaces are not, in general, regular, a Hausdorff space that is also (say) locally compact will be regular, because any Hausdorff space is preregular. Thus from a certain point of view, it is really preregularity, rather than regularity, that matters in these situations. However, definitions are usually still phrased in terms of regularity, since this condition is better known than preregularity.

See History of the separation axioms for more on this issue.

== Variants ==
The terms &quot;Hausdorff&quot;, &quot;separated&quot;, and &quot;preregular&quot; can also be applied to such variants on topological spaces as uniform spaces, Cauchy spaces, and convergence spaces. The characteristic that unites the concept in all of these examples is that limits of nets and filters (when they exist) are unique (for separated spaces) or unique up to topological indistinguishability (for preregular spaces).

As it turns out, uniform spaces, and more generally Cauchy spaces, are always preregular, so the Hausdorff condition in these cases reduces to the T0 condition. These are also the spaces in which completeness makes sense, and Hausdorffness is a natural companion to completeness in these cases. Specifically, a space is complete if and only if every Cauchy net has at &quot;least&quot; one limit, while a space is Hausdorff if and only if every Cauchy net has at &quot;most&quot; one limit (since only Cauchy nets can have limits in the first place).

== Algebra of functions ==
The algebra of continuous (real or complex) functions on a compact Hausdorff space is a commutative C*-algebra, and conversely by the Banach–Stone theorem one can recover the topology of the space from the algebraic properties of its algebra of continuous functions. This leads to noncommutative geometry, where one considers noncommutative C*-algebras as representing algebras of functions on a noncommutative space.

== Academic humour ==
* Hausdorff condition is illustrated by the pun that in Hausdorff spaces any two points can be &quot;housed off&quot; from each other by open sets.
* In the Mathematics Institute of the University of Bonn, in which Felix Hausdorff researched and lectured, there is a certain room designated the Hausdorff-Raum. This is a pun, as &quot;Raum&quot; means both &quot;room&quot; and &quot;space&quot; in German.

==See also==
* , a Hausdorff space &quot;X&quot; such that every continuous function has a fixed point.
* 
* 

== Notes ==
== References ==
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="3" end="11" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="36" end="47" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="51" end="66" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="74" end="82" title="Hausdorff space" label="T2 space"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="86" end="101" title="Hausdorff space" label="separated space"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="108" end="125" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="153" end="161" title="disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="162" end="175" title="neighbourhood (mathematics)" label="neighbourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140985" start="190" end="206" title="separation axiom" label="separation axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q847204" start="365" end="371" title="Limit of a sequence" label="limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q847204" start="375" end="383" title="limit of a sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191147" start="386" end="389" title="net (topology)" label="net"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901581" start="396" end="402" title="filter (topology)" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q75856" start="439" end="454" title="Felix Hausdorff" label="Felix Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="598" end="603" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q257272" start="701" end="728" title="separated by neighbourhoods" label="separated by neighbourhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q773483" start="738" end="750" title="existential quantification" label="there exists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="753" end="766" title="neighbourhood (topology)" label="neighbourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="871" end="879" title="Disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140985" start="1024" end="1040" title="separation axiom" label="separation axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902055" start="1273" end="1302" title="topologically distinguishable" label="topologically distinguishable"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="1497" end="1511" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="1614" end="1624" title="Kolmogorov space" label="Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="1736" end="1755" title="Kolmogorov quotient" label="Kolmogorov quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191147" start="1914" end="1918" title="net (topology)" label="nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901581" start="1968" end="1975" title="filter (topology)" label="filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="2019" end="2032" title="singleton set" label="singleton set"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="2080" end="2101" title="neighbourhood (mathematics)" label="closed neighbourhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="2170" end="2180" title="closed set" label="closed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="2271" end="2277" title="closed set" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="2297" end="2310" title="product space" label="product space"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672450" start="2424" end="2440" title="lifting property" label="lifting property"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="2647" end="2655" title="mathematical analysis" label="analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2693" end="2704" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="2726" end="2741" title="metric topology" label="metric topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="2802" end="2814" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="2880" end="2897" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721559" start="2903" end="2923" title="topological manifold" label="topological manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="3035" end="3037" title="T1 space" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491998" start="3066" end="3083" title="cofinite topology" label="cofinite topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="3098" end="3110" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139908" start="3122" end="3142" title="cocountable topology" label="cocountable topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="3157" end="3172" title="uncountable set" label="uncountable set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397059" start="3175" end="3193" title="Pseudometric space" label="Pseudometric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="3324" end="3335" title="gauge space" label="gauge space"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="3594" end="3610" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="3615" end="3633" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q147978" start="3656" end="3672" title="Zariski topology" label="Zariski topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q648995" start="3679" end="3696" title="algebraic variety" label="algebraic variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154351" start="3704" end="3722" title="spectrum of a ring" label="spectrum of a ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="3747" end="3759" title="model theory" label="model theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q176786" start="3763" end="3783" title="intuitionistic logic" label="intuitionistic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362924" start="3791" end="3799" title="complete lattice" label="complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617044" start="3800" end="3815" title="Heyting algebra" label="Heyting algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="3834" end="3842" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437566" start="3986" end="3998" title="Scott domain" label="Scott domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740469" start="4283" end="4299" title="sequential space" label="sequential space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977932" start="4337" end="4353" title="weakly Hausdorff" label="weakly Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="4373" end="4381" title="Subspace (topology)" label="Subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="4387" end="4395" title="product topology" label="products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="4435" end="4449" title="quotient space (topology)" label="quotient space"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="4618" end="4620" title="T1 space" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="4640" end="4649" title="singleton (mathematics)" label="singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="4700" end="4702" title="R0 space" label="R0"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778429" start="4731" end="4742" title="Sober space" label="Sober space"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="4841" end="4852" title="compact set" label="compact set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139908" start="4962" end="4982" title="cocountable topology" label="cocountable topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491998" start="5031" end="5048" title="cofinite topology" label="cofinite topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119470" start="5076" end="5092" title="Sierpiński space" label="Sierpiński space"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="5673" end="5688" title="locally compact space" label="locally compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="5709" end="5727" title="completely regular space" label="completely regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="5729" end="5736" title="Compact space" label="Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="5759" end="5765" title="normal space" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816967" start="5793" end="5813" title="Urysohn&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Urysohn&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346677" start="5822" end="5846" title="Tietze extension theorem" label="Tietze extension theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q191690" start="5856" end="5875" title="partition of unity" label="partitions of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="5906" end="5916" title="open cover" label="open cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="6008" end="6017" title="Tychonoff space" label="Tychonoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="6143" end="6153" title="continuous (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="6298" end="6303" title="Graph of a function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q687704" start="6457" end="6463" title="kernel of a function" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632649" start="6673" end="6677" title="open map" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="6823" end="6833" title="surjection" label="surjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="6903" end="6917" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224487" start="7054" end="7063" title="Equaliser (mathematics)" label="equalizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="7237" end="7242" title="dense (topology)" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632649" start="7445" end="7451" title="closed map" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="7499" end="7506" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="7645" end="7657" title="quotient map (topology)" label="quotient map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632649" start="7814" end="7824" title="closed map" label="closed map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="7910" end="7923" title="regular space" label="regular space"/>
<link wikidata="Q970119" start="8447" end="8462" title="paracompactness" label="paracompactness"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="8466" end="8483" title="local compactness" label="local compactness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870906" start="9048" end="9080" title="History of the separation axioms" label="History of the separation axioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="9266" end="9279" title="uniform space" label="uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054344" start="9282" end="9294" title="Cauchy space" label="Cauchy space"/>
<link wikidata="Q105095528" start="9301" end="9318" title="convergence space" label="convergence space"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="9747" end="9759" title="completeness (topology)" label="completeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q263809" start="10230" end="10240" title="C*-algebra" label="C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853767" start="10264" end="10284" title="Banach–Stone theorem" label="Banach–Stone theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746792" start="10411" end="10434" title="noncommutative geometry" label="noncommutative geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="10708" end="10717" title="open sets" label="open sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q152171" start="10757" end="10775" title="Universität Bonn" label="University of Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q75856" start="10786" end="10801" title="Felix Hausdorff" label="Felix Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="10892" end="10895" title="pun" label="pun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13644" wikidata="Q285966" url="?curid=13644" title="Hawkwind">
<text>Hawkwind are an English rock band known as one of the earliest space rock groups. Since their formation in November 1969, Hawkwind have gone through many incarnations and have incorporated many different styles into their music, including hard rock, progressive rock and psychedelic rock. They are regarded as an influential proto-punk band. Their lyrics often cover themes of urban life and science fiction.

Many musicians, dancers and writers have worked with the band since their inception. Key members of Hawkwind have included Nik Turner, Huw Lloyd-Langton, Del Dettmar, Lemmy, Simon King, Robert Calvert, Simon House and Ginger Baker, but the band are most closely associated with their singer, songwriter and guitarist Dave Brock, who founded the band and is the only remaining original member.

Hawkwind are best known for the song &quot;Silver Machine&quot;, which became a number-three UK hit single in 1972, and they had further chart singles with &quot;Urban Guerrilla&quot; (another top 40 hit) and &quot;Shot Down in the Night&quot;. The band had a run of twenty-two of their albums charting in the UK from 1971 to 1993, and another nine between 2012 and 2024.

==History==
===1969: formation===

Dave Brock and Mick Slattery had been in the London-based psychedelic band Famous Cure, and a meeting with bassist John Harrison revealed a mutual interest in electronic music, which led the trio to embark upon a new musical venture together. Seventeen-year-old drummer Terry Ollis replied to an advert in a music weekly; Nik Turner and Michael &quot;Dik Mik&quot; Davies, old acquaintances of Brock, offered help with transport and gear, but were soon pulled into the band.

Gatecrashing a local talent night at the All Saints Hall, Notting Hill, they were so disorganised as to not even have a name, opting for &quot;Group X&quot; at the last minute, nor any songs, choosing to play an extended 20-minute jam on the Byrds&#x27; &quot;Eight Miles High&quot;. BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel was in the audience, and was impressed enough to tell event organiser Douglas Smith to keep an eye on them. Smith signed them up and got them a deal with Liberty Records on the back of a deal he was setting up for Cochise.

The band settled on the name &quot;Hawkwind&quot; after briefly being billed as &quot;Group X&quot; and &quot;Hawkwind Zoo&quot;.

A session took place at Abbey Road Studios to record demos of &quot;Hurry on Sundown&quot; and other tracks (which were eventually included on the remastered version of the group&#x27;s debut album &quot;Hawkwind&quot;), after which Slattery left. He was replaced by Huw Lloyd-Langton who, during his former employment in a musical instrument shop, had known Brock (who at the time was a busker) and sold guitar strings to him.

===1970–1975: United Artists era===
Pretty Things guitarist Dick Taylor was brought in to produce the 1970 debut album &quot;Hawkwind&quot;. Although it was not a commercial success, it did bring them to the attention of the UK underground scene, which found them playing free concerts, benefit gigs, and festivals. Playing free outside the Bath Festival, they encountered another Ladbroke Grove–based band, the Pink Fairies, who shared similar interests in music and recreational substances; a friendship developed which led to the two bands becoming running partners and performing as &quot;Pinkwind&quot;. Their use of drugs, however, led to the departure of Harrison, who did not partake, to be replaced briefly by Thomas Crimble (about July 1970 – March 1971). Crimble played on a few BBC sessions (which were eventually collected on the album &quot;The Text of Festival&quot;) before leaving to help organise the Glastonbury Free Festival 1971; he sat in during the band&#x27;s performance there. Lloyd-Langton also quit, after a bad LSD trip at the Isle of Wight Festival led to a nervous breakdown.

Their follow-up album, 1971&#x27;s &quot;In Search of Space&quot;, brought greater commercial success, reaching number 18 on the UK album charts. This album offered a refinement of the band&#x27;s image and philosophy courtesy of graphic artist Barney Bubbles and underground press writer Robert Calvert, as depicted in the accompanying &quot;Hawklog&quot; booklet, which would be further developed into the &quot;Space Ritual&quot; stage show. Science fiction author Michael Moorcock and dancer Stacia also started contributing to the band. Dik Mik had left the band, replaced by sound engineer Del Dettmar, but chose to return for this album, thus giving the band two electronics players. Bass player Dave Anderson, who had been in the German band Amon Düül II, had also joined and played on the album, but departed before its release because of personal tensions with some other members of the band. Anderson and Lloyd-Langton then formed the short-lived band Amon Din. Meanwhile, Ollis quit, unhappy with the commercial direction in which the band were heading.

The addition of bassist Ian &quot;Lemmy&quot; Kilmister and drummer Simon King propelled the band to greater heights. One of the early gigs the band played was a benefit for the Greasy Truckers at The Roundhouse on 13 February 1972. A live album of the concert, &quot;Greasy Truckers Party&quot;, was released; from this, a single (with overdubbed vocal), &quot;Silver Machine&quot;, was also released, reaching number three in the UK charts. This generated sufficient funds for the subsequent album &quot;Doremi Fasol Latido&quot; and Space Ritual tour. The show featured costumes, dancers Stacia and Miss Renee – typically performing either topless or wearing only body paint – mime artist Tony Carrera, and a light show by Liquid Len. The songs in the show were connected by electronic and spoken word segues and the show was recorded on the elaborate package &quot;Space Ritual&quot;. At the height of their success, in 1973, the band released the single &quot;Urban Guerrilla&quot;, which coincided with an IRA bombing campaign in London, so the BBC refused to play it and the band&#x27;s management reluctantly decided to withdraw it fearing accusations of opportunism, despite the disc having already climbed to number 39 in the UK chart.


Dik Mik departed during 1973, and Calvert ended his association with the band to concentrate on solo projects. Dettmar also indicated that he was to leave the band, so Simon House was recruited as keyboardist and violinist playing live shows, a North America tour and recording the 1974 album &quot;Hall of the Mountain Grill&quot;. Dettmar left after a European tour and emigrated to Canada, whilst Alan Powell deputised for an incapacitated King on that European tour, but remained, giving the band two drummers.

At the beginning of 1975, the band recorded the album &quot;Warrior on the Edge of Time&quot; in collaboration with Michael Moorcock, loosely based on his Eternal Champion figure. However, during a North American tour in May, Lemmy was caught in possession of amphetamine crossing the border from the US into Canada. The border police mistook the powder for cocaine and he was jailed, forcing the band to cancel some shows. Fed up with his erratic behaviour, the band dismissed the bass player replacing him with their long-standing friend and former Pink Fairies guitarist Paul Rudolph. Lemmy then teamed up with another Pink Fairies guitarist, Larry Wallis, to form Motörhead, named after the last song he had written for Hawkwind.

===1976–1978: Charisma era===
Calvert made a guest appearance with the band for their headline set at the Reading Festival in August 1975, after which he chose to rejoin the band as a full-time lead vocalist. Stacia chose to relinquish her dancing duties and settle down to family life. The band changed record company to Tony Stratton-Smith&#x27;s Charisma Records and, on Stratton-Smith&#x27;s suggestion, band management from Douglas Smith to Tony Howard.

&quot;Astounding Sounds, Amazing Music&quot; is the first album of this era. On the eve of recording the follow-up &quot;Back on the Streets&quot; single, Turner was dismissed for his erratic live playing and Powell was deemed surplus to requirements. After a tour to promote the single and during the recording of the next album, Rudolph was also dismissed, for allegedly trying to steer the band into a musical direction at odds with Calvert and Brock&#x27;s vision.

Adrian &quot;Ade&quot; Shaw, who, as bass player for Magic Muscle, had supported Hawkwind on the &quot;Space Ritual&quot; tour, came in for the 1977 album &quot;Quark, Strangeness and Charm&quot;. The band continued to enjoy moderate commercial success, but Calvert&#x27;s mental illness often caused problems. A manic phase saw the band abandon a European tour in France, while a depression phase during a 1978 North American tour convinced Brock to disband the group. In between these two tours, the band had recorded the album &quot;PXR5&quot; in January 1978, but its release was delayed until 1979.

On 23 December 1977 in Barnstaple, Brock and Calvert had performed a one-off gig with Devon band Ark as the Sonic Assassins, and looking for a new project in 1978, bassist Harvey Bainbridge and drummer Martin Griffin were recruited from this event. Steve Swindells was recruited as keyboard player. The band was named Hawklords, (probably for legal reasons, the band having recently split from their management), and recording took place on a farm in Devon using a mobile studio, resulting in the album &quot;25 Years On&quot;. King had originally been the drummer for the project but quit during recording sessions to return to London, while House, who had temporarily left the band to join a David Bowie tour, elected to remain with Bowie full-time, but nevertheless contributed violin to these sessions. At the end of the band&#x27;s UK tour, Calvert, wanting King back in the band, dismissed Griffin, then promptly resigned himself, choosing to pursue a career in literature. Swindells left to record a solo album after an offer had been made to him by the record company ATCO.

===1979–1986: Bronze, RCA and independents===

In late 1979, Hawkwind reformed with Brock, Bainbridge and King being joined by Huw Lloyd-Langton (who had played on the debut album) and Tim Blake (formerly of Gong), debuting at the first Futurama (The World&#x27;s First Science Fiction Music Festival) on 9 September in Leeds, and then embarking upon a UK tour despite not having a record deal or any product to promote. Some shows were recorded and a deal was made with Bronze Records, resulting in the &quot;Live Seventy Nine&quot; album, quickly followed by the studio album &quot;Levitation&quot;. However, during the recording of &quot;Levitation&quot; King quit and Ginger Baker was drafted in for the sessions, but he chose to stay with the band for the tour, during which Blake left to be replaced by Keith Hale.

In 1981 Baker and Hale left after their insistence that Bainbridge should be dismissed was ignored, and Brock and Bainbridge elected to handle synthesisers and sequencers themselves, with drummer Griffin from the Hawklords rejoining. Three albums, which again saw Moorcock contributing lyrics and vocals, were recorded for RCA/Active: &quot;Sonic Attack&quot;, the electronic &quot;Church of Hawkwind&quot; and &quot;Choose Your Masques&quot;. This band headlined the 1981 Glastonbury Festival and made an appearance at the 1982 Donington Monsters of Rock Festival, as well as continuing to play the summer solstice at Stonehenge Free Festival.

In the early 1980s, Brock had started using drum machines for his home demos and became increasingly frustrated at the inability of drummers to keep perfect time, leading to a succession of drummers coming and going. First, Griffin was ousted and the band tried King again, but, unhappy with his playing at that time, he was rejected. Andy Anderson briefly joined while he was also playing for the Cure, and Robert Heaton also filled the spot briefly prior to the rise of New Model Army. Lloyd Langton Group drummer John Clark did some recording sessions, and in late 1983 Rick Martinez joined the band to play drums on the &quot;Earth Ritual&quot; tour in February and March 1984, later replaced by Clive Deamer.

Turner had returned as a guest for the 1982 &quot;Choose Your Masques&quot; tour and was invited back permanently. Further tours ensued with Phil &quot;Dead Fred&quot; Reeves augmenting the line-up on keyboards and violin, but neither Turner nor Reeves would appear on the only recording of 1983–84, &quot;The Earth Ritual Preview&quot;; however, there was a guest spot for Lemmy. The &quot;Earth Ritual&quot; tour was filmed for Hawkwind&#x27;s first video release, &quot;Night of the Hawk&quot;.

Alan Davey was a young fan of the band who had sent a tape of his playing to Brock, and Brock chose to oust Reeves moving Bainbridge from bass to keyboards to accommodate Davey. This experimental line-up played at the Stonehenge Free Festival in 1984, which was filmed and release as &quot;Stonehenge 84&quot;. Subsequent personal and professional tensions between Brock and Turner led to the latter&#x27;s expulsion at the beginning of 1985. Clive Deamer, who was deemed &quot;too professional&quot; for the band, was eventually replaced in 1985 by Danny Thompson Jr (son of folk-rock bassist Danny Thompson), a friend of Alan Davey, and remained almost to the end of the decade.

Hawkwind&#x27;s association with Moorcock climaxed in their most ambitious project, &quot;The Chronicle of the Black Sword&quot;, based loosely around the Elric series of books and theatrically staged with Tony Crerar as the central character. Moorcock contributed lyrics, but only performed some spoken pieces on some live dates. The tour was recorded and issued as an album &quot;Live Chronicles&quot; and video &quot;The Chronicle of the Black Sword&quot;. The band also performed at the Worldcon (World Science Fiction Convention) in Brighton.

In August 1985, The band performed at Crystal Palace Bowl, with several other rock bands, for a benefit concert for Pete Townshend&#x27;s Double-O anti-heroin charity. Lemmy and Stacia were reunited with the band for this event. Vera Lynn closed the show.

===1986–1999: GWR through to EBS===
A headline appearance at the 1986 Reading Festival was followed by a UK tour to promote the &quot;Live Chronicles&quot; album which was filmed and released as &quot;Chaos&quot;. In 1988 the band recorded the album &quot;The Xenon Codex&quot; with Guy Bidmead, but all was not well in the band and soon after, both Lloyd-Langton and Thompson departed.

Drummer Richard Chadwick, who joined in the summer of 1988, had been playing in small alternative free festival bands, most notably Bath&#x27;s Smart Pils, for a decade and had frequently crossed paths with Hawkwind and Brock. He was initially invited simply to play with the band, but eventually replaced stand in drummer Mick Kirton to become the band&#x27;s drummer to the present day.

To fill in the gap of lead sound, lost when Lloyd-Langton left, violinist House was re-instated into the line-up in 1989 (having previously been a member from 1974 until 1978), and, notably, Hawkwind embarked on their first North American visit in eleven years (since the somewhat disastrous 1978 tour), in which House did not partake. The successfully received tour was the first of several over the coming years, in an effort by the band to re-introduce themselves to the American market.

Bridget Wishart, an associate of Chadwick&#x27;s from the festival circuit, also joined to become the band&#x27;s one and only singing front-woman, the band had been fronted in earlier days by Stacia but only as a dancer. This band produced two albums, 1990&#x27;s &quot;Space Bandits&quot; and 1991&#x27;s &quot;Palace Springs&quot; and also filmed a one-hour appearance for the &quot;Bedrock TV&quot; series with dancer Julie Murray-Anderson, who performed with Hawkwind between 1988 and 1991.

1990 saw Hawkwind tour North America again, the second instalment in a series of American visits made at around this time in an effort to re-establish the Hawkwind brand in America. The original business plan was to hold three consecutive US tours, annually, from 1989 to 1991, with the first losing money, the second breaking even, and the third turning a profit, ultimately bringing Hawkwind back into recognition across the Atlantic. Progress, however, was somewhat stunted, due to ex-member Nik Turner touring the United States with his own band at the time, in which the shows were often marketed as Hawkwind.

Still supporting Space Bandits, 1991 commenced with perhaps the most surprising Hawkwind tour in the band&#x27;s history, without Dave Brock. Brock&#x27;s temporary replacement was former Smart Pils guitarist Steve Bemand (who had played with Chadwick and Wishart in the Demented Stoats). The tour began in Amsterdam on 12 March and took in Germany, Greece, Italy and France before wrapping up in Belgium on 10 April after 24 dates.

In 1991 Bainbridge, House and Wishart departed and the band continued as a three piece relying heavily on synthesisers and sequencers to create a wall-of-sound. The 1992 album &quot;Electric Tepee&quot; combined hard rock and light ambient pieces, while &quot;It is the Business of the Future to be Dangerous&quot; is almost devoid of the rock leanings. &quot;The Business Trip&quot; is a record of the previous album&#x27;s tour, but rockier as would be expected from a live outing. The &quot;White Zone&quot; album was released under the alias Psychedelic Warriors to distance itself entirely from the rock expectancy of Hawkwind.

A general criticism of techno music at that time was its facelessness and lack of personality, which the band were coming to feel also plagued them. Ron Tree had known the band on the festival circuit and offered his services as a front-man, and the band duly employed him for the album &quot;Alien 4&quot; and its accompanying tour which resulted in the album &quot;Love in Space&quot; and &quot;video&quot;.

In 1996, unhappy with the musical direction of the band, bassist Davey left, forming his own Middle-Eastern flavoured hard-rock group Bedouin and a Motörhead tribute act named Ace of Spades. His bass playing role was reluctantly picked up by singer Tree and the band were joined full-time by lead guitarist Jerry Richards (another stalwart of the festival scene, playing for Tubilah Dog who had merged with Brock&#x27;s Agents of Chaos during 1988) for the albums &quot;Distant Horizons&quot; and &quot;In Your Area&quot;. Rasta chanter Captain Rizz also joined the band for guest spots during live shows.

===1999–2007: Anniversaries, disputes and Voiceprint===
Hawkestra—a re-union event featuring appearances from past and present members—had originally been intended to coincide with the band&#x27;s 30th anniversary and the release of the career spanning &quot;Epocheclipse – 30 Year Anthology&quot; set, but logistical problems delayed it until 21 October 2000. It took place at the Brixton Academy with about 20 members taking part in a more than 3-hour set, which was filmed and recorded. Guests included Samantha Fox who sang &quot;Master of the Universe&quot;. However, arguments and disputes over financial recompense and musical input resulted in the prospect of the event being re-staged unlikely, and any album or DVD release being indefinitely shelved.

The Hawkestra had set a template for Brock to assemble a core band of Tree, Brock, Richards, Davey, Chadwick and for the use of former members as guests on live shows and studio recordings. The 2000 Christmas Astoria show was recorded with contributions from House, Blake, Rizz, Moorcock, Jez Huggett and Keith Kniveton and released as &quot;Yule Ritual&quot; the following year. In 2001, Davey agreed to rejoin the band permanently, but only after the departure of Tree and Richards.

Meanwhile, having rekindled relationships with old friends at the Hawkestra, Turner organised further Hawkestra gigs resulting in the formation of xhawkwind.com, a band consisting mainly of ex-Hawkwind members and playing old Hawkwind songs. An appearance at Guilfest in 2002 led to confusion as to whether this actually was Hawkwind, sufficiently irking Brock into taking legal action to prohibit Turner from trading under the name Hawkwind. Turner lost the case and the band began performing as Space Ritual.

An appearance at the Canterbury Sound Festival in August 2001, resulting in another live album &quot;Canterbury Fayre 2001&quot;, saw guest appearances from Lloyd-Langton, House, Kniveton with Arthur Brown on &quot;Silver Machine&quot;. The band organised the first of their own weekend festivals, named Hawkfest, in Devon in the summer of 2002. Brown joined the band in 2002 for a winter tour which featured some Kingdom Come songs and saw appearances from Blake and Lloyd-Langton, the Newcastle show being released on DVD as &quot;Out of the Shadows&quot; and the London show on CD as &quot;Spaced Out in London&quot;.

A new album, &quot;Take Me to Your Leader&quot;, was released in 2005. Recorded by the core band of Brock/Davey/Chadwick, contributors included new keyboardist Jason Stuart, Arthur Brown, tabloid writer and TV personality Matthew Wright, 1970s New Wave singer Lene Lovich, Simon House and Jez Huggett. This was followed in 2006 by the CD/DVD &quot;Take Me to Your Future&quot;.

The band were the subject of an hour-long television documentary titled &quot;Hawkwind: Do Not Panic&quot; that aired on BBC Four as part of the &quot;Originals&quot; series. It was broadcast on 30 March 2007 and repeated on 10 August 2007. Although Brock participated in its making, he did not appear in the programme; it is alleged that he requested all footage of himself be removed after he was denied any artistic control over the documentary. One of the documentary&#x27;s opening narratives states that Brock declined to be interviewed for the programme because of Nik Turner&#x27;s involvement, thus indicating that the two men had still not reconciled over the xhawkwind.com incident.

December 2006 saw the official departure of Alan Davey, who left to perform and record with two new bands: Gunslinger and Thunor. He was replaced by Mr Dibs, a long-standing member of the road crew. The band performed at their annual Hawkfest festival and headlined the US festival Nearfest and played gigs in PA and NY. At the end of 2007, Tim Blake once again joined the band filling the lead role playing keyboards and theremin. The band played five Christmas dates, the London show being released as an audio CD and video DVD under the title &quot;Knights of Space&quot;.

===2008–2016: Atomhenge and Eastworld===
In January 2008 the band reversed its anti-taping policy – which had long been a sore point with many fans – announcing that it would allow audio recording and non-commercial distribution of such recordings, provided there was no competing official release. At the end of 2008, Atomhenge Records (a subsidiary of Cherry Red Records) commenced the re-issuing of Hawkwind&#x27;s back catalogue from the years 1976 through to 1997 with the release of two triple CD anthologies &quot;Spirit of the Age (anthology 1976–84)&quot; and &quot;The Dream Goes On (anthology 1985–97)&quot;.

On 8 September 2008 keyboard player Jason Stuart died due to a brain haemorrhage. In October 2008, Niall Hone (former Tribe of Cro) joined Hawkwind for their winter 2008 tour playing guitar, along with returning synth/theremin player Tim Blake. In this period, Hone also occasionally played bass guitar alongside Mr Dibs and used laptops for live electronic improvisation.

In 2009, the band began occasionally featuring Jon Sevink from The Levellers as guest violinist at some shows. Later that year, Hawkwind embarked on a winter tour to celebrate the band&#x27;s 40th anniversary, including two gigs on 28 and 29 August marking the anniversary of their first live performances. In 2010, Hawkwind held their annual Hawkfest at the site of the original Isle of Wight Festival, marking the 40th anniversary of their appearance there.

On 21 June 2010, Hawkwind released a studio album entitled &quot;Blood of the Earth&quot; on Eastworld Records. During and since the &quot;Blood of the Earth&quot; support tours, Hone&#x27;s primary on-stage responsibility shifted to bass, while Mr. Dibs moved to a more traditional lead singer/front man role.

In 2011, Hawkwind toured Australia for the second time.

April 2012 saw the release of a new album, &quot;Onward&quot;, again on Eastworld. Keyboardist Dead Fred rejoined Hawkwind for the 2012 tour in support of &quot;Onward&quot; and has since remained with the band. In November 2012, Brock, Chadwick and Hone—credited as &quot;Hawkwind Light Orchestra&quot;—released &quot;Stellar Variations&quot; on Esoteric Recordings.

2013 marked the first Hawkeaster, a two-day festival held in Seaton, Devon during the Easter weekend. A US tour was booked for October 2013, but due to health issues, was postponed and later cancelled.

In February 2014, as part of a one-off Space Ritual performance, Hawkwind performed at the O2 Shepherd&#x27;s Bush Empire featuring an appearance by Brian Blessed for the spoken word element of Sonic Attack; a studio recording of this performance was released as a single in September 2014. Later in the year, former Soft Machine guitarist John Etheridge joined the live line-up of the band, though he had departed again prior to early 2015 dates.

Following Hawkeaster 2015, Hawkwind made their debut visit to Japan, playing two sold-out shows in Tokyo. Hawkwind performed two Solstice Ritual shows in December 2015, with Steve Hillage guesting, and Haz Wheaton joining Hawkwind on bass guitar. Wheaton is a former member of the band&#x27;s road crew who had previously appeared with Technicians of Spaceship Hawkwind, a &quot;skeleton crew&quot; spin off live band. Additionally, he had guested on bass for Dave Brock&#x27;s solo album &quot;Brockworld&quot; released earlier in the year.

===2016–onwards: Cherry Red projects===
The band released &quot;The Machine Stops&quot; on 15 April 2016, a concept album based on E.M. Forster&#x27;s short story of the same name. Brock and Chadwick were joined on the recording by Hone, Dibs and Wheaton sharing bass duties, while Hone and Dead Fred contributed one solo piece each. The album entered the UK album chart at number 29. Dead Fred&#x27;s last live appearance was at Eastbourne Winter Gardens on 1 April; Hone took on keyboard and synth duties until Blake returned for the summer shows.

The trio of Brock, Chadwick and Wheaton recorded the album &quot;Into the Woods&quot;, released on 5 May 2017, with additional contributions from Dibs, Magnus Martin (whose band Tarantism had supported Hawkwind on many occasions) and Big Bill Barry. Martin and saxophonist Michał Sosna (from Polish group hipiersoniK) joined the band for a 16-date UK promotional tour in the same month, and festival appearances at Hellfest, Clisson, France in June and Bluedot Festival at Jodrell Bank Observatory, Cheshire in July. The Roundhouse gig, with a guest appearance from Phil Campbell, was released as &quot;Hawkwind At The Roundhouse&quot; on 8 December in 2CD/DVD and 3LP formats.

For the &quot;Into The Woods&quot; tour the group had performed an opening acoustic set before the main set, and they decided to capture some acoustic performances of their 1970s repertoire in the studio. A chance meeting with Mike Batt by Brock at the US Embassy brought him into the project contributing production, arrangement and additional orchestrations. The album &quot;Road to Utopia&quot; was released on 14 September 2018. There was a guest appearance from Eric Clapton, who Brock had performed with as a duo in the 1960s prior to his rise to fame in The Yardbirds. There was also a guest appearance of the band&#x27;s former sax player, Jez Huggett, who&#x27;s featured on &quot;The Age of the Micro Man&quot;. Batt conducted a series of concerts titled &quot;In Search of Utopia – Infinity and Beyond&quot; featuring the band and Docklands Sinfonia Orchestra in October and November, with Arthur Brown guesting. After the recording of the album but before the shows, both Wheaton and Dibs left, while Hone rejoined on bass. Wheaton went on to join Electric Wizard, and Dibs stated &quot;irreconcilable differences&quot; on the Hawkwind fans Facebook page, Brock claiming &quot;we propped the fella up and kept him in the band longer than he should have been, because we were genuinely concerned... about his state of mind.&quot;

In October 2019 the group released &quot;All Aboard the Skylark&quot;, marketed as a return to their space rock roots. This was the first album with the line-up of Brock, Chadwick, Hone and Martin. Accompanying the CD version, and sold as a separate vinyl LP, was &quot;Acoustic Daze&quot; which included tracks from the &quot;Road to Utopia&quot; minus the additions of Batt and Clapton. The album was promoted with a 15 date tour of Britain in November, culminating in a final show at London&#x27;s Royal Albert Hall. The group were augmented by keyboard player Blake, with guest appearances from Phil Campbell and Clapton. A record of the live show titled &quot;50th Anniversary Live&quot;, with the guest appearance from Campbell, is released on 4 December 2020 by Cherry Red in 3LP and 2CD formats.

Brock had started work on new material in his home studio with some contributions from Chadwick and Martin when the COVID-19 pandemic spread curtailing any further band activity. Brock would continue work with remote contributions from Martin, and the album &quot;Carnivorous&quot; (an anagram of coronavirus) was released in October 2020 under the name Hawkwind Light Orchestra to reflect the reduced personnel.

When the group returned to live performances post-COVID in late 2021, the line-up featured Brock, Chadwick, Martin and new members Thighpaulsandra on keyboards and Doug MacKinnon on bass, replacing Blake and Hone respectively. A new Hawkwind album, &quot;Somnia&quot;, was released in 2021, followed in 2023 by &quot;The Future Never Waits&quot; and in 2024 by &quot;Stories from Time and Space&quot;. The live album &quot;Live at the Royal Albert Hall&quot; recorded on 29 September 2023 was released on 13 December 2024 in 3CD a 3LP formats, the CD issue containing a bonus CD of studio rehearsals. Brown joined the band for this performance reciting the poems.

==Influence and legacy==
Hawkwind have been cited as an influence by artists such as Al Jourgensen of Ministry, Monster Magnet, the Sex Pistols (who covered &quot;Silver Machine&quot;), Henry Rollins and Dez Cadena of Black Flag, Siobhan Fahey, Ty Segall, The Mekano Set, Ozric Tentacles., King Gizzard &amp; the Lizard Wizard, and Neurosis.

Hard rock musician Lemmy of the band Motörhead gained a lot from his tenure in Hawkwind. He said, &quot;I really found myself as an instrumentalist in Hawkwind. Before that I was just a guitar player who was pretending to be good, when actually I was no good at all. In Hawkwind I became a good bass player. It was where I learned I was good at something.&quot;

==Members==

Current members
* Dave Brock – vocals, guitars, keyboards, synthesisers 
* Richard Chadwick – drums, vocals 
* Magnus Martin – guitars, vocals, keyboards 
* Thighpaulsandra – keyboards, synthesizers 
* Doug MacKinnon – bass 

==Discography==
* &quot;Hawkwind&quot; (1970)
* &quot;In Search of Space&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Doremi Fasol Latido&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Hall of the Mountain Grill&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Warrior on the Edge of Time&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Astounding Sounds, Amazing Music&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Quark, Strangeness and Charm&quot; (1977)
* &quot;25 Years On&quot; – Released as Hawklords (1978)
* &quot;PXR5&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Levitation&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Sonic Attack&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Church of Hawkwind&quot; – Released as Church of Hawkwind (1982)
* &quot;Choose Your Masques&quot; (1982)
* &quot;The Chronicle of the Black Sword&quot; (1985)
* &quot;The Xenon Codex&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Space Bandits&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Electric Tepee&quot; (1992)
* &quot;It Is the Business of the Future to Be Dangerous&quot; (1993)
* &quot;White Zone&quot; – Released as Psychedelic Warriors (1995)
* &quot;Alien 4&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Distant Horizons&quot; (1997)
* &quot;In Your Area&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Spacebrock&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Take Me to Your Leader&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Take Me to Your Future&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Blood of the Earth&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Onward&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Stellar Variations&quot; – Released as Hawkwind Light Orchestra (2012)
* &quot;The Machine Stops&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Into the Woods&quot; (2017)
* &quot;The Road to Utopia&quot; (2018)
* &quot;All Aboard the Skylark&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Carnivorous&quot; – Released as Hawkwind Light Orchestra (2020)
* &quot;Somnia&quot; (2021)
* &quot;The Future Never Waits&quot; (2023)
* &quot;Stories from Time and Space&quot; (2024)
==Videography==

* 1984 – &quot;Night of the Hawks&quot; – 60 min concert
* 1984 – &quot;Stonehenge&quot; – 60 min concert with The Enid and Roy Harper
* 1984 – &quot;Stonehenge&quot; – 60 min concert
* 1985 – &quot;The Chronicle of the Black Sword&quot; – 60 min concert
* 1986 – &quot;Bristol Custom Bike Show&quot; – 15 min concert with Voodoo Child
* 1986 – &quot;Chaos&quot; – 60 min concert
* 1989 – &quot;Treworgey Tree Fayre&quot; – 90 min concert
* 1990 – &quot;Nottingham&quot; – 60 min TV concert
* 1990 – &quot;Bournemouth Academy&quot; – 90 min concert
* 1992 – &quot;Brixton Academy&quot; – 123 min concert
* 1995 – &quot;Love in Space&quot; – 90 min concert
* 2002 – &quot;Out of the Shadows&quot; – 90 min concert
* 2008 – &quot;Knights of Space&quot; – 90 min concert
* 2014 – &quot;Space Ritual Live&quot; – 140 min concert

==References==
==Sources==

==Further reading==
* Kris Tait – &quot;This is Hawkwind: Do Not Panic&quot; (1984, published by the band and now only available second hand)
* Ian Abrahams – &quot;Sonic Assassins&quot; (Published by SAF publishing; )
* Carol Clerk – &quot;The Saga of Hawkwind&quot; (Publisher: Music Sales Limited, 2004, )
* Nik Turner, Dave Thompson – &quot;The Spirit of Hawkwind 1969–1976&quot; (2015, Cleopatra Records, )
* Joe Banks – &quot;Hawkwind: Days Of The Underground&quot; (&quot;Strange Attractor Press, 2020&quot;, )
* Joe Banks – &quot;Sideways Through Time - An Oral History Of Hawkwind In The 1970s&quot; (Strange Attractor Press, 2024, )

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q285966" start="0" end="8" title="Hawkwind" label="Hawkwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q236913" start="63" end="73" title="space rock" label="space rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="239" end="248" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="250" end="266" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="271" end="287" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q27190" start="325" end="335" title="proto-punk" label="proto-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q906553" start="392" end="407" title="List of science fiction themes" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564640" start="533" end="543" title="Nik Turner" label="Nik Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q642165" start="545" end="562" title="Huw Lloyd-Langton" label="Huw Lloyd-Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252883" start="564" end="575" title="Del Dettmar" label="Del Dettmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q309926" start="577" end="582" title="Lemmy" label="Lemmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604798" start="584" end="594" title="Simon King (musician)" label="Simon King"/>
<link wikidata="Q426950" start="596" end="610" title="Robert Calvert" label="Robert Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032457" start="612" end="623" title="Simon House" label="Simon House"/>
<link wikidata="Q122232" start="628" end="640" title="Ginger Baker" label="Ginger Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032403" start="727" end="737" title="Dave Brock" label="Dave Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049495" start="847" end="861" title="Silver Machine" label="Silver Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899918" start="966" end="981" title="Urban Guerrilla" label="Urban Guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502390" start="1019" end="1041" title="Shot Down in the Night" label="Shot Down in the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032403" start="1212" end="1222" title="Dave Brock" label="Dave Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="1270" end="1281" title="Psychedelic music" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="1371" end="1387" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564640" start="1534" end="1544" title="Nik Turner" label="Nik Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670425" start="1729" end="1744" title="All Saints Hall" label="All Saints Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q215354" start="1746" end="1758" title="Notting Hill" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q211526" start="1926" end="1935" title="the Byrds" label="the Byrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303534" start="1948" end="1964" title="Eight Miles High" label="Eight Miles High"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="1972" end="1983" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="1987" end="1996" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392321" start="2151" end="2166" title="Liberty Records" label="Liberty Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105131" start="2211" end="2218" title="Cochise (band)" label="Cochise"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="2376" end="2394" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5948468" start="2420" end="2436" title="Hurry on Sundown" label="Hurry on Sundown"/>
<link wikidata="Q978961" start="2556" end="2564" title="Hawkwind (album)" label="Hawkwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q642165" start="2619" end="2636" title="Huw Lloyd-Langton" label="Huw Lloyd-Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q823571" start="2740" end="2746" title="busker" label="busker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364657" start="2817" end="2830" title="Pretty Things" label="Pretty Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q923999" start="2841" end="2852" title="Dick Taylor" label="Dick Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883606" start="3006" end="3020" title="UK underground" label="UK underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q4079242" start="3122" end="3135" title="Bath Festival of Blues and Progressive Music" label="Bath Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030864" start="3162" end="3176" title="Ladbroke Grove" label="Ladbroke Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095846" start="3193" end="3205" title="Pink Fairies" label="Pink Fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="3249" end="3272" title="Recreational drug use" label="recreational substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788702" start="3500" end="3514" title="Thomas Crimble (musician)" label="Thomas Crimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768605" start="3636" end="3656" title="The Text of Festival" label="The Text of Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="3821" end="3824" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920369" start="3837" end="3859" title="Isle of Wight Festival 1970" label="Isle of Wight Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="3869" end="3886" title="nervous breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933134" start="3930" end="3948" title="In Search of Space" label="In Search of Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062642" start="4134" end="4148" title="Barney Bubbles" label="Barney Bubbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q426950" start="4178" end="4192" title="Robert Calvert" label="Robert Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="4357" end="4373" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595925" start="4385" end="4391" title="Stacia" label="Stacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252883" start="4485" end="4496" title="Del Dettmar" label="Del Dettmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572476" start="4592" end="4605" title="Dave Anderson (musician)" label="Dave Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319707" start="4639" end="4651" title="Amon Düül II" label="Amon Düül II"/>
<link wikidata="Q309926" start="4980" end="5011" title="Lemmy" label="Ian &amp;quot;Lemmy&amp;quot; Kilmister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604798" start="5024" end="5034" title="Simon King (musician)" label="Simon King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780197" start="5153" end="5167" title="The Roundhouse" label="The Roundhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598597" start="5224" end="5245" title="Greasy Truckers Party" label="Greasy Truckers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049495" start="5318" end="5332" title="Silver Machine" label="Silver Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q979048" start="5462" end="5481" title="Doremi Fasol Latido" label="Doremi Fasol Latido"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274448" start="5682" end="5692" title="Liquid Len" label="Liquid Len"/>
<link wikidata="Q733359" start="5825" end="5837" title="Space Ritual" label="Space Ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899918" start="5921" end="5936" title="Urban Guerrilla" label="Urban Guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="5968" end="5971" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="6007" end="6010" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032457" start="6372" end="6383" title="Simon House" label="Simon House"/>
<link wikidata="Q978143" start="6503" end="6529" title="Hall of the Mountain Grill" label="Hall of the Mountain Grill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11850521" start="6604" end="6615" title="Alan Powell (drummer)" label="Alan Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q977954" start="6780" end="6807" title="Warrior on the Edge of Time" label="Warrior on the Edge of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="6836" end="6852" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469334" start="6875" end="6891" title="Eternal Champion (character)" label="Eternal Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="6980" end="6991" title="amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605772" start="7294" end="7306" title="Paul Rudolph (musician)" label="Paul Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385386" start="7366" end="7378" title="Larry Wallis" label="Larry Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="7388" end="7397" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354788" start="7411" end="7452" title="Motorhead (song)" label="the last song he had written for Hawkwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137962" start="7561" end="7577" title="Reading Festival" label="Reading Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063242" start="7804" end="7820" title="Charisma Records" label="Charisma Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q978876" start="7921" end="7953" title="Astounding Sounds, Amazing Music" label="Astounding Sounds, Amazing Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839361" start="8036" end="8055" title="Back on the Streets (single)" label="Back on the Streets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605793" start="8385" end="8412" title="Adrian &amp;quot;Ade&amp;quot; Shaw" label="Adrian &amp;quot;Ade&amp;quot; Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q978848" start="8546" end="8574" title="Quark, Strangeness and Charm" label="Quark, Strangeness and Charm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032013" start="8921" end="8925" title="PXR5" label="PXR5"/>
<link wikidata="Q808532" start="9013" end="9023" title="Barnstaple" label="Barnstaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561789" start="9098" end="9113" title="Sonic Assassins" label="Sonic Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588413" start="9162" end="9179" title="Harvey Bainbridge" label="Harvey Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605762" start="9239" end="9254" title="Steve Swindells" label="Steve Swindells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963419" start="9308" end="9317" title="Hawklords" label="Hawklords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032452" start="9499" end="9510" title="25 Years On" label="25 Years On"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="9684" end="9695" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q585643" start="10066" end="10070" title="Atco Records" label="ATCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q221971" start="10258" end="10267" title="Tim Blake" label="Tim Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q544024" start="10281" end="10285" title="Gong (band)" label="Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q671229" start="10544" end="10558" title="Bronze Records" label="Bronze Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032460" start="10583" end="10600" title="Live Seventy Nine" label="Live Seventy Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101219" start="10657" end="10667" title="Levitation (Hawkwind album)" label="Levitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122232" start="10745" end="10757" title="Ginger Baker" label="Ginger Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677527" start="11218" end="11228" title="Active Records" label="RCA/Active"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153436" start="11236" end="11248" title="Sonic Attack (album)" label="Sonic Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155125" start="11277" end="11295" title="Church of Hawkwind" label="Church of Hawkwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153443" start="11312" end="11331" title="Choose Your Masques" label="Choose Your Masques"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="11368" end="11388" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q749420" start="11424" end="11459" title="Monsters of Rock" label="Donington Monsters of Rock Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="11502" end="11510" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407488" start="11514" end="11538" title="Stonehenge Free Festival" label="Stonehenge Free Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524092" start="11876" end="11889" title="Andy Anderson (drummer)" label="Andy Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="11935" end="11943" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q327212" start="11949" end="11962" title="Robert Heaton" label="Robert Heaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501951" start="12013" end="12027" title="New Model Army (band)" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q642165" start="12029" end="12048" title="Lloyd Langton Group" label="Lloyd Langton Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979419" start="12241" end="12253" title="Clive Deamer" label="Clive Deamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731427" start="12562" end="12586" title="The Earth Ritual Preview" label="The Earth Ritual Preview"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685311" start="12729" end="12746" title="Night of the Hawk (Hawkwind video)" label="Night of the Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605800" start="12755" end="12765" title="Alan Davey (musician)" label="Alan Davey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164775" start="13349" end="13363" title="Danny Thompson" label="Danny Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154269" start="13527" end="13559" title="The Chronicle of the Black Sword" label="The Chronicle of the Black Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333353" start="13592" end="13597" title="Elric" label="Elric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660220" start="13819" end="13834" title="Live Chronicles" label="Live Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685311" start="13857" end="13889" title="The Chronicle of the Black Sword (Hawkwind video)" label="The Chronicle of the Black Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q617378" start="13928" end="13936" title="Worldcon" label="Worldcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191311" start="14024" end="14043" title="Crystal Palace Bowl" label="Crystal Palace Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="14102" end="14116" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299854" start="14124" end="14132" title="Double O (charity)" label="Double-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q229330" start="14215" end="14224" title="Vera Lynn" label="Vera Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685311" start="14444" end="14449" title="Chaos (Hawkwind video)" label="Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153555" start="14499" end="14514" title="The Xenon Codex" label="The Xenon Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644590" start="15513" end="15528" title="Bridget Wishart" label="Bridget Wishart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154931" start="15784" end="15797" title="Space Bandits" label="Space Bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889281" start="15826" end="15840" title="Palace Springs (album)" label="Palace Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685311" start="15899" end="15909" title="Nottingham (Hawkwind video)" label="Bedrock TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153807" start="17242" end="17256" title="Electric Tepee" label="Electric Tepee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154257" start="17320" end="17368" title="It is the Business of the Future to be Dangerous" label="It is the Business of the Future to be Dangerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986155" start="17420" end="17437" title="The Business Trip" label="The Business Trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155095" start="17554" end="17564" title="White Zone" label="White Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16598370" start="17843" end="17851" title="Ron Tree" label="Ron Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154173" start="17987" end="17994" title="Alien 4 (album)" label="Alien 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q977093" start="18061" end="18074" title="Love in Space" label="Love in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685311" start="18091" end="18096" title="Love in Space (Hawkwind video)" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191676" start="18575" end="18591" title="Distant Horizons" label="Distant Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191875" start="18608" end="18620" title="In Your Area" label="In Your Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q37935385" start="18642" end="18654" title="Captain Rizz" label="Captain Rizz"/>
<link wikidata="Q386080" start="18971" end="19003" title="Epocheclipse" label="Epocheclipse – 30 Year Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239788" start="19094" end="19109" title="Brixton Academy" label="Brixton Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q464052" start="19218" end="19230" title="Samantha Fox" label="Samantha Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023222" start="19816" end="19827" title="Yule Ritual" label="Yule Ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572476" start="20457" end="20469" title="Space Ritual (band)" label="Space Ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655703" start="20573" end="20594" title="Canterbury Fayre 2001" label="Canterbury Fayre 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q708782" start="20665" end="20677" title="Arthur Brown (musician)" label="Arthur Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685085" start="20776" end="20784" title="Hawkfest" label="Hawkfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062446" start="20886" end="20898" title="Kingdom Come (Arthur Brown)" label="Kingdom Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685311" start="21005" end="21023" title="Out of the Shadows (Hawkwind video)" label="Out of the Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965820" start="21065" end="21085" title="Spaced Out in London" label="Spaced Out in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192163" start="21113" end="21135" title="Take Me to Your Leader (Hawkwind album)" label="Take Me to Your Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q285966" start="21254" end="21266" title="Jason Stuart (musician)" label="Jason Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791449" start="21316" end="21330" title="Matthew Wright (television presenter)" label="Matthew Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q450618" start="21354" end="21365" title="Lene Lovich" label="Lene Lovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192177" start="21442" end="21464" title="Take Me to Your Future" label="Take Me to Your Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="21594" end="21602" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q221971" start="22509" end="22518" title="Tim Blake" label="Tim Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q207691" start="22590" end="22598" title="theremin" label="theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607107" start="22720" end="22736" title="Knights of Space" label="Knights of Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494570" start="23099" end="23117" title="Cherry Red Records" label="Cherry Red Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578023" start="23266" end="23303" title="Spirit of the Age Anthology" label="Spirit of the Age (anthology 1976–84)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578023" start="23320" end="23357" title="Spirit of the Age Anthology" label="The Dream Goes On (anthology 1985–97)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212497" start="23465" end="23475" title="Niall Hone" label="Niall Hone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380135" start="23803" end="23816" title="The Levellers (band)" label="The Levellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191634" start="24266" end="24284" title="Blood of the Earth" label="Blood of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191266" start="24619" end="24625" title="Onward (album)" label="Onward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153003" start="24917" end="24936" title="Esoteric Recordings" label="Esoteric Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q449118" start="25291" end="25304" title="Brian Blessed" label="Brian Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386182" start="25482" end="25496" title="John Etheridge" label="John Etheridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q304631" start="25765" end="25778" title="Steve Hillage" label="Steve Hillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096317" start="26198" end="26215" title="The Machine Stops (album)" label="The Machine Stops"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="26242" end="26255" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q189119" start="26265" end="26277" title="E.M. Forster" label="E.M. Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q287448" start="26304" end="26313" title="The Machine Stops" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101640" start="26750" end="26764" title="Into the Woods (Hawkwind album)" label="Into the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q247500" start="27100" end="27108" title="Hellfest (French music festival)" label="Hellfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q383472" start="27110" end="27117" title="Clisson" label="Clisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q56650021" start="27138" end="27154" title="Bluedot Festival" label="Bluedot Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569783" start="27158" end="27182" title="Jodrell Bank Observatory" label="Jodrell Bank Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780197" start="27206" end="27216" title="Roundhouse (venue)" label="Roundhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q366807" start="27251" end="27264" title="Phil Campbell (musician)" label="Phil Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q705596" start="27591" end="27600" title="Mike Batt" label="Mike Batt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369960" start="27617" end="27627" title="Embassy of the United States, London" label="US Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59202344" start="27741" end="27755" title="Road to Utopia (album)" label="Road to Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="27831" end="27843" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192725" start="27925" end="27938" title="The Yardbirds" label="The Yardbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287228" start="28206" end="28224" title="Docklands Sinfonia" label="Docklands Sinfonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q708782" start="28265" end="28277" title="Arthur Brown (musician)" label="Arthur Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325974" start="28424" end="28439" title="Electric Wizard" label="Electric Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740818" start="28747" end="28769" title="All Aboard the Skylark" label="All Aboard the Skylark"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="29207" end="29224" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q366807" start="29305" end="29318" title="Phil Campbell (musician)" label="Phil Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="29627" end="29644" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124474934" start="29775" end="29786" title="Carnivorous (album)" label="Carnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q57751738" start="29808" end="29819" title="coronavirus" label="coronavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q648341" start="30056" end="30071" title="Thighpaulsandra" label="Thighpaulsandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q124474932" start="30242" end="30264" title="The Future Never Waits" label="The Future Never Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q126192615" start="30292" end="30319" title="Stories from Time and Space" label="Stories from Time and Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="30360" end="30377" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q713807" start="30675" end="30688" title="Al Jourgensen" label="Al Jourgensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q425772" start="30692" end="30700" title="Ministry (band)" label="Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430616" start="30702" end="30716" title="Monster Magnet" label="Monster Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="30722" end="30733" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049495" start="30753" end="30767" title="Silver Machine" label="Silver Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q318509" start="30776" end="30789" title="Henry Rollins" label="Henry Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207295" start="30794" end="30804" title="Dez Cadena" label="Dez Cadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="30808" end="30818" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q467621" start="30820" end="30833" title="Siobhan Fahey" label="Siobhan Fahey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354373" start="30835" end="30844" title="Ty Segall" label="Ty Segall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750919" start="30846" end="30860" title="The Mekano Set" label="The Mekano Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550383" start="30862" end="30877" title="Ozric Tentacles" label="Ozric Tentacles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19366461" start="30880" end="30916" title="King Gizzard &amp;amp; the Lizard Wizard" label="King Gizzard &amp;amp; the Lizard Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q334093" start="30922" end="30930" title="Neurosis (band)" label="Neurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q309926" start="30952" end="30957" title="Lemmy" label="Lemmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="30970" end="30979" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032403" start="31327" end="31337" title="Dave Brock" label="Dave Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q648341" start="31466" end="31481" title="Thighpaulsandra" label="Thighpaulsandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q978961" start="31559" end="31567" title="Hawkwind (album)" label="Hawkwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933134" start="31589" end="31607" title="In Search of Space" label="In Search of Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q979048" start="31629" end="31648" title="Doremi Fasol Latido" label="Doremi Fasol Latido"/>
<link wikidata="Q978143" start="31670" end="31696" title="Hall of the Mountain Grill" label="Hall of the Mountain Grill"/>
<link wikidata="Q977954" start="31718" end="31745" title="Warrior on the Edge of Time" label="Warrior on the Edge of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q978876" start="31767" end="31799" title="Astounding Sounds, Amazing Music" label="Astounding Sounds, Amazing Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q978848" start="31821" end="31849" title="Quark, Strangeness and Charm" label="Quark, Strangeness and Charm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032452" start="31871" end="31882" title="25 Years On" label="25 Years On"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963419" start="31903" end="31912" title="Hawklords" label="Hawklords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032013" start="31928" end="31932" title="PXR5" label="PXR5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101219" start="31954" end="31964" title="Levitation (Hawkwind album)" label="Levitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153436" start="31986" end="31998" title="Sonic Attack (album)" label="Sonic Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155125" start="32020" end="32038" title="Church of Hawkwind" label="Church of Hawkwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153443" start="32093" end="32112" title="Choose Your Masques" label="Choose Your Masques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154269" start="32134" end="32166" title="The Chronicle of the Black Sword" label="The Chronicle of the Black Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153555" start="32188" end="32203" title="The Xenon Codex" label="The Xenon Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154931" start="32225" end="32238" title="Space Bandits" label="Space Bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153807" start="32260" end="32274" title="Electric Tepee" label="Electric Tepee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154257" start="32296" end="32344" title="It Is the Business of the Future to Be Dangerous" label="It Is the Business of the Future to Be Dangerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155095" start="32366" end="32376" title="White Zone" label="White Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154173" start="32433" end="32440" title="Alien 4 (album)" label="Alien 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191676" start="32462" end="32478" title="Distant Horizons" label="Distant Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191875" start="32500" end="32512" title="In Your Area" label="In Your Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191682" start="32534" end="32544" title="Spacebrock" label="Spacebrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192163" start="32566" end="32588" title="Take Me to Your Leader (Hawkwind album)" label="Take Me to Your Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192177" start="32610" end="32632" title="Take Me to Your Future" label="Take Me to Your Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191634" start="32654" end="32672" title="Blood of the Earth" label="Blood of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191266" start="32694" end="32700" title="Onward (album)" label="Onward"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096317" start="32801" end="32818" title="The Machine Stops (album)" label="The Machine Stops"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101640" start="32840" end="32854" title="Into the Woods (Hawkwind album)" label="Into the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q59202344" start="32876" end="32894" title="Road to Utopia (album)" label="The Road to Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740818" start="32916" end="32938" title="All Aboard the Skylark" label="All Aboard the Skylark"/>
<link wikidata="Q124474934" start="32960" end="32971" title="Carnivorous (album)" label="Carnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q124474932" start="33060" end="33082" title="The Future Never Waits" label="The Future Never Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q126192615" start="33104" end="33131" title="Stories from Time and Space" label="Stories from Time and Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437668" start="33273" end="33281" title="The Enid" label="The Enid"/>
<link wikidata="Q365670" start="33286" end="33296" title="Roy Harper (singer)" label="Roy Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q977093" start="33781" end="33794" title="Love in Space" label="Love in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607107" start="33890" end="33906" title="Knights of Space" label="Knights of Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564640" start="34327" end="34337" title="Nik Turner" label="Nik Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173362" start="34339" end="34352" title="Dave Thompson (author)" label="Dave Thompson"/>
</links>
</doc>
