<doc id="12891" wikidata="Q213901" url="?curid=12891" title="Gene therapy">
<text>Gene therapy is a medical technology that aims to produce a therapeutic effect through the manipulation of gene expression or through altering the biological properties of living cells.

The first attempt at modifying human DNA was performed in 1980, by Martin Cline, but the first successful nuclear gene transfer in humans, approved by the National Institutes of Health, was performed in May 1989. The first therapeutic use of gene transfer as well as the first direct insertion of human DNA into the nuclear genome was performed by French Anderson in a trial starting in September 1990. Between 1989 and December 2018, over 2,900 clinical trials were conducted, with more than half of them in phase I. In 2003, Gendicine became the first gene therapy to receive regulatory approval. Since that time, further gene therapy drugs were approved, such as alipogene tiparvovec (2012), Strimvelis (2016), tisagenlecleucel (2017), voretigene neparvovec (2017), patisiran (2018), onasemnogene abeparvovec (2019), idecabtagene vicleucel (2021), nadofaragene firadenovec, valoctocogene roxaparvovec and etranacogene dezaparvovec (all 2022). Most of these approaches utilize adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) and lentiviruses for performing gene insertions, &quot;in vivo&quot; and &quot;ex vivo&quot;, respectively. AAVs are characterized by stabilizing the viral capsid, lower immunogenicity, ability to transduce both dividing and nondividing cells, the potential to integrate site specifically and to achieve long-term expression in the in-vivo treatment. ASO / siRNA approaches such as those conducted by Alnylam and Ionis Pharmaceuticals require non-viral delivery systems, and utilize alternative mechanisms for trafficking to liver cells by way of GalNAc transporters.

Not all medical procedures that introduce alterations to a patient&#x27;s genetic makeup can be considered gene therapy. Bone marrow transplantation and organ transplants in general have been found to introduce foreign DNA into patients.

==Background==
Gene therapy was first conceptualized in the 1960s, when the feasibility of adding new genetic functions to mammalian cells began to be researched. Several methods to do so were tested, including injecting genes with a micropipette directly into a living mammalian cell, and exposing cells to a precipitate of DNA that contained the desired genes. Scientists theorized that a virus could also be used as a vehicle, or vector, to deliver new genes into cells.

One of the first scientists to report the successful direct incorporation of functional DNA into a mammalian cell was biochemist Dr. Lorraine Marquardt Kraus (6 September 1922 – 1 July 2016) at the University of Tennessee Health Science Center in Memphis, Tennessee. In 1961, she managed to genetically alter the hemoglobin of cells from bone marrow taken from a patient with sickle cell anaemia. She did this by incubating the patient&#x27;s cells in tissue culture with DNA extracted from a donor with normal hemoglobin. In 1968, researchers Theodore Friedmann, Jay Seegmiller, and John Subak-Sharpe at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, in the United States successfully corrected genetic defects associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, a debilitating neurological disease, by adding foreign DNA to cultured cells collected from patients suffering from the disease.

The first attempt, an unsuccessful one, at gene therapy (as well as the first case of medical transfer of foreign genes into humans not counting organ transplantation) was performed by geneticist Martin Cline of the University of California, Los Angeles in California, United States on 10 July 1980. Cline claimed that one of the genes in his patients was active six months later, though he never published this data or had it verified.

After extensive research on animals throughout the 1980s and a 1989 bacterial gene tagging trial on humans, the first gene therapy widely accepted as a success was demonstrated in a trial that started on 14 September 1990, when Ashanthi DeSilva was treated for ADA-SCID.

The first somatic treatment that produced a permanent genetic change was initiated in 1993. The goal was to cure malignant brain tumors by using recombinant DNA to transfer a gene making the tumor cells sensitive to a drug that in turn would cause the tumor cells to die.

The polymers are either translated into proteins, interfere with target gene expression, or possibly correct genetic mutations. The most common form uses DNA that encodes a functional, therapeutic gene to replace a mutated gene. The polymer molecule is packaged within a &quot;vector&quot;, which carries the molecule inside cells.

Early clinical failures led to dismissals of gene therapy. Clinical successes since 2006 regained researchers&#x27; attention, although , it was still largely an experimental technique. These include treatment of retinal diseases Leber&#x27;s congenital amaurosis and choroideremia, X-linked SCID, ADA-SCID, adrenoleukodystrophy, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), multiple myeloma, haemophilia, and Parkinson&#x27;s disease. Between 2013 and April 2014, US companies invested over $600 million in the field.

The first commercial gene therapy, Gendicine, was approved in China in 2003, for the treatment of certain cancers. In 2011, Neovasculgen was registered in Russia as the first-in-class gene-therapy drug for treatment of peripheral artery disease, including critical limb ischemia.
In 2012, alipogene tiparvovec, a treatment for a rare inherited disorder, lipoprotein lipase deficiency, became the first treatment to be approved for clinical use in either the European Union or the United States after its endorsement by the European Commission.

Following early advances in genetic engineering of bacteria, cells, and small animals, scientists started considering how to apply it to medicine. Two main approaches were considered – replacing or disrupting defective genes. Scientists focused on diseases caused by single-gene defects, such as cystic fibrosis, haemophilia, muscular dystrophy, thalassemia, and sickle cell anemia. alipogene tiparvovec treats one such disease, caused by a defect in lipoprotein lipase.

DNA must be administered, reach the damaged cells, enter the cell and either express or disrupt a protein. Multiple delivery techniques have been explored. The initial approach incorporated DNA into an engineered virus to deliver the DNA into a chromosome. Naked DNA approaches have also been explored, especially in the context of vaccine development.

Generally, efforts focused on administering a gene that causes a needed protein to be expressed. More recently, increased understanding of nuclease function has led to more direct DNA editing, using techniques such as zinc finger nucleases and CRISPR. The vector incorporates genes into chromosomes. The expressed nucleases then knock out and replace genes in the chromosome. these approaches involve removing cells from patients, editing a chromosome and returning the transformed cells to patients.

Gene editing is a potential approach to alter the human genome to treat genetic diseases, viral diseases, and cancer. these approaches are being studied in clinical trials.

== Classification ==

=== Breadth of definition ===
In 1986, a meeting at the Institute Of Medicine defined gene therapy as the addition or replacement of a gene in a targeted cell type. In the same year, the FDA announced that it had jurisdiction over approving &quot;gene therapy&quot; without defining the term. The FDA added a very broad definition in 1993 of any treatment that would &#x27;modify or manipulate the expression of genetic material or to alter the biological properties of living cells&#x27;. In 2018 this was narrowed to &#x27;products that mediate their effects by transcription or translation of transferred genetic material or by specifically altering host (human) genetic sequences&#x27;.

Writing in 2018, in the Journal of Law and the Biosciences, Sherkow et al. argued for a narrower definition of gene therapy than the FDA&#x27;s in light of new technology that would consist of any treatment that intentionally and permanently modified a cell&#x27;s genome, with the definition of genome including episomes outside the nucleus but excluding changes due to episomes that are lost over time. This definition would also exclude introducing cells that did not derive from a patient themselves, but include ex vivo approaches, and would not depend on the vector used.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, some academics insisted that the mRNA vaccines for COVID were not gene therapy to prevent the spread of incorrect information that the vaccine could alter DNA, other academics maintained that the vaccines were a gene therapy because they introduced genetic material into a cell. Fact-checkers, such as Full Fact, Reuters, PolitiFact, and FactCheck.org said that calling the vaccines a gene therapy was incorrect. Podcast host Joe Rogan was criticized for calling mRNA vaccines gene therapy as was British politician Andrew Bridgen, with fact checker Full Fact calling for Bridgen to be removed from the conservative party for this and other statements.

=== Genes present or added ===
Gene therapy encapsulates many forms of adding different nucleic acids to a cell. &quot;Gene augmentation&quot; adds a new protein coding gene to a cell. One form of gene augmentiation is &quot;gene replacement therapy&quot;, a treatment for monogenic recessive disorders where a single gene is not functional an additional functional gene is added. For diseases caused by multiple genes or a dominant gene, gene silencing or gene editing approaches are more appropriate but &quot;gene&quot; &quot;addition, a&quot; form of gene augmentation where new gene is added, may improve a cells function without modifying the genes that cause a disorder.

=== Cell types ===
Gene therapy may be classified into two types by the type of cell it affects: somatic cell and germline gene therapy.

In somatic cell gene therapy (SCGT), the therapeutic genes are transferred into any cell other than a gamete, germ cell, gametocyte, or undifferentiated stem cell. Any such modifications affect the individual patient only, and are not inherited by offspring. Somatic gene therapy represents mainstream basic and clinical research, in which therapeutic DNA (either integrated in the genome or as an external episome or plasmid) is used to treat disease. Over 600 clinical trials utilizing SCGT are underway in the US. Most focus on severe genetic disorders, including immunodeficiencies, haemophilia, thalassaemia, and cystic fibrosis. Such single gene disorders are good candidates for somatic cell therapy. The complete correction of a genetic disorder or the replacement of multiple genes is not yet possible. Only a few of the trials are in the advanced stages.

In germline gene therapy (GGT), germ cells (sperm or egg cells) are modified by the introduction of functional genes into their genomes. Modifying a germ cell causes all the organism&#x27;s cells to contain the modified gene. The change is therefore heritable and passed on to later generations. Australia, Canada, Germany, Israel, Switzerland, and the Netherlands prohibit GGT for application in human beings, for technical and ethical reasons, including insufficient knowledge about possible risks to future generations and higher risks versus SCGT. The US has no federal controls specifically addressing human genetic modification (beyond FDA regulations for therapies in general).

=== In vivo versus ex vivo therapies ===
In &quot;in vivo&quot; gene therapy, a vector (typically, a virus) is introduced to the patient, which then achieves the desired biological effect by passing the genetic material (e.g. for a missing protein) into the patient&#x27;s cells. In &quot;ex vivo&quot; gene therapies, such as CAR-T therapeutics, the patient&#x27;s own cells (autologous) or healthy donor cells (allogeneic) are modified outside the body (hence, &quot;ex vivo&quot;) using a vector to express a particular protein, such as a chimeric antigen receptor.

&quot;In vivo&quot; gene therapy is seen as simpler, since it does not require the harvesting of mitotic cells. However, &quot;ex vivo&quot; gene therapies are better tolerated and less associated with severe immune responses. The death of Jesse Gelsinger in a trial of an adenovirus-vectored treatment for ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency due to a systemic inflammatory reaction led to a temporary halt on gene therapy trials across the United States. , &quot;in vivo&quot; and &quot;ex vivo&quot; therapeutics are both seen as safe.

=== Gene editing ===
The concept of gene therapy is to fix a genetic problem at its source. If, for instance, a mutation in a certain gene causes the production of a dysfunctional protein resulting (usually recessively) in an inherited disease, gene therapy could be used to deliver a copy of this gene that does not contain the deleterious mutation and thereby produces a functional protein. This strategy is referred to as gene replacement therapy and could be employed to treat inherited retinal diseases.

While the concept of gene replacement therapy is mostly suitable for recessive diseases, novel strategies have been suggested that are capable of also treating conditions with a dominant pattern of inheritance.
* The introduction of CRISPR gene editing has opened new doors for its application and utilization in gene therapy, as instead of pure replacement of a gene, it enables correction of the particular genetic defect. Solutions to medical hurdles, such as the eradication of latent human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) reservoirs and correction of the mutation that causes sickle cell disease, may be available as a therapeutic option in the future.
* Prosthetic gene therapy aims to enable cells of the body to take over functions they physiologically do not carry out. One example is the so-called vision restoration gene therapy, that aims to restore vision in patients with end-stage retinal diseases. In end-stage retinal diseases, the photoreceptors, as the primary light sensitive cells of the retina are irreversibly lost. By the means of prosthetic gene therapy light sensitive proteins are delivered into the remaining cells of the retina, to render them light sensitive and thereby enable them to signal visual information towards the brain.
In vivo, gene editing systems using CRISPR have been used in studies with mice to treat cancer and have been effective at reducing tumors. In vitro, the CRISPR system has been used to treat HPV cancer tumors. Adeno-associated virus, Lentivirus based vectors have been to introduce the genome for the CRISPR system.

==Vectors==
The delivery of DNA into cells can be accomplished by multiple methods. The two major classes are recombinant viruses (sometimes called biological nanoparticles or viral vectors) and naked DNA or DNA complexes (non-viral methods).

===Viruses===


In order to replicate, viruses introduce their genetic material into the host cell, tricking the host&#x27;s cellular machinery into using it as blueprints for viral proteins. Retroviruses go a stage further by having their genetic material copied into the nuclear genome of the host cell. Scientists exploit this by substituting part of a virus&#x27;s genetic material with therapeutic DNA or RNA. Like the genetic material (DNA or RNA) in viruses, therapeutic genetic material can be designed to simply serve as a temporary blueprint that degrades naturally, as in a &quot;non-integrative vectors&quot;, or to enter the host&#x27;s nucleus becoming a permanent part of the host&#x27;s nuclear DNA in infected cells.

A number of viruses have been used for human gene therapy, including viruses such as lentivirus, adenoviruses, herpes simplex, vaccinia, and adeno-associated virus.

Adenovirus viral vectors (Ad) temporarily modify a cell&#x27;s genetic expression with genetic material that is not integrated into the host cell&#x27;s DNA. As of 2017, such vectors were used in 20% of trials for gene therapy. Adenovirus vectors are mostly used in cancer treatments and novel genetic vaccines such as the Ebola vaccine, vaccines used in clinical trials for HIV and SARS-CoV-2, or cancer vaccines.

Lentiviral vectors based on lentivirus, a retrovirus, can modify a cell&#x27;s nuclear genome to permanently express a gene, although vectors can be modified to prevent integration. Retroviruses were used in 18% of trials before 2018. Libmeldy is an ex vivo stem cell treatment for metachromatic leukodystrophy which uses a lentiviral vector and was approved by the European medical agency in 2020.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) is a virus that is incapable of transmission between cells unless the cell is infected by another virus, a helper virus. Adenovirus and the herpes viruses act as helper viruses for AAV. AAV persists within the cell outside of the cell&#x27;s nuclear genome for an extended period of time through the formation of concatemers mostly organized as episomes. Genetic material from AAV vectors is integrated into the host cell&#x27;s nuclear genome at a low frequency and likely mediated by the DNA-modifying enzymes of the host cell. Animal models suggest that integration of AAV genetic material into the host cell&#x27;s nuclear genome may cause hepatocellular carcinoma, a form of liver cancer. Several AAV investigational agents have been explored in treatment of wet age related macular degeneration by both intravitreal and subretinal approaches as a potential application of AAV gene therapy for human disease.

=== Non-viral ===

Non-viral vectors for gene therapy present certain advantages over viral methods, such as large scale production and low host immunogenicity. However, non-viral methods initially produced lower levels of transfection and gene expression, and thus lower therapeutic efficacy. Newer technologies offer promise of solving these problems, with the advent of increased cell-specific targeting and subcellular trafficking control.

Methods for non-viral gene therapy include the injection of naked DNA, electroporation, the gene gun, sonoporation, magnetofection, the use of oligonucleotides, lipoplexes, dendrimers, and inorganic nanoparticles. These therapeutics can be administered directly or through scaffold enrichment.

More recent approaches, such as those performed by companies such as Ligandal, offer the possibility of creating cell-specific targeting technologies for a variety of gene therapy modalities, including RNA, DNA and gene editing tools such as CRISPR. Other companies, such as Arbutus Biopharma and Arcturus Therapeutics, offer non-viral, non-cell-targeted approaches that mainly exhibit liver trophism. In more recent years, startups such as Sixfold Bio, GenEdit, and Spotlight Therapeutics have begun to solve the non-viral gene delivery problem. Non-viral techniques offer the possibility of repeat dosing and greater tailorability of genetic payloads, which in the future will be more likely to take over viral-based delivery systems.

Companies such as Editas Medicine, Intellia Therapeutics, CRISPR Therapeutics, Casebia, Cellectis, Precision Biosciences, bluebird bio, Excision BioTherapeutics, and Sangamo have developed non-viral gene editing techniques, however frequently still use viruses for delivering gene insertion material following genomic cleavage by guided nucleases. These companies focus on gene editing, and still face major delivery hurdles.

BioNTech, Moderna Therapeutics and CureVac focus on delivery of mRNA payloads, which are necessarily non-viral delivery problems.

Alnylam, Dicerna Pharmaceuticals, and Ionis Pharmaceuticals focus on delivery of siRNA (antisense oligonucleotides) for gene suppression, which also necessitate non-viral delivery systems.

In academic contexts, a number of laboratories are working on delivery of PEGylated particles, which form serum protein coronas and chiefly exhibit LDL receptor mediated uptake in cells &quot;in vivo&quot;.

== Treatment ==

=== Cancer ===

There have been attempts to treat cancer using gene therapy. As of 2017, 65% of gene therapy trials were for cancer treatment.

Adenovirus vectors are useful for some cancer gene therapies because adenovirus can transiently insert genetic material into a cell without permanently altering the cell&#x27;s nuclear genome. These vectors can be used to cause antigens to be added to cancers causing an immune response, or hinder angiogenesis by expressing certain proteins. An Adenovirus vector is used in the commercial products Gendicine and Oncorine. Another commercial product, Rexin G, uses a retrovirus-based vector and selectively binds to receptors that are more expressed in tumors.

One approach, suicide gene therapy, works by introducing genes encoding enzymes that will cause a cancer cell to die. Another approach is the use oncolytic viruses, such as Oncorine, which are viruses that selectively reproduce in cancerous cells leaving other cells unaffected.

mRNA has been suggested as a non-viral vector for cancer gene therapy that would temporarily change a cancerous cell&#x27;s function to create antigens or kill the cancerous cells and there have been several trials.

Afamitresgene autoleucel, sold under the brand name Tecelra, is an autologous T cell immunotherapy used for the treatment of synovial sarcoma. It is a T cell receptor (TCR) gene therapy. It is the first FDA-approved engineered cell therapy for a solid tumor. It uses a self-inactivating lentiviral vector to express a T-cell receptor specific for MAGE-A4, a melanoma-associated antigen.

=== Genetic diseases ===
Gene therapy approaches to replace a faulty gene with a healthy gene have been proposed and are being studied for treating some genetic diseases. As of 2017, 11.1% of gene therapy clinical trials targeted monogenic diseases.

Diseases such as sickle cell disease that are caused by autosomal recessive disorders for which a person&#x27;s normal phenotype or cell function may be restored in cells that have the disease by a normal copy of the gene that is mutated, may be a good candidate for gene therapy treatment. The risks and benefits related to gene therapy for sickle cell disease are not known.

Gene therapy has been used in the eye. The eye is especially suitable for adeno-associated virus vectors. Voretigene neparvovec is an approved gene therapy to treat Leber&#x27;s hereditary optic neuropathy. alipogene tiparvovec, a treatment for pancreatitis caused by a genetic condition, and Zolgensma for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy both use an adeno-associated virus vector.

=== Infectious diseases ===
As of 2017, 7% of genetic therapy trials targeted infectious diseases. 69.2% of trials targeted HIV, 11% hepatitis B or C, and 7.1% malaria.

===List of gene therapies for treatment of disease===
Some genetic therapies have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the European Medicines Agency (EMA), and for use in Russia and China.
==Adverse effects, contraindications and hurdles for use==
Some of the unsolved problems include:

* Off-target effects – The possibility of unwanted, likely harmful, changes to the genome present a large barrier to the widespread implementation of this technology. Improvements to the specificity of gRNAs and Cas enzymes present viable solutions to this issue as well as the refinement of the delivery method of CRISPR. It is likely that different diseases will benefit from different delivery methods.
* Short-lived nature – Before gene therapy can become a permanent cure for a condition, the therapeutic DNA introduced into target cells must remain functional and the cells containing the therapeutic DNA must be stable. Problems with integrating therapeutic DNA into the nuclear genome and the rapidly dividing nature of many cells prevent it from achieving long-term benefits. Patients require multiple treatments.
* Immune response – Any time a foreign object is introduced into human tissues, the immune system is stimulated to attack the invader. Stimulating the immune system in a way that reduces gene therapy effectiveness is possible. The immune system&#x27;s enhanced response to viruses that it has seen before reduces the effectiveness to repeated treatments.
* Problems with viral vectors – Viral vectors carry the risks of toxicity, inflammatory responses, and gene control and targeting issues.
* Multigene disorders – Some commonly occurring disorders, such as heart disease, high blood pressure, Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, arthritis, and diabetes, are affected by variations in multiple genes, which complicate gene therapy.
* Some therapies may breach the Weismann barrier (between soma and germ-line) protecting the testes, potentially modifying the germline, falling afoul of regulations in countries that prohibit the latter practice.
* Insertional mutagenesis – If the DNA is integrated in a sensitive spot in the genome, for example in a tumor suppressor gene, the therapy could induce a tumor. This has occurred in clinical trials for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID) patients, in which hematopoietic stem cells were transduced with a corrective transgene using a retrovirus, and this led to the development of T cell leukemia in 3 of 20 patients. One possible solution is to add a functional tumor suppressor gene to the DNA to be integrated. This may be problematic since the longer the DNA is, the harder it is to integrate into cell genomes. CRISPR technology allows researchers to make much more precise genome changes at exact locations.
* Cost – alipogene tiparvovec (Glybera), for example, at a cost of $1.6 million per patient, was reported in 2013, to be the world&#x27;s most expensive drug.

===Deaths===
Three patients&#x27; deaths have been reported in gene therapy trials, putting the field under close scrutiny. The first was that of Jesse Gelsinger, who died in 1999, because of immune rejection response. One X-SCID patient died of leukemia in 2003. In 2007, a rheumatoid arthritis patient died from an infection; the subsequent investigation concluded that the death was not related to gene therapy.

==Regulations==
Regulations covering genetic modification are part of general guidelines about human-involved biomedical research. There are no international treaties which are legally binding in this area, but there are recommendations for national laws from various bodies.

The Helsinki Declaration (Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects) was amended by the World Medical Association&#x27;s General Assembly in 2008. This document provides principles physicians and researchers must consider when involving humans as research subjects. The Statement on Gene Therapy Research initiated by the Human Genome Organization (HUGO) in 2001, provides a legal baseline for all countries. HUGO&#x27;s document emphasizes human freedom and adherence to human rights, and offers recommendations for somatic gene therapy, including the importance of recognizing public concerns about such research.

===United States===
No federal legislation lays out protocols or restrictions about human genetic engineering. This subject is governed by overlapping regulations from local and federal agencies, including the Department of Health and Human Services, the FDA and NIH&#x27;s Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. Researchers seeking federal funds for an investigational new drug application, (commonly the case for somatic human genetic engineering,) must obey international and federal guidelines for the protection of human subjects.

NIH serves as the main gene therapy regulator for federally funded research. Privately funded research is advised to follow these regulations. NIH provides funding for research that develops or enhances genetic engineering techniques and to evaluate the ethics and quality in current research. The NIH maintains a mandatory registry of human genetic engineering research protocols that includes all federally funded projects.

An NIH advisory committee published a set of guidelines on gene manipulation. The guidelines discuss lab safety as well as human test subjects and various experimental types that involve genetic changes. Several sections specifically pertain to human genetic engineering, including Section III-C-1. This section describes required review processes and other aspects when seeking approval to begin clinical research involving genetic transfer into a human patient. The protocol for a gene therapy clinical trial must be approved by the NIH&#x27;s Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee prior to any clinical trial beginning; this is different from any other kind of clinical trial.

As with other kinds of drugs, the FDA regulates the quality and safety of gene therapy products and supervises how these products are used clinically. Therapeutic alteration of the human genome falls under the same regulatory requirements as any other medical treatment. Research involving human subjects, such as clinical trials, must be reviewed and approved by the FDA and an Institutional Review Board.

==Gene doping==
Athletes may adopt gene therapy technologies to improve their performance. Gene doping is not known to occur, but multiple gene therapies may have such effects. Kayser et al. argue that gene doping could level the playing field if all athletes receive equal access. Critics claim that any therapeutic intervention for non-therapeutic/enhancement purposes compromises the ethical foundations of medicine and sports.

== Genetic enhancement ==

Genetic engineering could be used to cure diseases, but also to change physical appearance, metabolism, and even improve physical capabilities and mental faculties such as memory and intelligence. Ethical claims about germline engineering include beliefs that every fetus has a right to remain genetically unmodified, that parents hold the right to genetically modify their offspring, and that every child has the right to be born free of preventable diseases. For parents, genetic engineering could be seen as another child enhancement technique to add to diet, exercise, education, training, cosmetics, and plastic surgery. Another theorist claims that moral concerns limit but do not prohibit germline engineering.

A 2020 issue of the journal &quot;Bioethics&quot; was devoted to moral issues surrounding germline genetic engineering in people.

Possible regulatory schemes include a complete ban, provision to everyone, or professional self-regulation. The American Medical Association&#x27;s Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs stated that &quot;genetic interventions to enhance traits should be considered permissible only in severely restricted situations: (1) clear and meaningful benefits to the fetus or child; (2) no trade-off with other characteristics or traits; and (3) equal access to the genetic technology, irrespective of income or other socioeconomic characteristics.&quot;

As early in the history of biotechnology as 1990, there have been scientists opposed to attempts to modify the human germline using these new tools, and such concerns have continued as technology progressed. With the advent of new techniques like CRISPR, in March 2015 a group of scientists urged a worldwide moratorium on clinical use of gene editing technologies to edit the human genome in a way that can be inherited. In April 2015, researchers sparked controversy when they reported results of basic research to edit the DNA of non-viable human embryos using CRISPR. A committee of the American National Academy of Sciences and National Academy of Medicine gave qualified support to human genome editing in 2017 once answers have been found to safety and efficiency problems &quot;but only for serious conditions under stringent oversight.&quot;

==History==
===1970s and earlier===
In 1972, Friedmann and Roblin authored a paper in &quot;Science&quot; titled &quot;Gene therapy for human genetic disease?&quot;. Rogers (1970) was cited for proposing that &quot;exogenous good DNA&quot; be used to replace the defective DNA in those with genetic defects.

===1980s===
In 1984, a retrovirus vector system was designed that could efficiently insert foreign genes into mammalian chromosomes.

===1990s===
The first approved gene therapy clinical research in the US took place on 14 September 1990, at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), under the direction of William French Anderson. Four-year-old Ashanti DeSilva received treatment for a genetic defect that left her with adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA-SCID), a severe immune system deficiency. The defective gene of the patient&#x27;s blood cells was replaced by the functional variant. Ashanti&#x27;s immune system was partially restored by the therapy. Production of the missing enzyme was temporarily stimulated, but the new cells with functional genes were not generated. She led a normal life only with the regular injections performed every two months. The effects were successful, but temporary.

Cancer gene therapy was introduced in 1992/93 (Trojan et al. 1993). The treatment of glioblastoma multiforme, the malignant brain tumor whose outcome is always fatal, was done using a vector expressing antisense IGF-I RNA (clinical trial approved by NIH protocol no.1602 24 November 1993, and by the FDA in 1994). This therapy also represents the beginning of cancer immunogene therapy, a treatment which proves to be effective due to the anti-tumor mechanism of IGF-I antisense, which is related to strong immune and apoptotic phenomena.

In 1992, Claudio Bordignon, working at the Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, performed the first gene therapy procedure using hematopoietic stem cells as vectors to deliver genes intended to correct hereditary diseases. In 2002, this work led to the publication of the first successful gene therapy treatment for ADA-SCID. The success of a multi-center trial for treating children with SCID (severe combined immune deficiency or &quot;bubble boy&quot; disease) from 2000 and 2002, was questioned when two of the ten children treated at the trial&#x27;s Paris center developed a leukemia-like condition. Clinical trials were halted temporarily in 2002, but resumed after regulatory review of the protocol in the US, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Germany.

In 1993, Andrew Gobea was born with SCID following prenatal genetic screening. Blood was removed from his mother&#x27;s placenta and umbilical cord immediately after birth, to acquire stem cells. The allele that codes for adenosine deaminase (ADA) was obtained and inserted into a retrovirus. Retroviruses and stem cells were mixed, after which the viruses inserted the gene into the stem cell chromosomes. Stem cells containing the working ADA gene were injected into Andrew&#x27;s blood. Injections of the ADA enzyme were also given weekly. For four years T cells (white blood cells), produced by stem cells, made ADA enzymes using the ADA gene. After four years more treatment was needed.

In 1996, Luigi Naldini and Didier Trono developed a new class of gene therapy vectors based on HIV capable of infecting non-dividing cells that have since then been widely used in clinical and research settings, pioneering lentivirals vector in gene therapy.

Jesse Gelsinger&#x27;s death in 1999 impeded gene therapy research in the US. As a result, the FDA suspended several clinical trials pending the reevaluation of ethical and procedural practices.

===2000s===
The modified gene therapy strategy of antisense IGF-I RNA (NIH n˚ 1602) using antisense / triple helix anti-IGF-I approach was registered in 2002, by Wiley gene therapy clinical trial - n˚ 635 and 636. The approach has shown promising results in the treatment of six different malignant tumors: glioblastoma, cancers of liver, colon, prostate, uterus, and ovary (Collaborative NATO Science Programme on Gene Therapy USA, France, Poland n˚ LST 980517 conducted by J. Trojan) (Trojan et al., 2012). This anti-gene antisense/triple helix therapy has proven to be efficient, due to the mechanism stopping simultaneously IGF-I expression on translation and transcription levels, strengthening anti-tumor immune and apoptotic phenomena.

====2002====
Sickle cell disease can be treated in mice. The mice – which have essentially the same defect that causes human cases – used a viral vector to induce production of fetal hemoglobin (HbF), which normally ceases to be produced shortly after birth. In humans, the use of hydroxyurea to stimulate the production of HbF temporarily alleviates sickle cell symptoms. The researchers demonstrated this treatment to be a more permanent means to increase therapeutic HbF production.

A new gene therapy approach repaired errors in messenger RNA derived from defective genes. This technique has the potential to treat thalassaemia, cystic fibrosis and some cancers.

Researchers created liposomes 25 nanometers across that can carry therapeutic DNA through pores in the nuclear membrane.

====2003====
In 2003, a research team inserted genes into the brain for the first time. They used liposomes coated in a polymer called polyethylene glycol, which unlike viral vectors, are small enough to cross the blood–brain barrier.

Short pieces of double-stranded RNA (short, interfering RNAs or siRNAs) are used by cells to degrade RNA of a particular sequence. If a siRNA is designed to match the RNA copied from a faulty gene, then the abnormal protein product of that gene will not be produced.

Gendicine is a cancer gene therapy that delivers the tumor suppressor gene p53 using an engineered adenovirus. In 2003, it was approved in China for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

====2006====
In March, researchers announced the successful use of gene therapy to treat two adult patients for X-linked chronic granulomatous disease, a disease which affects myeloid cells and damages the immune system. The study is the first to show that gene therapy can treat the myeloid system.

In May, a team reported a way to prevent the immune system from rejecting a newly delivered gene. Similar to organ transplantation, gene therapy has been plagued by this problem. The immune system normally recognizes the new gene as foreign and rejects the cells carrying it. The research utilized a newly uncovered network of genes regulated by molecules known as microRNAs. This natural function selectively obscured their therapeutic gene in immune system cells and protected it from discovery. Mice infected with the gene containing an immune-cell microRNA target sequence did not reject the gene.

In August, scientists successfully treated metastatic melanoma in two patients using killer T cells genetically retargeted to attack the cancer cells.

In November, researchers reported on the use of VRX496, a gene-based immunotherapy for the treatment of HIV that uses a lentiviral vector to deliver an antisense gene against the HIV envelope. In a phase I clinical trial, five subjects with chronic HIV infection who had failed to respond to at least two antiretroviral regimens were treated. A single intravenous infusion of autologous CD4 T cells genetically modified with VRX496 was well tolerated. All patients had stable or decreased viral load; four of the five patients had stable or increased CD4 T cell counts. All five patients had stable or increased immune response to HIV antigens and other pathogens. This was the first evaluation of a lentiviral vector administered in a US human clinical trial.

====2007====
In May 2007, researchers announced the first gene therapy trial for inherited retinal disease. The first operation was carried out on a 23-year-old British male, Robert Johnson, in early 2007.

====2008====
Leber&#x27;s congenital amaurosis is an inherited blinding disease caused by mutations in the RPE65 gene. The results of a small clinical trial in children were published in April. Delivery of recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) carrying RPE65 yielded positive results. In May, two more groups reported positive results in independent clinical trials using gene therapy to treat the condition. In all three clinical trials, patients recovered functional vision without apparent side-effects.

====2009====
In September researchers were able to give trichromatic vision to squirrel monkeys. In November 2009, researchers halted a fatal genetic disorder called adrenoleukodystrophy in two children using a lentivirus vector to deliver a functioning version of ABCD1, the gene that is mutated in the disorder.

===2010s===
====2010====
An April paper reported that gene therapy addressed achromatopsia (color blindness) in dogs by targeting cone photoreceptors. Cone function and day vision were restored for at least 33 months in two young specimens. The therapy was less efficient for older dogs.

In September it was announced that an 18-year-old male patient in France with beta thalassemia major had been successfully treated. Beta thalassemia major is an inherited blood disease in which beta haemoglobin is missing and patients are dependent on regular lifelong blood transfusions. The technique used a lentiviral vector to transduce the human β-globin gene into purified blood and marrow cells obtained from the patient in June 2007. The patient&#x27;s haemoglobin levels were stable at 9 to 10 g/dL. About a third of the hemoglobin contained the form introduced by the viral vector and blood transfusions were not needed. Further clinical trials were planned. Bone marrow transplants are the only cure for thalassemia, but 75% of patients do not find a matching donor.

Cancer immunogene therapy using modified antigene, antisense/triple helix approach was introduced in South America in 2010/11 in La Sabana University, Bogota (Ethical Committee 14 December 2010, no P-004-10). Considering the ethical aspect of gene diagnostic and gene therapy targeting IGF-I, the IGF-I expressing tumors i.e. lung and epidermis cancers were treated (Trojan et al. 2016).

====2011====
In 2007 and 2008, a man (Timothy Ray Brown) was cured of HIV by repeated hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (see also allogeneic stem cell transplantation, allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, allotransplantation) with double-delta-32 mutation which disables the CCR5 receptor. This cure was accepted by the medical community in 2011. It required complete ablation of existing bone marrow, which is very debilitating.

In August two of three subjects of a pilot study were confirmed to have been cured from chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). The therapy used genetically modified T cells to attack cells that expressed the CD19 protein to fight the disease. In 2013, the researchers announced that 26 of 59 patients had achieved complete remission and the original patient had remained tumor-free.

Human HGF plasmid DNA therapy of cardiomyocytes is being examined as a potential treatment for coronary artery disease as well as treatment for the damage that occurs to the heart after myocardial infarction.

In 2011, Neovasculgen was registered in Russia as the first-in-class gene-therapy drug for treatment of peripheral artery disease, including critical limb ischemia; it delivers the gene encoding for VEGF. Neovasculogen is a plasmid encoding the CMV promoter and the 165 amino acid form of VEGF.

====2012====
The FDA approved Phase I clinical trials on thalassemia major patients in the US for 10 participants in July. The study was expected to continue until 2015.

In July 2012, the European Medicines Agency recommended approval of a gene therapy treatment for the first time in either Europe or the United States. The treatment used Alipogene tiparvovec (Glybera) to compensate for lipoprotein lipase deficiency, which can cause severe pancreatitis. The recommendation was endorsed by the European Commission in November 2012, and commercial rollout began in late 2014. Alipogene tiparvovec was expected to cost around $1.6 million per treatment in 2012, revised to $1 million in 2015, making it the most expensive medicine in the world at the time. , only the patients treated in clinical trials and a patient who paid the full price for treatment have received the drug.

In December 2012, it was reported that 10 of 13 patients with multiple myeloma were in remission &quot;or very close to it&quot; three months after being injected with a treatment involving genetically engineered T cells to target proteins NY-ESO-1 and LAGE-1, which exist only on cancerous myeloma cells.

====2013====
In March researchers reported that three of five adult subjects who had acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) had been in remission for five months to two years after being treated with genetically modified T cells which attacked cells with CD19 genes on their surface, i.e. all B cells, cancerous or not. The researchers believed that the patients&#x27; immune systems would make normal T cells and B cells after a couple of months. They were also given bone marrow. One patient relapsed and died and one died of a blood clot unrelated to the disease.

Following encouraging Phase I trials, in April, researchers announced they were starting Phase II clinical trials (called CUPID2 and SERCA-LVAD) on 250 patients at several hospitals to combat heart disease. The therapy was designed to increase the levels of SERCA2, a protein in heart muscles, improving muscle function. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted this a breakthrough therapy designation to accelerate the trial and approval process. In 2016, it was reported that no improvement was found from the CUPID 2 trial.

In July researchers reported promising results for six children with two severe hereditary diseases had been treated with a partially deactivated lentivirus to replace a faulty gene and after 7–32 months. Three of the children had metachromatic leukodystrophy, which causes children to lose cognitive and motor skills. The other children had Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, which leaves them to open to infection, autoimmune diseases, and cancer. Follow up trials with gene therapy on another six children with Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome were also reported as promising.

In October researchers reported that two children born with adenosine deaminase severe combined immunodeficiency disease (ADA-SCID) had been treated with genetically engineered stem cells 18 months previously and that their immune systems were showing signs of full recovery. Another three children were making progress. In 2014, a further 18 children with ADA-SCID were cured by gene therapy. ADA-SCID children have no functioning immune system and are sometimes known as &quot;bubble children&quot;.

Also in October researchers reported that they had treated six people with haemophilia in early 2011 using an adeno-associated virus. Over two years later all six were producing clotting factor.

====2014====
In January researchers reported that six choroideremia patients had been treated with adeno-associated virus with a copy of REP1. Over a six-month to two-year period all had improved their sight. By 2016, 32 patients had been treated with positive results and researchers were hopeful the treatment would be long-lasting. Choroideremia is an inherited genetic eye disease with no approved treatment, leading to loss of sight.

In March researchers reported that 12 HIV patients had been treated since 2009 in a trial with a genetically engineered virus with a rare mutation (CCR5 deficiency) known to protect against HIV with promising results.

Clinical trials of gene therapy for sickle cell disease were started in 2014.

In February LentiGlobin BB305, a gene therapy treatment undergoing clinical trials for treatment of beta thalassemia gained FDA &quot;breakthrough&quot; status after several patients were able to forgo the frequent blood transfusions usually required to treat the disease.

In March researchers delivered a recombinant gene encoding a broadly neutralizing antibody into monkeys infected with simian HIV; the monkeys&#x27; cells produced the antibody, which cleared them of HIV. The technique is named immunoprophylaxis by gene transfer (IGT). Animal tests for antibodies to ebola, malaria, influenza, and hepatitis were underway.

In March, scientists, including an inventor of CRISPR, Jennifer Doudna, urged a worldwide moratorium on germline gene therapy, writing &quot;scientists should avoid even attempting, in lax jurisdictions, germline genome modification for clinical application in humans&quot; until the full implications &quot;are discussed among scientific and governmental organizations&quot;.

In December, scientists of major world academies called for a moratorium on inheritable human genome edits, including those related to CRISPR-Cas9 technologies but that basic research including embryo gene editing should continue.

====2015====

Researchers successfully treated a boy with epidermolysis bullosa using skin grafts grown from his own skin cells, genetically altered to repair the mutation that caused his disease.

In November, researchers announced that they had treated a baby girl, Layla Richards, with an experimental treatment using donor T cells genetically engineered using TALEN to attack cancer cells. One year after the treatment she was still free of her cancer (a highly aggressive form of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia [ALL]). Children with highly aggressive ALL normally have a very poor prognosis and Layla&#x27;s disease had been regarded as terminal before the treatment.

====2016====
In April the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use of the European Medicines Agency endorsed a gene therapy treatment called Strimvelis and the European Commission approved it in June. This treats children born with adenosine deaminase deficiency and who have no functioning immune system. This was the second gene therapy treatment to be approved in Europe.

In October, Chinese scientists reported they had started a trial to genetically modify T cells from 10 adult patients with lung cancer and reinject the modified T cells back into their bodies to attack the cancer cells. The T cells had the PD-1 protein (which stops or slows the immune response) removed using CRISPR-Cas9.

A 2016 Cochrane systematic review looking at data from four trials on topical cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene therapy does not support its clinical use as a mist inhaled into the lungs to treat cystic fibrosis patients with lung infections. One of the four trials did find weak evidence that liposome-based CFTR gene transfer therapy may lead to a small respiratory improvement for people with CF. This weak evidence is not enough to make a clinical recommendation for routine CFTR gene therapy.

==== 2017 ====
In February Kite Pharma announced results from a clinical trial of CAR-T cells in around a hundred people with advanced non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

In March, French scientists reported on clinical research of gene therapy to treat sickle cell disease.

In August, the FDA approved tisagenlecleucel for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Tisagenlecleucel is an adoptive cell transfer therapy for B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; T cells from a person with cancer are removed, genetically engineered to make a specific T-cell receptor (a chimeric T cell receptor, or &quot;CAR-T&quot;) that reacts to the cancer, and are administered back to the person. The T cells are engineered to target a protein called CD19 that is common on B cells. This is the first form of gene therapy to be approved in the United States. In October, a similar therapy called axicabtagene ciloleucel was approved for non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

In October, biophysicist and biohacker Josiah Zayner claimed to have performed the very first in-vivo human genome editing in the form of a self-administered therapy.

On 13 November, medical scientists working with Sangamo Therapeutics, headquartered in Richmond, California, announced the first ever in-body human gene editing therapy. The treatment, designed to permanently insert a healthy version of the flawed gene that causes Hunter syndrome, was given to 44-year-old Brian Madeux and is part of the world&#x27;s first study to permanently edit DNA inside the human body. The success of the gene insertion was later confirmed. Clinical trials by Sangamo involving gene editing using zinc finger nuclease (ZFN) are ongoing.

In December the results of using an adeno-associated virus with blood clotting factor VIII to treat nine haemophilia A patients were published. Six of the seven patients on the high dose regime increased the level of the blood clotting VIII to normal levels. The low and medium dose regimes had no effect on the patient&#x27;s blood clotting levels.

In December, the FDA approved voretigene neparvovec, the first &quot;in vivo&quot; gene therapy, for the treatment of blindness due to Leber&#x27;s congenital amaurosis. The price of this treatment is for both eyes.

==== 2019 ====
In May, the FDA approved onasemnogene abeparvovec (Zolgensma) for treating spinal muscular atrophy in children under two years of age. The list price of Zolgensma was set at per dose, making it the most expensive drug ever.

In May, the EMA approved betibeglogene autotemcel (Zynteglo) for treating beta thalassemia for people twelve years of age and older.

In July, Allergan and Editas Medicine announced phase I/II clinical trial of AGN-151587 for the treatment of Leber congenital amaurosis 10. This is one of the first studies of a CRISPR-based &quot;in vivo&quot; human gene editing therapy, where the editing takes place inside the human body. The first injection of the CRISPR-Cas System was confirmed in March 2020.

Exagamglogene autotemcel, a CRISPR-based human gene editing therapy, was used for sickle cell and thalassemia in clinical trials.

=== 2020s ===

==== 2020 ====
In May, onasemnogene abeparvovec (Zolgensma) was approved by the European Union for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy in people who either have clinical symptoms of SMA type 1 or who have no more than three copies of the &quot;SMN2&quot; gene, irrespective of body weight or age.

In August, Audentes Therapeutics reported that three out of 17 children with X-linked myotubular myopathy participating the clinical trial of a AAV8-based gene therapy treatment AT132 have died. It was suggested that the treatment, whose dosage is based on body weight, exerts a disproportionately toxic effect on heavier patients, since the three patients who died were heavier than the others. The trial has been put on clinical hold.

On 15 October, the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) of the European Medicines Agency (EMA) adopted a positive opinion, recommending the granting of a marketing authorisation for the medicinal product Libmeldy (autologous CD34+ cell enriched population that contains hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells transduced ex vivo using a lentiviral vector encoding the human arylsulfatase A gene), a gene therapy for the treatment of children with the &quot;late infantile&quot; (LI) or &quot;early juvenile&quot; (EJ) forms of metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD). The active substance of Libmeldy consists of the child&#x27;s own stem cells which have been modified to contain working copies of the ARSA gene. When the modified cells are injected back into the patient as a one-time infusion, the cells are expected to start producing the ARSA enzyme that breaks down the build-up of sulfatides in the nerve cells and other cells of the patient&#x27;s body. Libmeldy was approved for medical use in the EU in December 2020.

On 15 October, Lysogene, a French biotechnological company, reported the death of a patient in who has received LYS-SAF302, an experimental gene therapy treatment for mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA (Sanfilippo syndrome type A).

====2021====

In May, a new method using an altered version of HIV as a lentivirus vector was reported in the treatment of 50 children with ADA-SCID obtaining positive results in 48 of them, this method is expected to be safer than retroviruses vectors commonly used in previous studies of SCID where the development of leukemia was usually observed and had already been used in 2019, but in a smaller group with X-SCID.

In June a clinical trial on six patients affected with transthyretin amyloidosis reported a reduction the concentration of missfolded transthretin (TTR) protein in serum through CRISPR-based inactivation of the &quot;TTR&quot; gene in liver cells observing mean reductions of 52% and 87% among the lower and higher dose groups.This was done in vivo without taking cells out of the patient to edit them and reinfuse them later.

In July results of a small gene therapy phase I study was published reporting observation of dopamine restoration on seven patients between 4 and 9 years old affected by aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency (AADC deficiency).

====2022====
In February, the first ever gene therapy for Tay–Sachs disease was announced, it uses an adeno-associated virus to deliver the correct instruction for the HEXA gene on brain cells which causes the disease. Only two children were part of a compassionate trial presenting improvements over the natural course of the disease and no vector-related adverse events.

In May, eladocagene exuparvovec is recommended for approval by the European Commission.

In July results of a gene therapy candidate for haemophilia B called FLT180 were announced, it works using an adeno-associated virus (AAV) to restore the clotting factor IX (FIX) protein, normal levels of the protein were observed with low doses of the therapy but immunosuppression was necessitated to decrease the risk of vector-related immune responses.

In December, a 13-year girl that had been diagnosed with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia was successfully treated at Great Ormond Street Hospital (GOSH) in the first documented use of therapeutic gene editing for this purpose, after undergoing six months of an experimental treatment, where all attempts of other treatments failed. The procedure included reprogramming a healthy T-cell to destroy the cancerous T-cells to first rid her of leukaemia, and then rebuilding her immune system using healthy immune cells. The GOSH team used BASE editing and had previously treated a case of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in 2015 using TALENs.

==== 2023 ====
In May 2023, the FDA approved beremagene geperpavec for the treatment of wounds in people with dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) which is applied as a topical gel that delivers a herpes-simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) vector encoding the collagen type VII alpha 1 chain (COL7A1) gene that is dysfunctional on those affected by DEB . One trial found 65% of the Vyjuvek-treated wounds completely closed while only 26% of the placebo-treated at 24 weeks. It has been also reported its use as an eyedrop for a patient with DEB that had vision loss due to the widespread blistering with good results.

In June 2023, the FDA gave an accelerated approval to Elevidys for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) only for boys 4 to 5 years old as they are more likely to benefit from the therapy which consists of one-time intravenous infusion of a virus (AAV rh74 vector) that delivers a functioning &quot;microdystrophin&quot; gene (138 kDa) into the muscle cells to act in place of the normal dystrophin (427 kDa) that is found mutated in this disease.

In July 2023, it was reported that it had been developed a new method to affect genetic expressions through direct current.

In December 2023, two gene therapies were approved for sickle cell disease, exagamglogene autotemcel and lovotibeglogene autotemcel.

2024

In November 2024, FDA granted accelerated approval for eladocagene exuparvovec-tneq (Kebilidi, PTC Therapeutics), a direct-to-brain gene therapy for aromatic -amino acid decarboxylase deficiency. It uses a recombinant adeno-associated virus serotype 2 (rAAV2) to deliver a functioning DOPA decarboxylase (DDC) gene directly into the putamen, increasing the AADC enzyme and restoring dopamine production. It is administered through a stereotactic surgical procedure.

== List of gene therapies ==
* Gene therapy for color blindness
* Gene therapy for epilepsy
* Gene therapy for osteoarthritis
* Gene therapy in Parkinson&#x27;s disease
* Gene therapy of the human retina
* List of gene therapies

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="0" end="12" title="Gene therapy" label="Gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519843" start="18" end="36" title="Health technology" label="medical technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419430" start="60" end="78" title="therapeutic effect" label="therapeutic effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="107" end="122" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="224" end="227" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775158" start="254" end="266" title="Martin Cline" label="Martin Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="342" end="371" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300359" start="535" end="550" title="French Anderson" label="French Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180990" start="696" end="703" title="Phases of clinical research" label="phase I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501344" start="714" end="723" title="Gendicine" label="Gendicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572516" start="853" end="873" title="alipogene tiparvovec" label="alipogene tiparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313411" start="882" end="892" title="Strimvelis" label="Strimvelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314624" start="901" end="917" title="tisagenlecleucel" label="tisagenlecleucel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988385" start="926" end="947" title="voretigene neparvovec" label="voretigene neparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q40441442" start="956" end="965" title="patisiran" label="patisiran"/>
<link wikidata="Q56934130" start="974" end="998" title="onasemnogene abeparvovec" label="onasemnogene abeparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q106293994" start="1007" end="1029" title="idecabtagene vicleucel" label="idecabtagene vicleucel"/>
<link wikidata="Q115779373" start="1038" end="1062" title="nadofaragene firadenovec" label="nadofaragene firadenovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q107391591" start="1064" end="1090" title="valoctocogene roxaparvovec" label="valoctocogene roxaparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q115409056" start="1095" end="1120" title="etranacogene dezaparvovec" label="etranacogene dezaparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="1166" end="1188" title="adeno-associated virus" label="adeno-associated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q374232" start="1202" end="1212" title="lentivirus" label="lentivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="1253" end="1260" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q310484" start="1277" end="1284" title="ex vivo" label="ex vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q830465" start="1348" end="1360" title="viral capsid" label="viral capsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q845870" start="1395" end="1404" title="Transduction (genetics)" label="transduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731430" start="1549" end="1552" title="Allele-specific oligonucleotide" label="ASO"/>
<link wikidata="Q203221" start="1555" end="1560" title="Small interfering RNA" label="siRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974682" start="1599" end="1606" title="Alnylam" label="Alnylam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079531" start="1611" end="1632" title="Ionis Pharmaceuticals" label="Ionis Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q285835" start="1745" end="1751" title="GalNAc" label="GalNAc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128050" start="1888" end="1915" title="Bone marrow transplantation" label="Bone marrow transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="1920" end="1937" title="organ transplants" label="organ transplants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="2129" end="2135" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="2139" end="2144" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="2227" end="2231" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2331" end="2334" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="2397" end="2402" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2569" end="2572" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919046" start="2599" end="2609" title="biochemist" label="biochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896420" start="2679" end="2724" title="University of Tennessee Health Science Center" label="University of Tennessee Health Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="2728" end="2746" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="2794" end="2804" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="2808" end="2813" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="2819" end="2830" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="2857" end="2876" title="Sickle cell disease" label="sickle cell anaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="2924" end="2929" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2953" end="2956" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="2992" end="3002" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q78901323" start="3025" end="3043" title="Theodore Friedmann" label="Theodore Friedmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="3090" end="3119" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3144" end="3157" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q727436" start="3213" end="3233" title="Lesch-Nyhan syndrome" label="Lesch-Nyhan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="3250" end="3270" title="neurological disease" label="neurological disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="3290" end="3293" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="3510" end="3531" title="organ transplantation" label="organ transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126128" start="3550" end="3560" title="geneticist" label="geneticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775158" start="3561" end="3573" title="Martin Cline" label="Martin Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="3581" end="3618" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3622" end="3632" title="California (state)" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3634" end="3647" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055374" start="4064" end="4067" title="adenosine deaminase deficiency" label="ADA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334408" start="4068" end="4072" title="severe combined immunodeficiency" label="SCID"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="4372" end="4382" title="translation (biology)" label="translated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="4388" end="4396" title="proteins" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="4420" end="4435" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="4457" end="4474" title="genetic mutations" label="genetic mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="4502" end="4505" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="4545" end="4549" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="4563" end="4569" title="mutate" label="mutate"/>
<link wikidata="Q427389" start="4625" end="4631" title="Vector (molecular biology)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="4894" end="4910" title="retinal diseases" label="retinal diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811132" start="4911" end="4944" title="Leber&amp;#x27;s congenital amaurosis" label="Leber&amp;#x27;s congenital amaurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397009" start="4949" end="4962" title="choroideremia" label="choroideremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423538" start="4964" end="4977" title="x-linked severe combined immunodeficiency" label="X-linked SCID"/>
<link wikidata="Q366964" start="4989" end="5009" title="adrenoleukodystrophy" label="adrenoleukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088156" start="5011" end="5039" title="chronic lymphocytic leukemia" label="chronic lymphocytic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180664" start="5047" end="5073" title="acute lymphocytic leukemia" label="acute lymphocytic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="5081" end="5097" title="multiple myeloma" label="multiple myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q134003" start="5099" end="5110" title="haemophilia" label="haemophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="5116" end="5140" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501344" start="5261" end="5270" title="Gendicine" label="Gendicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314402" start="5350" end="5362" title="Neovasculgen" label="Neovasculgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q378681" start="5445" end="5470" title="peripheral artery disease" label="peripheral artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316059" start="5482" end="5504" title="critical limb ischemia" label="critical limb ischemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572516" start="5515" end="5535" title="alipogene tiparvovec" label="alipogene tiparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="5560" end="5578" title="inherited disorder" label="inherited disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349695" start="5580" end="5609" title="lipoprotein lipase deficiency" label="lipoprotein lipase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="5749" end="5768" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="5799" end="5818" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q178194" start="6067" end="6082" title="cystic fibrosis" label="cystic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137767" start="6097" end="6115" title="muscular dystrophy" label="muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="6117" end="6128" title="thalassemia" label="thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="6134" end="6152" title="sickle cell anemia" label="sickle cell anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572516" start="6154" end="6174" title="alipogene tiparvovec" label="alipogene tiparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q420014" start="6222" end="6240" title="lipoprotein lipase" label="lipoprotein lipase"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="6456" end="6461" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="6488" end="6498" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="6500" end="6509" title="Naked DNA" label="Naked DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="6575" end="6582" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422529" start="6736" end="6744" title="nucleases" label="nuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q204773" start="6815" end="6836" title="zinc finger nucleases" label="zinc finger nucleases"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="6841" end="6847" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533489" start="7099" end="7111" title="Genome editing" label="Gene editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352382" start="7351" end="7372" title="Institute Of Medicine" label="Institute Of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8269" end="8289" title="Genome#definition" label="definition of genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="8577" end="8585" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795487" start="8629" end="8641" title="mRNA vaccine" label="mRNA vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q59555084" start="8875" end="8888" title="Fact-checking" label="Fact-checkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325238" start="8898" end="8907" title="Full Fact" label="Full Fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="8909" end="8916" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394318" start="8918" end="8928" title="PolitiFact" label="PolitiFact"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428664" start="8934" end="8947" title="FactCheck.org" label="FactCheck.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718421" start="9022" end="9031" title="Joe Rogan" label="Joe Rogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265028" start="9112" end="9126" title="Andrew Bridgen" label="Andrew Bridgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q123619" start="9338" end="9350" title="nucleic acid" label="nucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="9523" end="9532" title="Monogenic (genetics)" label="monogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431332" start="9689" end="9703" title="gene silencing" label="gene silencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q725508" start="10070" end="10082" title="somatic cell" label="somatic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="10169" end="10175" title="gamete" label="gamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q281579" start="10177" end="10186" title="germ cell" label="germ cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319949" start="10188" end="10198" title="gametocyte" label="gametocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="10220" end="10229" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q239526" start="10315" end="10324" title="offspring" label="offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="10449" end="10455" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730650" start="10474" end="10481" title="episome" label="episome"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="10485" end="10492" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="10529" end="10544" title="clinical trials" label="clinical trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043160" start="10634" end="10652" title="Primary immunodeficiency" label="immunodeficiencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q134003" start="10654" end="10665" title="haemophilia" label="haemophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="10667" end="10679" title="Thalassemia" label="thalassaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178194" start="10685" end="10700" title="cystic fibrosis" label="cystic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139164" start="10936" end="10944" title="germline" label="germline"/>
<link wikidata="Q281579" start="10965" end="10974" title="germ cell" label="germ cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="10977" end="10982" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="10986" end="10994" title="egg cell" label="egg cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="11183" end="11192" title="heritable" label="heritable"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="11669" end="11676" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q310484" start="11908" end="11915" title="ex vivo" label="ex vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099363" start="11946" end="11951" title="Chimeric antigen receptor T cell" label="CAR-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="12286" end="12293" title="Mitosis" label="mitotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825818" start="12429" end="12444" title="Jesse Gelsinger" label="Jesse Gelsinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q193447" start="12462" end="12472" title="Adenoviridae" label="adenovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043161" start="12496" end="12533" title="ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency" label="ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310682" start="13473" end="13492" title="CRISPR gene editing" label="CRISPR gene editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="13759" end="13762" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="14534" end="14540" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="14707" end="14729" title="Adeno-associated virus" label="Adeno-associated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q374232" start="14731" end="14741" title="Lentivirus" label="Lentivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917858" start="14889" end="14896" title="Vectors in Gene Therapy" label="methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302706" start="14924" end="14941" title="recombinant virus" label="recombinant virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="14973" end="14985" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="15009" end="15018" title="naked DNA" label="naked DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q114773374" start="15086" end="15095" title="Viral replication" label="replicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="15097" end="15102" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189308" start="15250" end="15260" title="Retrovirus" label="Retrovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q374232" start="15878" end="15888" title="lentivirus" label="lentivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193447" start="15890" end="15900" title="adenovirus" label="adenovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q655331" start="15904" end="15918" title="herpes simplex virus" label="herpes simplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986297" start="15920" end="15928" title="vaccinia virus" label="vaccinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="15934" end="15956" title="adeno-associated virus" label="adeno-associated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193447" start="15959" end="15983" title="Adenoviridae" label="Adenovirus viral vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553092" start="16282" end="16295" title="Ebola vaccine" label="Ebola vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="16334" end="16337" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q82069695" start="16342" end="16352" title="SARS-CoV-2" label="SARS-CoV-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378309" start="16357" end="16371" title="cancer vaccine" label="cancer vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155135" start="16375" end="16393" title="Lentiviral vector in gene therapy" label="Lentiviral vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q374232" start="16403" end="16413" title="lentivirus" label="lentivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189308" start="16417" end="16427" title="retrovirus" label="retrovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="16462" end="16468" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q108887202" start="16610" end="16618" title="Atidarsagene autotemcel" label="Libmeldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120682" start="16657" end="16685" title="metachromatic leukodystrophy" label="metachromatic leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="16775" end="16797" title="Adeno-associated virus" label="Adeno-associated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158263" start="17117" end="17127" title="concatemer" label="concatemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730650" start="17149" end="17156" title="episome" label="episome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148337" start="17448" end="17472" title="hepatocellular carcinoma" label="hepatocellular carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q623031" start="17484" end="17496" title="liver cancer" label="liver cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27429789" start="17568" end="17604" title="Wet age-related macular degeneration" label="wet age related macular degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q180609" start="17613" end="17625" title="Intravitreal administration" label="intravitreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660197" start="17864" end="17878" title="immunogenicity" label="immunogenicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429031" start="17942" end="17954" title="transfection" label="transfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="17959" end="17974" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18164" end="18198" title="Vectors in Gene Therapy#Non-viral methods" label="Methods for non-viral gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142521" start="18235" end="18250" title="electroporation" label="electroporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502320" start="18256" end="18264" title="gene gun" label="gene gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533126" start="18266" end="18278" title="sonoporation" label="sonoporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731661" start="18280" end="18294" title="magnetofection" label="magnetofection"/>
<link wikidata="Q133686" start="18307" end="18322" title="oligonucleotide" label="oligonucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540285" start="18437" end="18456" title="Tissue engineering" label="scaffold enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18528" end="18536" title="Ligandal" label="Ligandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17747021" start="18734" end="18751" title="Arbutus Biopharma" label="Arbutus Biopharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q98713358" start="18756" end="18777" title="Arcturus Therapeutics" label="Arcturus Therapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18900" end="18911" title="Sixfold Bio" label="Sixfold Bio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18913" end="18920" title="GenEdit" label="GenEdit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18926" end="18948" title="Spotlight Therapeutics" label="Spotlight Therapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23131313" start="19215" end="19230" title="Editas Medicine" label="Editas Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621387" start="19232" end="19253" title="Intellia Therapeutics" label="Intellia Therapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q104480207" start="19255" end="19274" title="CRISPR Therapeutics" label="CRISPR Therapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19276" end="19283" title="Casebia" label="Casebia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943995" start="19285" end="19294" title="Cellectis" label="Cellectis"/>
<link wikidata="Q116056726" start="19296" end="19317" title="Precision Biosciences" label="Precision Biosciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q30256843" start="19319" end="19331" title="bluebird bio" label="bluebird bio"/>
<link wikidata="Q123252511" start="19333" end="19357" title="Excision BioTherapeutics" label="Excision BioTherapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19363" end="19370" title="Sangamo" label="Sangamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q422529" start="19534" end="19542" title="nuclease" label="nuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q30256699" start="19624" end="19632" title="BioNTech" label="BioNTech"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081612" start="19634" end="19654" title="Moderna Therapeutics" label="Moderna Therapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144473" start="19659" end="19666" title="CureVac" label="CureVac"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="19688" end="19692" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974682" start="19755" end="19762" title="Alnylam" label="Alnylam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19764" end="19787" title="Dicerna Pharmaceuticals" label="Dicerna Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079531" start="19793" end="19814" title="Ionis Pharmaceuticals" label="Ionis Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q203221" start="19836" end="19841" title="siRNA" label="siRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q410083" start="20019" end="20022" title="Polyethylene glycol" label="PEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q110127772" start="20057" end="20071" title="protein corona" label="protein corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q425649" start="20093" end="20105" title="LDL receptor" label="LDL receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="20220" end="20226" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="20542" end="20549" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q539568" start="20612" end="20624" title="angiogenesis" label="angiogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501344" start="20713" end="20722" title="Gendicine" label="Gendicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560099" start="20727" end="20735" title="Oncorine" label="Oncorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605697" start="20765" end="20772" title="Rexin G" label="Rexin G"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311663" start="20890" end="20910" title="Suicide gene" label="suicide gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560099" start="21022" end="21037" title="oncolytic virus" label="oncolytic virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795487" start="21156" end="21160" title="mRNA vaccine" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q129322330" start="21373" end="21397" title="Afamitresgene autoleucel" label="Afamitresgene autoleucel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619315" start="21498" end="21514" title="synovial sarcoma" label="synovial sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="22029" end="22048" title="sickle cell disease" label="sickle cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="22068" end="22096" title="autosomal recessive disorder" label="autosomal recessive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="22131" end="22140" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682229" start="22390" end="22427" title="Gene therapy of the human retina" label="Gene therapy has been used in the eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="22464" end="22486" title="adeno-associated virus" label="adeno-associated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988385" start="22496" end="22517" title="Voretigene neparvovec" label="Voretigene neparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262161" start="22555" end="22595" title="Leber&amp;#x27;s hereditary optic neuropathy" label="Leber&amp;#x27;s hereditary optic neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572516" start="22597" end="22617" title="alipogene tiparvovec" label="alipogene tiparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527888" start="22635" end="22647" title="pancreatitis" label="pancreatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56934130" start="22683" end="22692" title="Zolgensma" label="Zolgensma"/>
<link wikidata="Q580290" start="22714" end="22737" title="spinal muscular atrophy" label="spinal muscular atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="22906" end="22909" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="22915" end="22924" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="22942" end="22949" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="23060" end="23088" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="23100" end="23125" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="23951" end="23957" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="24319" end="24332" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="24648" end="24661" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="24663" end="24682" title="high blood pressure" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="24684" end="24708" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="24710" end="24719" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="24725" end="24733" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883991" start="24844" end="24860" title="Weismann barrier" label="Weismann barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q149299" start="25040" end="25051" title="mutagenesis" label="mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q422445" start="25131" end="25152" title="tumor suppressor gene" label="tumor suppressor gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="25181" end="25186" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423538" start="25229" end="25270" title="X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency" label="X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q919283" start="25299" end="25312" title="hematopoietic" label="hematopoietic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189308" start="25376" end="25386" title="retrovirus" label="retrovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708277" start="25423" end="25438" title="T cell leukemia" label="T cell leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="25658" end="25664" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572516" start="25765" end="25785" title="alipogene tiparvovec" label="alipogene tiparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825818" start="26062" end="26077" title="Jesse Gelsinger" label="Jesse Gelsinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="26191" end="26211" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q777473" start="26613" end="26633" title="Declaration of Helsinki" label="Helsinki Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q180442" start="26720" end="26745" title="World Medical Association" label="World Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q641168" start="26954" end="26979" title="Human Genome Organization" label="Human Genome Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="27459" end="27498" title="Department of Health and Human Services" label="Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="29202" end="29217" title="clinical trials" label="clinical trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q362104" start="29267" end="29293" title="Institutional Review Board" label="Institutional Review Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501357" start="29387" end="29398" title="Gene doping" label="Gene doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513555" start="29516" end="29539" title="Level playing field" label="level the playing field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="29847" end="29857" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495354" start="29868" end="29875" title="Human enhancement" label="improve"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="29927" end="29933" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="29938" end="29950" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="30021" end="30026" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="30717" end="30745" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="31181" end="31194" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139164" start="31271" end="31279" title="germline" label="germline"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="31401" end="31407" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="31531" end="31543" title="human genome" label="human genome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31633" end="31641" title="CRISPR#Society and culture" label="reported"/>
<link wikidata="Q964754" start="31653" end="31667" title="basic research" label="basic research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="31680" end="31683" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="31698" end="31711" title="human embryos" label="human embryos"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="31754" end="31782" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352382" start="31787" end="31815" title="National Academy of Medicine" label="National Academy of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="32098" end="32105" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="32561" end="32590" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300359" start="32621" end="32644" title="William French Anderson" label="William French Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055374" start="32735" end="32765" title="adenosine deaminase deficiency" label="adenosine deaminase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q282142" start="33308" end="33320" title="glioblastoma" label="glioblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679953" start="33772" end="33789" title="Claudio Bordignon" label="Claudio Bordignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551506" start="33806" end="33841" title="Vita-Salute San Raffaele University" label="Vita-Salute San Raffaele University"/>
<link wikidata="Q514525" start="33892" end="33915" title="hematopoietic stem cell" label="hematopoietic stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="33965" end="33984" title="hereditary diseases" label="hereditary diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334408" start="34158" end="34191" title="severe combined immune deficiency" label="severe combined immune deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="34590" end="34607" title="genetic screening" label="genetic screening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212935" start="34650" end="34658" title="placenta" label="placenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q172563" start="34663" end="34677" title="umbilical cord" label="umbilical cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="34730" end="34736" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q356093" start="34752" end="34771" title="adenosine deaminase" label="adenosine deaminase"/>
<link wikidata="Q193529" start="35088" end="35094" title="T cell" label="T cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574299" start="35232" end="35245" title="Luigi Naldini" label="Luigi Naldini"/>
<link wikidata="Q87886075" start="35250" end="35262" title="Didier Trono" label="Didier Trono"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="35318" end="35321" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155135" start="35446" end="35480" title="Lentiviral vector in gene therapy" label="lentivirals vector in gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825818" start="35483" end="35498" title="Jesse Gelsinger" label="Jesse Gelsinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q282142" start="35986" end="35998" title="glioblastoma" label="glioblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="36436" end="36455" title="Sickle cell disease" label="Sickle cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496436" start="36600" end="36616" title="fetal hemoglobin" label="fetal hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212272" start="36704" end="36715" title="hydroxyurea" label="hydroxyurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="36957" end="36970" title="messenger RNA" label="messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="37043" end="37055" title="thalassaemia" label="thalassaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178194" start="37057" end="37072" title="cystic fibrosis" label="cystic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q410454" start="37112" end="37121" title="liposomes" label="liposomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q465608" start="37195" end="37211" title="nuclear membrane" label="nuclear membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q410454" start="37312" end="37321" title="liposomes" label="liposomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="37334" end="37341" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q410083" start="37349" end="37368" title="polyethylene glycol" label="polyethylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="37428" end="37447" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819370" start="37466" end="37485" title="double-stranded RNA" label="double-stranded RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q203221" start="37514" end="37519" title="siRNA" label="siRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501344" start="37718" end="37727" title="Gendicine" label="Gendicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422445" start="37771" end="37787" title="tumor suppressor" label="tumor suppressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="37793" end="37796" title="p53" label="p53"/>
<link wikidata="Q193447" start="37817" end="37827" title="adenovirus" label="adenovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783924" start="37884" end="37921" title="Head and neck cancer" label="head and neck squamous cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165663" start="38045" end="38074" title="chronic granulomatous disease" label="chronic granulomatous disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956561" start="38100" end="38107" title="myeloid" label="myeloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="38130" end="38143" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="38334" end="38350" title="organ transplant" label="organ transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="38590" end="38598" title="microRNA" label="microRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="38882" end="38890" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q376266" start="38913" end="38927" title="Cytotoxic T cell" label="killer T cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427096" start="39049" end="39062" title="immunotherapy" label="immunotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="39084" end="39087" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q374232" start="39100" end="39110" title="lentivirus" label="lentiviral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298489" start="39111" end="39117" title="viral vector" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362279" start="39132" end="39141" title="Sense (molecular biology)" label="antisense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380903" start="39159" end="39171" title="HIV envelope" label="HIV envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180990" start="39178" end="39200" title="phase I clinical trial" label="phase I clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q583050" start="39285" end="39299" title="antiretroviral" label="antiretroviral"/>
<link wikidata="Q379071" start="39356" end="39366" title="autologous" label="autologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q412587" start="39367" end="39370" title="CD4" label="CD4"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="39615" end="39622" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="39634" end="39642" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="39833" end="39848" title="retinal disease" label="retinal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811132" start="39962" end="39995" title="Leber&amp;#x27;s congenital amaurosis" label="Leber&amp;#x27;s congenital amaurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031223" start="40056" end="40061" title="RPE65" label="RPE65"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="40167" end="40189" title="adeno-associated virus" label="adeno-associated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317719" start="40516" end="40535" title="trichromatic vision" label="trichromatic vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q309200" start="40539" end="40555" title="squirrel monkeys" label="squirrel monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="40602" end="40618" title="genetic disorder" label="genetic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q366964" start="40626" end="40646" title="adrenoleukodystrophy" label="adrenoleukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q374232" start="40671" end="40681" title="lentivirus" label="lentivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912808" start="40725" end="40730" title="ABCD1" label="ABCD1"/>
<link wikidata="Q432396" start="40852" end="40865" title="achromatopsia" label="achromatopsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q147298" start="40905" end="40909" title="Cone (vision)" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616632" start="41142" end="41158" title="beta thalassemia" label="beta thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103824" start="41235" end="41248" title="blood disease" label="blood disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q424422" start="41258" end="41274" title="HBB" label="beta haemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="41333" end="41351" title="blood transfusions" label="blood transfusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="41453" end="41459" title="Bone marrow" label="marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128050" start="41733" end="41755" title="Bone marrow transplant" label="Bone marrow transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667296" start="42270" end="42287" title="Timothy Ray Brown" label="Timothy Ray Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128050" start="42318" end="42357" title="hematopoietic stem cell transplantation" label="hematopoietic stem cell transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773075" start="42368" end="42404" title="allogeneic stem cell transplantation" label="allogeneic stem cell transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773075" start="42406" end="42444" title="allogeneic bone marrow transplantation" label="allogeneic bone marrow transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773075" start="42446" end="42465" title="allotransplantation" label="allotransplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q418404" start="42516" end="42520" title="CCR5" label="CCR5"/>
<link wikidata="Q322177" start="42609" end="42617" title="Ablation therapy" label="ablation"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="42630" end="42641" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088156" start="42760" end="42788" title="chronic lymphocytic leukemia" label="chronic lymphocytic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193529" start="42834" end="42841" title="T cells" label="T cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q798033" start="42877" end="42881" title="CD19" label="CD19"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937205" start="43053" end="43082" title="Human HGF plasmid DNA therapy" label="Human HGF plasmid DNA therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="43086" end="43100" title="cardiomyocytes" label="cardiomyocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="43148" end="43171" title="coronary artery disease" label="coronary artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="43239" end="43260" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314402" start="43272" end="43284" title="Neovasculgen" label="Neovasculgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q378681" start="43367" end="43392" title="peripheral artery disease" label="peripheral artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316059" start="43404" end="43426" title="critical limb ischemia" label="critical limb ischemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29725" start="43462" end="43466" title="VEGF" label="VEGF"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="43487" end="43494" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43508" end="43520" title="Cytomegalovirus#Genetic engineering" label="CMV promoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29725" start="43552" end="43556" title="VEGF" label="VEGF"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="43616" end="43627" title="thalassemia" label="thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="43748" end="43773" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572516" start="43900" end="43920" title="Alipogene tiparvovec" label="Alipogene tiparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349695" start="43949" end="43978" title="lipoprotein lipase deficiency" label="lipoprotein lipase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527888" start="44003" end="44015" title="pancreatitis" label="pancreatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="44056" end="44075" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="44503" end="44519" title="multiple myeloma" label="multiple myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193529" start="44654" end="44661" title="T cells" label="T cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q17911226" start="44681" end="44689" title="NY-ESO-1" label="NY-ESO-1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44694" end="44700" title="LAGE-1" label="LAGE-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q180664" start="44833" end="44859" title="acute lymphocytic leukemia" label="acute lymphocytic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193529" start="44963" end="44970" title="T cells" label="T cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q798033" start="44997" end="45001" title="CD19" label="CD19"/>
<link wikidata="Q188930" start="45035" end="45041" title="B cell" label="B cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="45502" end="45515" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q24785512" start="45568" end="45573" title="SERCA" label="SERCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="45640" end="45668" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326544" start="45690" end="45710" title="breakthrough therapy" label="breakthrough therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120682" start="46080" end="46108" title="metachromatic leukodystrophy" label="metachromatic leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q953638" start="46191" end="46215" title="Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome" label="Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055374" start="46473" end="46533" title="Adenosine deaminase deficiency" label="adenosine deaminase severe combined immunodeficiency disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q179217" start="47094" end="47109" title="clotting factor" label="clotting factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397009" start="47166" end="47179" title="choroideremia" label="choroideremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912966" start="47249" end="47253" title="Rab escort protein" label="REP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q418404" start="47700" end="47704" title="CCR5" label="CCR5"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="47807" end="47826" title="sickle cell disease" label="sickle cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975367" start="47862" end="47879" title="LentiGlobin BB305" label="LentiGlobin BB305"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616632" start="47950" end="47966" title="beta thalassemia" label="beta thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q285697" start="48157" end="48173" title="recombinant gene" label="recombinant gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003054" start="48185" end="48214" title="broadly neutralizing antibody" label="broadly neutralizing antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="48249" end="48252" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="48291" end="48299" title="antibody" label="antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="48528" end="48534" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q56068" start="48536" end="48551" title="Jennifer Doudna" label="Jennifer Doudna"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="48947" end="48959" title="human genome" label="human genome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48994" end="49005" title="Gene drive#CRISPR" label="CRISPR-Cas9"/>
<link wikidata="Q923020" start="49149" end="49170" title="epidermolysis bullosa" label="epidermolysis bullosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833921" start="49455" end="49460" title="Transcription activator-like effector nuclease" label="TALEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q180664" start="49576" end="49605" title="acute lymphoblastic leukaemia" label="acute lymphoblastic leukaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q780128" start="49790" end="49836" title="Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use" label="Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="49844" end="49869" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313411" start="49911" end="49921" title="Strimvelis" label="Strimvelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055374" start="50002" end="50032" title="adenosine deaminase deficiency" label="adenosine deaminase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208025" start="50386" end="50398" title="Programmed cell death protein 1" label="PD-1 protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="50477" end="50503" title="Cochrane (organisation)" label="Cochrane systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q420470" start="50540" end="50599" title="Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator" label="topical cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343414" start="51026" end="51037" title="Kite Pharma" label="Kite Pharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099363" start="51081" end="51086" title="CAR-T" label="CAR-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138590" start="51134" end="51154" title="non-Hodgkin lymphoma" label="non-Hodgkin lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="51240" end="51259" title="sickle cell disease" label="sickle cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314624" start="51290" end="51306" title="tisagenlecleucel" label="tisagenlecleucel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180664" start="51311" end="51339" title="acute lymphoblastic leukemia" label="acute lymphoblastic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537484" start="51364" end="51386" title="adoptive cell transfer" label="adoptive cell transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188930" start="51399" end="51405" title="B-cell" label="B-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q193529" start="51436" end="51443" title="T cells" label="T cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="51483" end="51505" title="genetically engineered" label="genetically engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q412037" start="51525" end="51540" title="T-cell receptor" label="T-cell receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q798033" start="51714" end="51718" title="CD19" label="CD19"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314851" start="51859" end="51882" title="axicabtagene ciloleucel" label="axicabtagene ciloleucel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100" start="51935" end="51947" title="Biophysics" label="biophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205179" start="51952" end="51961" title="Do-it-yourself biology" label="biohacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q24045393" start="51962" end="51975" title="Josiah Zayner" label="Josiah Zayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417809" start="52139" end="52159" title="Sangamo Therapeutics" label="Sangamo Therapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q495377" start="52178" end="52198" title="Richmond, California" label="Richmond, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533489" start="52233" end="52259" title="human gene editing therapy" label="human gene editing therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529983" start="52356" end="52371" title="Hunter syndrome" label="Hunter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="52475" end="52478" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q204773" start="52613" end="52633" title="zinc finger nuclease" label="zinc finger nuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q410137" start="52733" end="52744" title="factor VIII" label="factor VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092064" start="52759" end="52772" title="haemophilia A" label="haemophilia A"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988385" start="53035" end="53056" title="voretigene neparvovec" label="voretigene neparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811132" start="53140" end="53173" title="Leber&amp;#x27;s congenital amaurosis" label="Leber&amp;#x27;s congenital amaurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56934130" start="53262" end="53286" title="onasemnogene abeparvovec" label="onasemnogene abeparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q580290" start="53312" end="53335" title="spinal muscular atrophy" label="spinal muscular atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975367" start="53487" end="53511" title="betibeglogene autotemcel" label="betibeglogene autotemcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616632" start="53536" end="53552" title="beta thalassemia" label="beta thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q906187" start="53605" end="53613" title="Allergan" label="Allergan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23131313" start="53618" end="53633" title="Editas Medicine" label="Editas Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811132" start="53705" end="53731" title="Leber congenital amaurosis" label="Leber congenital amaurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="53774" end="53780" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="53793" end="53800" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533489" start="53807" end="53833" title="human gene editing therapy" label="human gene editing therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107400400" start="53963" end="53987" title="Exagamglogene autotemcel" label="Exagamglogene autotemcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="53991" end="53997" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533489" start="54004" end="54030" title="human gene editing therapy" label="human gene editing therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="54045" end="54056" title="sickle cell" label="sickle cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="54061" end="54072" title="thalassemia" label="thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031605" start="54352" end="54373" title="SMN2" label="&amp;quot;SMN2&amp;quot; gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q528842" start="54423" end="54444" title="Astellas Pharma" label="Audentes Therapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331454" start="54489" end="54517" title="X-linked myotubular myopathy" label="X-linked myotubular myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q780128" start="54869" end="54915" title="Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use" label="Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="54930" end="54955" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q108887202" start="55071" end="55079" title="Libmeldy" label="Libmeldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200359" start="56058" end="56089" title="Sanfilippo syndrome" label="mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="56184" end="56187" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56193" end="56210" title="Viral vector#Lentiviruses" label="lentivirus vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055374" start="56261" end="56269" title="Adenosine deaminase deficiency" label="ADA-SCID"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56353" end="56373" title="Viral vector#Retroviruses" label="retroviruses vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="56441" end="56449" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844603" start="56598" end="56623" title="Familial amyloid polyneuropathy" label="transthyretin amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419999" start="56677" end="56689" title="Transthyretin" label="transthretin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310682" start="56721" end="56727" title="CRISPR gene editing" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57011" end="57018" title="Phases of clinical research#Phase I" label="phase I"/>
<link wikidata="Q30989658" start="57141" end="57187" title="aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency" label="aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q560337" start="57266" end="57283" title="Tay–Sachs disease" label="Tay–Sachs disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="57310" end="57332" title="adeno-associated virus" label="adeno-associated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18026873" start="57376" end="57380" title="HEXA" label="HEXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11516357" start="57565" end="57578" title="adverse event" label="adverse event"/>
<link wikidata="Q112252432" start="57590" end="57613" title="eladocagene exuparvovec" label="eladocagene exuparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562598" start="57719" end="57732" title="haemophilia B" label="haemophilia B"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="57781" end="57803" title="adeno-associated virus" label="adeno-associated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q425360" start="57834" end="57843" title="factor IX" label="factor IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667889" start="58086" end="58122" title="T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia" label="T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349705" start="58151" end="58179" title="Great Ormond Street Hospital" label="Great Ormond Street Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58569" end="58581" title="Genome editing#Editing by nucleobase modification (BASE editing)" label="BASE editing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58590" end="58600" title="#2015" label="previously"/>
<link wikidata="Q180664" start="58619" end="58648" title="acute lymphoblastic leukaemia" label="acute lymphoblastic leukaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833921" start="58663" end="58669" title="TALENs" label="TALENs"/>
<link wikidata="Q119475442" start="58717" end="58738" title="beremagene geperpavec" label="beremagene geperpavec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589131" start="58782" end="58814" title="dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa" label="dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102497" start="58960" end="58966" title="COL7A1" label="COL7A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005771" start="59316" end="59336" title="Accelerated approval (FDA)" label="accelerated approval"/>
<link wikidata="Q120434975" start="59340" end="59348" title="Delandistrogene moxeparvovec" label="Elevidys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648484" start="59353" end="59380" title="Duchenne muscular dystrophy" label="Duchenne muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="59613" end="59616" title="Dalton (unit)" label="kDa"/>
<link wikidata="Q412285" start="59670" end="59680" title="dystrophin" label="dystrophin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="59911" end="59930" title="sickle cell disease" label="sickle cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q107400400" start="59932" end="59956" title="exagamglogene autotemcel" label="exagamglogene autotemcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709344" start="59961" end="59987" title="lovotibeglogene autotemcel" label="lovotibeglogene autotemcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q112252432" start="60051" end="60074" title="eladocagene exuparvovec" label="eladocagene exuparvovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120959" start="60091" end="60107" title="PTC Therapeutics" label="PTC Therapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30989658" start="60145" end="60190" title="Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency" label="aromatic -amino acid decarboxylase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="60214" end="60236" title="adeno-associated virus" label="adeno-associated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q421186" start="60281" end="60299" title="DOPA decarboxylase" label="DOPA decarboxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q550934" start="60329" end="60336" title="putamen" label="putamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="60379" end="60387" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611270" start="60429" end="60441" title="Stereotactic injection" label="stereotactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157138" start="60494" end="60526" title="Gene therapy for color blindness" label="Gene therapy for color blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156787" start="60529" end="60554" title="Gene therapy for epilepsy" label="Gene therapy for epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015958" start="60557" end="60588" title="Gene therapy for osteoarthritis" label="Gene therapy for osteoarthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155541" start="60591" end="60631" title="Gene therapy in Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Gene therapy in Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682229" start="60634" end="60666" title="Gene therapy of the human retina" label="Gene therapy of the human retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359001" start="60669" end="60691" title="List of gene therapies" label="List of gene therapies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12893" wikidata="Q224192" url="?curid=12893" title="Galatea">
<text>Galatea is an ancient Greek name meaning &quot;she who is milk-white&quot;.

Galatea, Galathea or Gallathea may refer to:

==In mythology==
* Galatea, three different mythological figures from Greek mythology

==In the arts==
* &quot;Aci, Galatea e Polifemo&quot;, cantata by Handel
* &quot;Galatea&quot; (Raphael), or &quot;The Triumph of Galatea&quot;, a 1512 fresco of Ovid&#x27;s sea-nymph
* &quot;Gallathea&quot;, a late sixteenth-century play by John Lyly
* &quot;Galatea, or Pygmalion Reversed&quot;, an 1883 musical comedy by Henry Pottinger Stephens, W. Webster and Meyer Lutz
* &quot;Galatea&quot;, a 2009 play by Lawrence Aronovitch
* &quot;La Galatea&quot;, a sixteenth-century pastoral novel by Miguel de Cervantes
* &quot;Galatea&quot; (novel), a 1953 novel by James M. Cain
* &quot;Galatea&quot;, a 1976 novel by Philip Pullman
* &quot;&quot;, a 1977 ballet film with Ekaterina Maximova and Māris Liepa
* &quot;Galatea 2.2&quot;, a 1995 novel by Richard Powers
* &quot;Galatea&quot; (video game), released in 2000
* Galatea, a main figure in the &quot;Pygmalion and the Image&quot; series of four paintings by Sir Edward Coley Burne-Jones (1878)
* Galatea, a major character in Pamphilus de amore, a widely-read poem from 1200
* &quot;Galatea of the Spheres&quot;, a 1952 painting by Salvador Dalí

==Fictional characters==
* Galatea, in the manga &quot;Claymore&quot; by Norihiro Yagi
* Galatea, an android in the 2007 novel &quot;Soon I Will Be Invincible&quot; by Austin Grossman
* Galatea, a villain in the 1990s Japanese anime series &quot;Bubblegum Crisis: Tokyo 2040&quot;
* Galatea, a supervillain appearing in &quot;Justice League Unlimited&quot;
* Galatea, a female robot in the film &quot;Bicentennial Man&quot;
* Galathea, a cow in the J. R. R. Tolkien novel &quot;Farmer Giles of Ham&quot;
* Galatea, a character in the mobile game &quot;Fate/Grand Order&quot;
* Galatea Dunkel, in the 1957 novel &quot;On the Road&quot; by Jack Kerouac

==In science==
* 74 Galatea, a large main belt asteroid
* Galatea, a moon of Neptune
* &quot;Galathea&quot;, a genus of squat lobsters
* Galatea, common name for plants of the genus &quot;Dieffenbachia&quot; 
* &quot;Galatea&quot;, a taxonomic synonym for the plant genus &quot;Galatella&quot;

==Places==
* Galatea, New Zealand, a village in the North Island
* Galatea, Ohio, a community in the United States
* Mount Galatea, in the Canadian Rockies
* Galathea National Park, a national park in the Nicobar Islands, India

==Ships==
* List of ships named &quot;Galatea&quot;

==Other uses==
* &quot;Galatea&quot; (locomotive), a preserved example of the LMS Jubilee class of steam locomotive
* Galatea II a Thoroughbred racehorse
* Galatea, a type of cotton twill fabric
* Galatea AB, a Swedish beverage distributor

==See also==
* Galathée (disambiguation)
* Galatia (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224192" start="0" end="7" title="Galatea" label="Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q224192" start="77" end="84" title="Galatea" label="Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q224192" start="86" end="94" title="Galatea" label="Galathea"/>
<link wikidata="Q224192" start="98" end="107" title="Galatea" label="Gallathea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094023" start="142" end="149" title="Galatea (Greek myth)" label="Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626977" start="234" end="257" title="Aci, Galatea e Polifemo" label="Aci, Galatea e Polifemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344368" start="285" end="314" title="Galatea (Raphael)" label="&amp;quot;Galatea&amp;quot; (Raphael)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518881" start="402" end="411" title="Gallathea" label="Gallathea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518033" start="470" end="500" title="Galatea, or Pygmalion Reversed" label="Galatea, or Pygmalion Reversed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503814" start="624" end="643" title="Lawrence Aronovitch" label="Lawrence Aronovitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348040" start="652" end="662" title="La Galatea" label="La Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q112741131" start="730" end="757" title="Galatea (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Galatea&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q190220" start="828" end="842" title="Philip Pullman" label="Philip Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q254142" start="883" end="901" title="Ekaterina Maximova" label="Ekaterina Maximova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637804" start="906" end="917" title="Māris Liepa" label="Māris Liepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518037" start="926" end="937" title="Galatea 2.2" label="Galatea 2.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518036" start="978" end="1010" title="Galatea (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Galatea&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263012" start="1061" end="1103" title="Pygmalion and the Image Series" label="&amp;quot;Pygmalion and the Image&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q9054920" start="1193" end="1211" title="Pamphilus de amore" label="Pamphilus de amore"/>
<link wikidata="Q137457" start="1250" end="1272" title="Galatea of the Spheres" label="Galatea of the Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q476230" start="1369" end="1377" title="Claymore (manga)" label="Claymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562688" start="1447" end="1472" title="Soon I Will Be Invincible" label="Soon I Will Be Invincible"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1560" end="1588" title="Bubblegum Crisis: Tokyo 2040" label="Bubblegum Crisis: Tokyo 2040"/>
<link wikidata="Q948668" start="1597" end="1604" title="Galatea (Justice League Unlimited)" label="Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669712" start="1640" end="1664" title="Justice League Unlimited" label="Justice League Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q170250" start="1709" end="1737" title="Bicentennial Man (film)" label="&amp;quot;Bicentennial Man&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q471398" start="1792" end="1811" title="Farmer Giles of Ham" label="Farmer Giles of Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18339082" start="1866" end="1882" title="Fate/Grand Order" label="Fate/Grand Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q743180" start="1931" end="1942" title="On the Road" label="On the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q156855" start="1983" end="1993" title="74 Galatea" label="74 Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19464" start="2024" end="2031" title="Galatea (moon)" label="Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592851" start="2059" end="2067" title="Galathea" label="Galathea"/>
<link wikidata="Q738915" start="2154" end="2167" title="Dieffenbachia" label="Dieffenbachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q278396" start="2244" end="2253" title="Galatella" label="Galatella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518032" start="2274" end="2294" title="Galatea, New Zealand" label="Galatea, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133763" start="2328" end="2341" title="Galatea, Ohio" label="Galatea, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920852" start="2378" end="2391" title="Mount Galatea" label="Mount Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979723" start="2419" end="2441" title="Galathea National Park" label="Galathea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q87652757" start="2502" end="2541" title="list of ships named Galatea" label="List of ships named &amp;quot;Galatea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459117" start="2560" end="2592" title="LMS Jubilee Class 5699 Galatea" label="&amp;quot;Galatea&amp;quot; (locomotive)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518035" start="2661" end="2671" title="Galatea II" label="Galatea II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="2718" end="2724" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17987915" start="2799" end="2824" title="Galathée (disambiguation)" label="Galathée (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174879" start="2827" end="2851" title="Galatia (disambiguation)" label="Galatia (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12896" wikidata="Q79948" url="?curid=12896" title="Gulf of Oman">
<text>The Gulf of Oman or Sea of Oman ( &quot;khalīj ʿumān&quot;; &quot;daryâ-ye omân&quot;), also known as Gulf of Makran or Sea of Makran ( &quot;khalīj makrān&quot;; &quot;daryâ-ye makrān&quot;), is a gulf in the Indian Ocean that connects the Arabian Sea with the Strait of Hormuz, which then runs to the Persian Gulf. It borders Iran and Pakistan on the north, Oman on the south, and the United Arab Emirates on the west.

==Extent==
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Gulf of Oman as follows:

==Exclusive economic zone==
Exclusive economic zones in Gulf of Oman:

==Bordering countries==
Coastline length of bordering countries:

# - 850 km coastline
# - 750 km coastline
# - 50 km coastline
# - 50 km coastline

==Alternative names==


The Gulf of Oman historically and geographically has been referred to by different names by Arabian, Iranian, Indian, Pakistani, and European geographers and travelers, including Makran Sea and Akhzar Sea.

# Makran Sea
# Akhzar Sea
# Persian Sea (consists of the whole of the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman)

Until the 18th century, it was known as Makran Sea and is also visible on historical maps and museums.

==Major ports==
*Port of Fujairah, Fujairah, United Arab Emirates
*Khor Fakkan Container Terminal, Khor Fakkan, United Arab Emirates
*Port of Chabahar, Chabahar, Iran
*Port Sultan Qaboos, Muttrah, Oman

== International trade ==
The Western side of the gulf connects to the Strait of Hormuz, a strategic route through which a third of the world&#x27;s liquefied natural gas and 20% of global oil consumption passes from Middle East producers.

==Ecology==
In 2018, scientists confirmed the Gulf of Oman contains one of the world&#x27;s largest marine dead zones, where the ocean contains little or no oxygen and marine wildlife cannot exist. The dead zone encompasses nearly the entire Gulf of Oman and equivalent to the size of Florida, United States of America. The cause is a combination of increased ocean warming and increased runoff of nitrogen and phosphorus from fertilizers.

==International underwater rail tunnel==
In 2018, a rail tunnel under the sea was suggested to link the UAE with the western coast of India. The bullet train tunnel would be supported by pontoons and be nearly in length.

== Pop culture ==
In the &quot;Battlefield&quot; video game series, the Gulf of Oman is a map used in &quot;Battlefield 2&quot;, &quot;Battlefield 3&quot;, &quot;Battlefield Play4Free&quot; and &quot;Battlefield 4&quot; with the United States Marines Corps (USMC) invading the shore of Oman with the fictional Middle Eastern Coalition (MEC) defending it in Battlefield 2, and with Russian Ground Forces defending it in Play4Free, Battlefield 3 and Battlefield 4.

==See also==
* Eastern Arabia
* Musandam Peninsula
* History of the United Arab Emirates#The pearling industry and the Portuguese empire: 16th - 18th century
* Saeed bin Butti#Perpetual Maritime Truce
* Sultan bin Saqr Al Qasimi#Perpetual Maritime Truce of 1853
* Persian Gulf campaign of 1809
* Persian Gulf campaign of 1819
* General Maritime Treaty of 1820
* May 2019 Gulf of Oman incident
* June 2019 Gulf of Oman incident

==References==
== Further reading ==
* &quot;The Book of Duarte Barbosa&quot; by Duarte Barbosa, Mansel Longworth Dames. 1989. p. 79. 
* &quot;The Natural History of Pliny&quot;. by Pliny, Henry Thomas Riley, John Bostock. 1855. p. 117
* &quot;The Countries and Tribes of the Persian Gulf&quot; by Samuel Barrett Miles - 1966. p. 148
* &quot;The Life &amp; Strange Surprising Adventures of Robinson Crusoe of York, Mariner&quot;. by Daniel Defoe. 1895. p. 279
* &quot;The Outline of History: Being a Plain History of Life and Mankind&quot;. by Herbert George Well. 1920. p. 379.
* &quot;The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge&quot; by Johann Jakob Herzog, Philip Schaff, Albert Hauck. 1910. p. 242</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="4" end="16" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Gulf of Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="20" end="31" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Sea of Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="102" end="116" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Gulf of Makran"/>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="120" end="133" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Sea of Makran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322134" start="198" end="202" title="gulf" label="gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="210" end="222" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="241" end="252" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79883" start="262" end="278" title="Strait of Hormuz" label="Strait of Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="303" end="315" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="328" end="332" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="337" end="345" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="360" end="364" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="387" end="407" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="437" end="476" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="International Hydrographic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="557" end="581" title="Exclusive economic zones" label="Exclusive economic zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q676141" start="624" end="640" title="Coastline length" label="Coastline length"/>
<link wikidata="Q695111" start="952" end="958" title="Makran" label="Makran"/>
<link wikidata="Q12246913" start="1203" end="1219" title="Port of Fujairah" label="Port of Fujairah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045" start="1221" end="1229" title="Fujairah" label="Fujairah"/>
<link wikidata="Q764279" start="1285" end="1296" title="Khor Fakkan" label="Khor Fakkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231108" start="1320" end="1336" title="Port of Chabahar" label="Port of Chabahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q862466" start="1338" end="1346" title="Chabahar" label="Chabahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327342" start="1354" end="1372" title="Port Sultan Qaboos" label="Port Sultan Qaboos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166791" start="1374" end="1381" title="Muttrah" label="Muttrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q79883" start="1460" end="1476" title="Strait of Hormuz" label="Strait of Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="1538" end="1559" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131192" start="1578" end="1593" title="List of countries by oil exports" label="oil consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1606" end="1617" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236263" start="1730" end="1747" title="Dead zone (ecology)" label="marine dead zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q14868764" start="1990" end="2003" title="ocean warming" label="ocean warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="2216" end="2228" title="High-speed rail" label="bullet train"/>
<link wikidata="Q474587" start="2324" end="2335" title="Battlefield (video game series)" label="Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q206653" start="2401" end="2414" title="Battlefield 2" label="Battlefield 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q791454" start="2428" end="2441" title="Battlefield 3" label="Battlefield 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q791432" start="2455" end="2476" title="Battlefield Play4Free" label="Battlefield Play4Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618557" start="2493" end="2506" title="Battlefield 4" label="Battlefield 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="2522" end="2556" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marines Corps (USMC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031386" start="2674" end="2695" title="Russian Ground Forces" label="Russian Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165357" start="2772" end="2786" title="Eastern Arabia" label="Eastern Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246200" start="2789" end="2807" title="Musandam Peninsula" label="Musandam Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2810" end="2914" title="History of the United Arab Emirates#The pearling industry and the Portuguese empire: 16th - 18th century" label="History of the United Arab Emirates#The pearling industry and the Portuguese empire: 16th - 18th century"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2917" end="2957" title="Saeed bin Butti#Perpetual Maritime Truce" label="Saeed bin Butti#Perpetual Maritime Truce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2960" end="3018" title="Sultan bin Saqr Al Qasimi#Perpetual Maritime Truce of 1853" label="Sultan bin Saqr Al Qasimi#Perpetual Maritime Truce of 1853"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170213" start="3021" end="3050" title="Persian Gulf campaign of 1809" label="Persian Gulf campaign of 1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746515" start="3053" end="3082" title="Persian Gulf campaign of 1819" label="Persian Gulf campaign of 1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532020" start="3085" end="3116" title="General Maritime Treaty of 1820" label="General Maritime Treaty of 1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q63830384" start="3119" end="3149" title="May 2019 Gulf of Oman incident" label="May 2019 Gulf of Oman incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q64590471" start="3152" end="3183" title="June 2019 Gulf of Oman incident" label="June 2019 Gulf of Oman incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751582" start="3282" end="3304" title="Mansel Longworth Dames" label="Mansel Longworth Dames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729156" start="3374" end="3392" title="Henry Thomas Riley" label="Henry Thomas Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222522" start="3394" end="3406" title="John Bostock (physician)" label="John Bostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429036" start="3483" end="3503" title="Samuel Barrett Miles" label="Samuel Barrett Miles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12898" wikidata="Q128234" url="?curid=12898" title="Grammatical case">
<text>A grammatical case is a category of nouns and noun modifiers (determiners, adjectives, participles, and numerals) that corresponds to one or more potential grammatical functions for a nominal group in a wording. In various languages, nominal groups consisting of a noun and its modifiers belong to one of a few such categories. For instance, in English, one says &quot;I see them&quot; and &quot;they see me&quot;: the nominative pronouns &quot;I/they&quot; represent the perceiver, and the accusative pronouns &quot;me/them&quot; represent the phenomenon perceived. Here, nominative and accusative are cases, that is, categories of pronouns corresponding to the functions they have in representation.

English has largely lost its inflected case system but personal pronouns still have three cases, which are simplified forms of the nominative, accusative (including functions formerly handled by the dative) and genitive cases. They are used with personal pronouns: subjective case (I, you, he, she, it, we, they, who, whoever), objective case (me, you, him, her, it, us, them, whom, whomever) and possessive case (my, mine; your, yours; his; her, hers; its; our, ours; their, theirs; whose; whosever). Forms such as &quot;I&quot;, &quot;he&quot; and &quot;we&quot; are used for the subject (&quot;I kicked John&quot;), and forms such as &quot;me&quot;, &quot;him&quot; and &quot;us&quot; are used for the object (&quot;John kicked me&quot;).

As a language evolves, cases can merge (for instance, in Ancient Greek, the locative case merged with the dative), a phenomenon known as syncretism.

Languages such as Sanskrit, Kannada, Latin, Tamil, Russian and Sinhala have extensive case systems, with nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and determiners all inflecting (usually by means of different suffixes) to indicate their case. The number of cases differs between languages: Persian has three; modern English has three but for pronouns only; Torlakian dialects, Classical and Modern Standard Arabic have three; German, Icelandic, Modern Greek, and Irish have four; Albanian, Romanian and Ancient Greek have five; Bengali, Latin, Russian, Slovak, Kajkavian, Slovenian, and Turkish each have at least six; Armenian, Czech, Georgian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Polish, Serbo-Croatian and Ukrainian have seven; Mongolian, Marathi, Sanskrit, Kannada, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Assamese and Greenlandic have eight; Old Nubian and Sinhala have nine; Basque has 13; Estonian has 14; Finnish has 15; Hungarian has 18; and Tsez has at least 36 cases.

Commonly encountered cases include nominative, accusative, dative and genitive. A role that one of those languages marks by case is often marked in English with a preposition. For example, the English prepositional phrase &quot;with (his) foot&quot; (as in &quot;John kicked the ball with his foot&quot;) might be rendered in Russian using a single noun in the instrumental case, or in Ancient Greek as (, meaning &quot;the foot&quot;) with both words (the definite article, and the noun () &quot;foot&quot;) changing to dative form.

More formally, case has been defined as &quot;a system of marking dependent nouns for the type of relationship they bear to their heads&quot;. Cases should be distinguished from thematic roles such as &quot;agent&quot; and &quot;patient&quot;. They are often closely related, and in languages such as Latin, several thematic roles are realised by a somewhat fixed case for deponent verbs, but cases are a syntagmatic/phrasal category, and thematic roles are the function of a syntagma/phrase in a larger structure. Languages having cases often exhibit free word order, as thematic roles are not required to be marked by position in the sentence.

== History ==
It is widely accepted that the Ancient Greeks had a certain idea of the forms of a name in their own language. A fragment of Anacreon seems to prove this. Grammatical cases were first recognized by the Stoics and from some philosophers of the Peripatetic school. The advancements of those philosophers were later employed by the philologists of the Library of Alexandria.

== Etymology ==
The English word &quot;case&quot; used in this sense comes from the Latin , which is derived from the verb , &quot;to fall&quot;, from the Proto-Indo-European root &quot;&quot;. The Latin word is a calque of the Greek , , lit. &quot;falling, fall&quot;. The sense is that all other cases are considered to have &quot;fallen&quot; away from the nominative. This imagery is also reflected in the word &quot;declension&quot;, from Latin , &quot;to lean&quot;, from the PIE root &quot;&quot;.

The equivalent to &quot;case&quot; in several other European languages also derives from &quot;casus&quot;, including in French, in Italian and in German. The Russian word (&quot;padyézh&quot;) is a calque from Greek and similarly contains a root meaning &quot;fall&quot;, and the German and Czech simply mean &quot;fall&quot;, and are used for both the concept of grammatical case and to refer to physical falls. The Dutch equivalent translates as &#x27;noun case&#x27;, in which &#x27;noun&#x27; has the older meaning of both &#x27;adjective (noun)&#x27; and &#x27;(substantive) noun&#x27;. The Finnish equivalent is , whose main meaning is &quot;position&quot; or &quot;place&quot;. 

Similar to Latin, Sanskrit uses the term विभक्ति &quot;(vibhakti)&quot; which may be interpreted as the specific or distinct &quot;bendings&quot; or &quot;experiences&quot; of a word, from the verb भुज् &quot;(bhuj)&quot; and the prefix वि &quot;(vi)&quot;, and names the individual cases using ordinal numbers.

== Indo-European languages ==
Although not very prominent in modern English, cases featured much more saliently in Old English and other ancient Indo-European languages, such as Latin, Old Persian, Ancient Greek, and Sanskrit. Historically, the Indo-European languages had eight morphological cases, although modern languages typically have fewer, using prepositions and word order to convey information that had previously been conveyed using distinct noun forms. Among modern languages, cases still feature prominently in most of the Balto-Slavic languages (except Macedonian and Bulgarian), with most having six to eight cases, as well as Icelandic, German and Modern Greek, which have four. In German, cases are mostly marked on articles and adjectives, and less so on nouns. In Icelandic, articles, adjectives, personal names and nouns are all marked for case, making it the most conservative Germanic language.

The eight historical Indo-European cases are as follows, with examples either of the English case or of the English syntactic alternative to case:

All of the above are just rough descriptions; the precise distinctions vary significantly from language to language, and as such they are often more complex. Case is based fundamentally on changes to the noun to indicate the noun&#x27;s role in the sentence – one of the defining features of so-called fusional languages. Old English was a fusional language, but Modern English does not work this way.

===Modern English===
Modern English has largely abandoned the inflectional case system of Proto-Indo-European in favor of analytic constructions. The personal pronouns of Modern English retain morphological case more strongly than any other word class (a remnant of the more extensive case system of Old English). For other pronouns, and all nouns, adjectives, and articles, grammatical function is indicated only by word order, by prepositions, and by the &quot;Saxon genitive&quot; (&quot;-&#x27;s&quot;).

Taken as a whole, English personal pronouns are typically said to have three morphological cases:

* The &quot;nominative case&quot; (&quot;subjective pronouns&quot; such as &quot;I&quot;, &quot;he&quot;, &quot;she&quot;, &quot;we&quot;), used for the subject of a finite verb and sometimes for the complement of a copula.
* The &quot;oblique case&quot; (&quot;object pronouns&quot; such as &quot;me&quot;, &quot;him&quot;, &quot;her&quot;, &quot;us&quot;), used for the direct or indirect object of a verb, for the object of a preposition, for an absolute disjunct, and sometimes for the complement of a copula.
* The &quot;genitive case&quot; (&quot;possessive pronouns&quot; such as &quot;my/mine&quot;, &quot;his&quot;, &quot;her/hers&quot;, &quot;our/ours&quot;), used for a grammatical possessor. This is not always considered to be a case; see .

Most English personal pronouns have five forms: the nominative case form, the oblique case form, a distinct &quot;reflexive&quot; or &quot;intensive&quot; form (such as &quot;myself&quot;, &quot;ourselves&quot;) which is based upon the possessive determiner form but is coreferential to a preceding instance of nominative or oblique, and the possessive case forms, which include both a &quot;determiner&quot; form (such as &quot;my&quot;, &quot;our&quot;) and a predicatively-used &quot;independent&quot; form (such as &quot;mine&quot;, &quot;ours&quot;) which is distinct (with two exceptions: the third person singular masculine &quot;he&quot; and the third person singular neuter &quot;it&quot;, which use the same form for both determiner and independent [&quot;his car&quot;, &quot;it is his&quot;]). The interrogative personal pronoun &quot;who&quot; exhibits the greatest diversity of forms within the modern English pronoun system, having definite nominative, oblique, and genitive forms (&quot;who&quot;, &quot;whom&quot;, &quot;whose&quot;) and equivalently-coordinating indefinite forms (&quot;whoever&quot;, &quot;whomever&quot;, and &quot;whosever&quot;).

Although English &quot;pronouns&quot; can have subject and object forms (he/him, she/her), &quot;nouns&quot; show only a singular/plural and a possessive/non-possessive distinction (e.g. &quot;chair&quot;, &quot;chairs&quot;, &quot;chair&#x27;s&quot;, &quot;chairs&quot;&#x27;); there is no manifest difference in the form of &quot;chair&quot; between &quot;The chair is here.&quot; (subject) and &quot;I own the chair.&quot; (direct object), a distinction made instead by word order and context.

== Hierarchy of cases ==

Cases can be ranked in the following hierarchy, where a language that does not have a given case will tend not to have any cases to the right of the missing case:

: nominative &quot;or&quot; absolutive → accusative &quot;or&quot; ergative → genitive → dative → locative &quot;or&quot; prepositional → ablative &quot;and/or&quot; instrumental → &quot;others&quot;.

This is, however, only a general tendency. Many forms of Central German, such as Colognian and Luxembourgish, have a dative case but lack a genitive. In Irish nouns, the nominative and accusative have fallen together, whereas the dative–locative has remained separate in some paradigms; Irish also has genitive and vocative cases. In many modern Indo-Aryan languages, the accusative, genitive, and dative have merged to an oblique case, but many of these languages still retain vocative, locative, and ablative cases. Old English had an instrumental case, but neither a locative nor a prepositional case.

== Case order ==
The traditional case order (nom-gen-dat-acc) was expressed for the first time in &quot;The Art of Grammar&quot; in the 2nd century BC:
Latin grammars, such as &quot;Ars grammatica&quot;, followed the Greek tradition, but added the ablative case of Latin. Later other European languages also followed that Graeco-Roman tradition.

However, for some languages, such as Latin, due to case syncretism the order may be changed for convenience, where the accusative or the vocative cases are placed after the nominative and before the genitive. For example:
For similar reasons, the customary order of the four cases in Icelandic is nominative–accusative–dative–genitive, as illustrated below:

Sanskrit similarly arranges cases in the order nominative-accusative-instrumental-dative-ablative-genitive-locative-vocative. The cases are individually named as the &quot;first,&quot; &quot;second,&quot; &quot;third&quot; and so on. For example, the common &quot;when-then&quot; construction is called the सति सप्तमी &quot;(Sati Saptami)&quot; or &quot;The Good Seventh&quot; as it uses the locative, which is the seventh case.

== Case concord systems ==
In the most common case concord system, only the head-word (the noun) in a phrase is marked for case. This system appears in many Papuan languages as well as in Turkic, Mongolian, Quechua, Dravidian, Indo-Aryan, and other languages. In Basque and various Amazonian and Australian languages, only the phrase-final word (not necessarily the noun) is marked for case. In many Indo-European, Finnic, and Semitic languages, case is marked on the noun, the determiner, and usually the adjective. Other systems are less common. In some languages, there is double-marking of a word as both genitive (to indicate semantic role) and another case such as accusative (to establish concord with the head noun).

== Declension paradigms ==
Declension is the process or result of altering nouns to the correct grammatical cases. Languages with rich nominal inflection (using grammatical cases for many purposes) typically have a number of identifiable declension classes, or groups of nouns with a similar pattern of case inflection or declension. Sanskrit has six declension classes, whereas Latin is traditionally considered to have five, and Ancient Greek three. For example, Slovak has fifteen noun declension classes, five for each gender (the number may vary depending on which paradigms are counted or omitted, this mainly concerns those that modify declension of foreign words; refer to article).

In Indo-European languages, declension patterns may depend on a variety of factors, such as gender, number, phonological environment, and irregular historical factors. Pronouns sometimes have separate paradigms. In some languages, particularly Slavic languages, a case may contain different groups of endings depending on whether the word is a noun or an adjective. A single case may contain many different endings, some of which may even be derived from different roots. For example, in Polish, the genitive case has &quot;-a, -u, -ów, -i/-y, -e-&quot; for nouns, and &quot;-ego, -ej, -ich/-ych&quot; for adjectives. To a lesser extent, a noun&#x27;s animacy or humanness may add another layer of complexity. For example, in Russian:

vs.

and

== Examples ==
=== Australian Aboriginal languages ===
Australian languages represent a diversity of case paradigms in terms of their alignment (i.e. nominative-accusative vs. ergative-absolutive) and the morpho-syntactic properties of case inflection including where/how many times across a noun phrase the case morphology will appear. For typical r-expression noun phrases, most Australian languages follow a basic ERG-ABS template with additional cases for peripheral arguments; however, many Australian languages, the function of case marking extends beyond the prototypical function of specifying the syntactic and semantic relation of an NP to a predicate. Dench and Evans (1988) use a five-part system for categorizing the functional roles of case marking in Australian languages. They are enumerated below as they appear in Senge (2015):

# Relational: a suffix which represents syntactic or semantic roles of a noun phrase in clauses.
# Adnominal: a suffix which relates a noun phrase to another within the one noun phrase.
# Referential: a suffix which attaches to a noun phrase in agreement with another noun phrase which represents one of the core arguments in the clause.
# Subordinating: a suffix which attaches to elements of a subordinate clause. Its functions are: (i) specifying temporal or logical (typically, causal and purposive) relationships between two clauses (Temporal-subordinator); (ii) indicating coreferential relationships between arguments in the two clauses (Concord-subordinator).
# Derivational: a suffix which attaches to a bare stem before other case suffixes and create a new lexical item.

To illustrate this paradigm in action, take the case-system of Wanyjirra for whose description Senge invokes this system. Each of the case markers functions in the prototypical relational sense, but many extend into these additional functions:

Wanyjirra is an example of a language in which case marking occurs on all sub-constituents of the NP; see the following example in which the demonstrative, head, and quantifier of the noun phrase all receive ergative marking:

However, this is by no means always the case or even the norm for Australian languages. For many, case-affixes are considered special-clitics (i.e. phrasal-affixes, see Anderson 2005) because they have a singular fixed position within the phrase. For Bardi, the case marker usually appears on the first phrasal constituent while the opposite is the case for Wangkatja (i.e. the case marker is attracted to the rightmost edge of the phrase). See the following examples respectively:

=== Basque ===
Basque has the following cases, with examples given in the indefinite, definite singular, definite plural, and definite close plural of the word &quot;etxe&quot;, &quot;house&quot;, &quot;home&quot;:

* absolutive (&quot;etxe, etxea, etxeak, etxeok&quot;: &quot;house, the / a house, (the / some) houses, these houses&quot;),
* ergative (&quot;etxek, etxeak, etxeek, etxeok&quot;),
* dative (&quot;etxeri, etxeari, etxeei, etxeoi&quot;),
* genitive (&quot;etxeren, etxearen, etxeen, etxeon&quot;),
* destinative (or benefactive: &quot;etxerentzat, etxearentzat, etxeentzat, etxeontzat&quot;),
* motivative (or causal: &quot;etxerengatik, etxearengatik, etxeengatik, etxeongatik&quot;),
* sociative (&quot;etxerekin, etxearekin, etxeekin, etxeokin&quot;),
* instrumental (&quot;etxez, etxeaz, etxeez, etxeoz&quot;),
* locative or inesive (&quot;etxetan, etxean, etxeetan, etxeotan&quot;),
* ablative (&quot;etxetatik, etxetik, exteetatik, etxeotatik&quot;),
* adlative (&quot;etxetara, etxera, etxeetara, etxeotara&quot;),
* directional adlative (&quot;etxetarantz, etxerantz, etxeetarantz, etxeotarantz&quot;),
* terminative adlative (&quot;etxetaraino, etxeraino, etxeetaraino, etxeotaraino&quot;),
* locative genitive (&quot;etxetako, etxeko, etxeetako, etxeotako&quot;),
* prolative (etxetzat), only in the indefinite grammatical number,
* partitive (etxerik), only in the indefinite grammatical number, and
* distributive (&quot;Bost liburu ikasleko banatu dituzte&quot;, &quot;They have handed out five books to each student&quot;), only in the indefinite grammatical number.

Some of them can be re-declined, even more than once, as if they were nouns (usually, from the genitive locative case), although they mainly work as noun modifiers before a noun clause:

* &quot;etxearena&quot; (that which is of the house), &quot;etxearenarekin&quot; (with the one which pertains to the house), 
* &quot;neskarentzako&quot; (which is for the girl), &quot;neskarentzakoan&quot; (in the one which is for the girl), 
* &quot;neskekiko&quot; (which is with the girls), &quot;neskekikoa&quot; (the one which is for the girls), 
* &quot;arazoarengatiko&quot; (which is because of the problem), &quot;arazoarengatikoak&quot; (the ones which are due to the problems), 
* &quot;zurezkoaz&quot; (by means of the wooden one), 
* &quot;etxeetakoaz&quot; (about the one which is in the houses), &quot;etxeetakoari&quot; (to the one which is in the houses), 
* &quot;etxetiko&quot; (which comes from the house), &quot;etxetikoa&quot; (the one which comes from the house), etxetikoari (to the one which comes from the house), 
* &quot;etxeetarako&quot; (which goes to the houses), &quot;etxeetarakoa&quot; (the one which goes to the houses), &quot;etxeetarakoaz&quot; (about the one which goes to the houses), 
* &quot;etxeranzko&quot; (which goes towards the house), &quot;etxeranzkoa&quot; (the one which goes to the house), &quot;etxeranzkoarena&quot; (the one which belongs to the one which goes to the house), 
* &quot;etxerainoko&quot; (which goes up to the house), &quot;etxerainokoa&quot; (the one which goes up to the house), &quot;etxerainokoarekin&quot; (with the one which goes up to the houses)...

=== German ===
In German, grammatical case is largely preserved in the articles and adjectives, but nouns have lost many of their original endings. Below is an example of case inflection in German using the masculine and one of the German words for &quot;sailor&quot;.

* (nominative) &quot;the sailor&quot; [as a subject] (e.g. &quot;Der Seemann steht da&quot; – the sailor is standing there)
* (genitive) &quot;the sailor&#x27;s / [of] the sailor&quot; (e.g. – the name of the sailor is Otto)
* (dative) &quot;[to/for] the sailor&quot; [as an indirect object] (e.g. – I gave a present to the sailor)
* (accusative) &quot;the sailor&quot; [as a direct object] (e.g. – I saw the sailor)

An example with the feminine definite article with the German word for &quot;woman&quot;.

* &quot;die Frau&quot; (nominative) &quot;the woman&quot; [as a subject] (e.g. &quot;Die Frau isst&quot; - the woman is eating)
* &quot;der Frau&quot; (genitive) &quot;the woman&#x27;s / [of] the woman&quot; (e.g. &quot;Die Katze der Frau ist weiß&quot; - the cat of the woman is white)
* &quot;der Frau&quot; (dative) &quot;[to/for] the woman&quot; [as an indirect object] (e.g. &quot;Ich gab der Frau ein Geschenk&quot; - I gave a present to the woman)
* &quot;die Frau&quot; (accusative) &quot;the woman&quot; [as a direct object] (e.g. &quot;Ich sah die Frau&quot; - I saw the woman)

An example with the neuter definite article with the German word for &quot;book&quot;.

* &quot;das Buch (nominative)&quot; &quot;the book&quot; [as a subject] (e.g. &quot;Das Buch ist gut -&quot; the book is good)
* &quot;des Buch(e)s&quot; (genitive) &quot;the book&#x27;s/ [of] the book&quot; (e.g. &quot;Die Seiten des Buchs sind grün&quot; - the pages of the book are green)
* &quot;dem Buch(e)&quot; (dative) &quot;[to/for] the book&quot; [as an indirect object] (e.g. &quot;Ich gab dem Buch einen Titel&quot; - I gave the book a title)
* &quot;das Buch&quot; (accusative) &quot;the book&quot; [as a direct object] (e.g. &quot;Ich sah das Buch&quot; - I saw the book)

Proper names for cities have two genitive nouns:

* &quot;der Hauptbahnhof Berlins&quot; (primary genitive) &quot;the main train station of Berlin&quot;
* &quot;der Berliner Hauptbahnhof&quot; (secondary genitive) &quot;Berlin&#x27;s main train station&quot;

=== Hindi-Urdu ===
Hindi-Urdu (Hindustani) has three noun cases, the &quot;nominative,&quot; &quot;oblique&quot;, and &quot;vocative&quot; cases. The vocative case is now obsolete (but still used in certain regions) and the oblique case doubles as the vocative case. The pronoun cases in Hindi-Urdu are the &quot;nominative&quot;, &quot;ergative&quot;, &quot;accusative, dative&quot;, and two &quot;oblique&quot; cases. The case forms which do not exist for certain pronouns are constructed using primary postpositions (or other grammatical particles) and the oblique case (shown in parentheses in the table below).

The other cases are constructed adpositionally using the case-marking postpositions using the nouns and pronouns in their oblique cases. The oblique case is used exclusively with these 8 case-marking postpositions of Hindi-Urdu forming 10 grammatical cases, which are: &quot;ergative&quot; ने (ne), &quot;dative&quot; and &quot;accusative&quot; को (ko), &quot;instrumental&quot; and &quot;ablative&quot; से (se), &quot;genitive&quot; का (kā), &quot;inessive&quot; में (mẽ), &quot;adessive&quot; पे (pe), &quot;terminative&quot; तक (tak), &quot;semblative&quot; सा (sā).
=== Latin ===
An example of a Latin case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Latin term for &quot;cook&quot;, which belongs to .

* (nominative) &quot;[the] cook&quot; [as a subject] (e.g. – the cook is standing there)
* (genitive) &quot;[the] cook&#x27;s / [of the] cook&quot; (e.g. – the cook&#x27;s name is Claudius)
* (dative) &quot;[to/for the] cook&quot; [as an indirect object] (e.g. – I gave a present to the cook)
* (accusative) &quot;[the] cook&quot; [as a direct object] (e.g. – I saw the cook)
* (ablative) &quot;[by/with/from/in the] cook&quot; [in various uses not covered by the above] (e.g. – I am taller than the cook: ablative of comparison)
* (vocative) &quot;[you] the cook&quot; [addressing the object] (e.g. – I thank you, cook)

For some toponyms, a seventh case, the locative, also exists, such as (in Mediolanum).

The Romance languages have largely abandoned or simplified the grammatical cases of Latin. Much like English, most Romance case markers survive only in pronouns.

=== Lithuanian ===
Typically in Lithuanian, only the inflection changes for the seven different grammatical cases:

* Nominative (&quot;&quot;): – – &quot;This is a dog.&quot;
* Genitive (&quot;&quot;): – – &quot;Tom took the dog&#x27;s bone.&quot;
* Dative (&quot;&quot;): – – &quot;He gave the bone to another dog.&quot;
* Accusative (&quot;&quot;): – – &quot;He washed the dog.&quot;
* Instrumental (&quot;): – – He scared the cats with (using) the dog.
* Locative (&quot;): – – &quot;We&#x27;ll meet at the White Dog (Cafe).&quot;
* Vocative (&quot;&quot;): – – &quot;He shouted: Hey, dog!&quot;

=== Hungarian ===
Hungarian declension is relatively simple with regular suffixes attached to the vast majority of nouns. The following table lists all of the cases used in Hungarian.

=== Russian ===
An example of a Russian case inflection is given below (with explicit stress marks), using the singular forms of the Russian term for &quot;sailor&quot;, which belongs to Russian&#x27;s first declension class.
* (nominative) &quot;[the] sailor&quot; [as a subject] (e.g. : The sailor is standing there)
* (genitive) &quot;[the] sailor&#x27;s / [of the] sailor&quot; (e.g. : The sailor&#x27;s son is an artist)
* (dative) &quot;[to/for the] sailor&quot; [as an indirect object] (e.g. : (They/Someone) gave a present to the sailor)
* (accusative) &quot;[the] sailor&quot; [as a direct object] (e.g. : (I) see the sailor)
* (instrumental) &quot;[with/by the] sailor&quot; (e.g. : (I) have a friendship with the sailor)
* (prepositional) &quot;[about/on/in the] sailor&quot; (e.g. : (I) think about the sailor)

Up to ten additional cases are identified by linguists, although today all of them are either incomplete (do not apply to all nouns or do not form full word paradigm with all combinations of gender and number) or degenerate (appear identical to one of the main six cases). The most recognized additional cases are locative (), partitive (), and two forms of vocative — old () and neo-vocative (). Sometimes, so called count-form (for some countable nouns after numerals) is considered to be a sub-case.

=== Sanskrit ===
Grammatical case was analyzed extensively in Sanskrit. The grammarian Pāṇini identified six semantic roles or &quot;kāraka&quot;, which are related to the following eight Sanskrit cases in order:

For example, in the following sentence &quot;leaf&quot; is the agent (&quot;kartā&quot;, nominative case), &quot;tree&quot; is the source (&quot;apādāna&quot;, ablative case), and &quot;ground&quot; is the locus (&quot;adhikaraṇa&quot;, locative case). The declensions are reflected in the morphemes &quot;-āt&quot;, &quot;-am&quot;, and &quot;-au&quot; respectively.

However, the cases may be deployed for other than the default thematic roles. A notable example is the passive construction. In the following sentence, &quot;Devadatta&quot; is the &quot;kartā&quot;, but appears in the instrumental case, and &quot;rice&quot;, the &quot;karman&quot;, object, is in the nominative case (as subject of the verb). The declensions are reflected in the morphemes &quot;-ena&quot; and &quot;-am&quot;.

=== Tamil ===
The Tamil case system is analyzed in native and missionary grammars as consisting of a finite number of cases. The usual treatment of Tamil case (Arden 1942) is one in which there are seven cases: nominative (first case), accusative (second case), instrumental (third), dative (fourth), ablative (fifth), genitive (sixth), and locative (seventh). In traditional analyses, there is always a clear distinction made between post-positional morphemes and case endings. The vocative is sometimes given a place in the case system as an eighth case, but vocative forms do not participate in usual morphophonemic alternations and do not govern the use of any postpositions. Modern grammarians, however, argue that this eight-case classification is coarse and artificial and that Tamil usage is best understood if each suffix or combination of suffixes is seen as marking a separate case.

=== Turkish ===
Modern Turkish has six cases (In Turkish &quot;İsmin Hâlleri&quot;).
The accusative can exist only in the noun(whether it is derived from a verb or not). For example, &quot;Arkadaşlar bize gelmeyi düşünüyorlar.&quot; (Friends are thinking of coming to us).

The dative can exist only in the noun (whether it is derived from a verb or not). For example, &quot;Bol bol kitap okumaya çalışıyorum.&quot; (I try to read a lot of books).

== Evolution ==
As languages evolve, case systems change. In early Ancient Greek, for example, the genitive and ablative cases of given names became combined, giving five cases, rather than the six retained in Latin. In modern Hindi, the cases have been reduced to three: a direct case (for subjects and direct objects) and oblique case, and a vocative case. In English, apart from the pronouns discussed above, case has vanished altogether except for the possessive/non-possessive dichotomy in nouns.

The evolution of the treatment of case relationships can be circular. Postpositions can become unstressed and sound like they are an unstressed syllable of a neighboring word. A postposition can thus merge into the stem of a head noun, developing various forms depending on the phonological shape of the stem. Affixes are subject to various phonological processes such as assimilation, vowel centering to the schwa, phoneme loss, and fusion, and these processes can reduce or even eliminate the distinctions between cases. Languages can then compensate for the resulting loss of function by creating postpositions, thus coming full circle.

Recent experiments in agent-based modeling have shown how case systems can emerge and evolve in a population of language users. The experiments demonstrate that language users may introduce new case markers to reduce the cognitive effort required for semantic interpretation, hence facilitating communication through language. Case markers then become generalized through analogical reasoning and reuse.

==Linguistic typology==

===Morphosyntactic alignment===
Languages are categorized into several case systems, based on their &quot;morphosyntactic alignment&quot;—how they group verb agents and patients into cases:

* &quot;Nominative–accusative&quot; (or simply &quot;accusative&quot;): The argument (subject) of an intransitive verb is in the same case as the agent (subject) of a transitive verb; this case is then called the &quot;nominative case&quot;, with the patient (direct object) of a transitive verb being in the &quot;accusative case&quot;.
* &quot;Ergative–absolutive&quot; (or simply &quot;ergative&quot;): The argument (subject) of an intransitive verb is in the same case as the patient (direct object) of a transitive verb; this case is then called the &quot;absolutive case&quot;, with the agent (subject) of a transitive verb being in the &quot;ergative case&quot;.
* &quot;Ergative–accusative&quot; (or &quot;tripartite&quot;): The argument (subject) of an intransitive verb is in its own case (the &quot;intransitive case&quot;), separate from that of the agent (subject) or patient (direct object) of a transitive verb (which is in the ergative case or accusative case, respectively).
* &quot;Active–stative&quot; (or simply &quot;active&quot;): The argument (subject) of an intransitive verb can be in one of two cases; if the argument is an &quot;agent&quot;, as in &quot;He ate&quot;, then it is in the same case as the agent (subject) of a transitive verb (sometimes called the &quot;agentive case&quot;), and if it is a &quot;patient&quot;, as in &quot;He tripped&quot;, then it is in the same case as the patient (direct object) of a transitive verb (sometimes called the &quot;patientive case&quot;).
* &quot;Trigger&quot;: One noun in a sentence is the topic or focus. This noun is in the trigger case, and information elsewhere in the sentence (for example a verb affix in Tagalog) specifies the role of the trigger. The trigger may be identified as the agent, patient, etc. Other nouns may be inflected for case, but the inflections are overloaded; for example, in Tagalog, the subject and object of a verb are both expressed in the genitive case when they are not in the trigger case.

The following are systems that some languages use to mark case instead of, or in addition to, declension:
* Positional: Nouns are not inflected for case; the position of a noun in the sentence expresses its case.
* Adpositional: Nouns are accompanied by words that mark case.

===Language families===
*With a few exceptions, most languages in the Finno-Ugric family make extensive use of cases. Finnish has 15 cases according to the traditional description (or up to 30 depending on the interpretation). However, only 12 are commonly used in speech (see Finnish noun cases and Finnish locative system). Estonian has 14 (see Estonian locative system) and Hungarian has 18, both with additional archaic cases used for some words.
*Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic languages also exhibit complex case systems. Since the abovementioned languages, along with Korean and Japanese, shared certain similarities, linguists proposed an Altaic family and reconstructed its case system; although the hypothesis had been largely discredited.
*The Tsez language, a Northeast Caucasian language, has 64 cases.
*The original version of John Quijada&#x27;s constructed language Ithkuil has 81 noun cases, and its descendant Ilaksh and Ithkuil after the 2011 revision both have 96 noun cases.

The lemma form of words, which is the form chosen by convention as the canonical form of a word, is usually the most unmarked or basic case, which is typically the nominative, trigger, or absolutive case, whichever a language may have.

== See also ==
* Agreement (linguistics)
* Case hierarchy
* Declension
* Differential object marking
* Inflection
* List of grammatical cases
* Phi features
* Thematic relation
* Verbal case
* Voice (grammar)

== Notes ==
== References ==
===General references===
* Ivan G. Iliev (2007) On the Nature of Grammatical Case ... (Case and Vocativeness) 

* Iliev, Iv. The Russian Genitive of Negation and Its Japanese Counterpart. International Journal of Russian Studies. 1, 2018

==External links==

*Grammatical Features Inventory – DOI: 10.15126/SMG.18/1.04
*World Atlas of Language Structures Online
**Chapter 28: Case Syncretism
**Chapter 49: Number of Cases
**Chapter 50: Asymmetrical Case Marking
**Chapter 51: Position of Case Affixes
**Chapter 98: Alignment of Case Marking of Full Noun Phrases
**Chapter 99: Alignment of Case Marking of Pronouns</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="2" end="18" title="Grammatical case" label="grammatical case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="36" end="40" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q576271" start="62" end="72" title="determiner" label="determiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="75" end="84" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="87" end="97" title="participle" label="participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q63116" start="104" end="111" title="Numeral (linguistics)" label="numeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302023" start="156" end="176" title="grammatical function" label="grammatical function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048572" start="184" end="197" title="Nominal group (functional grammar)" label="nominal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="345" end="352" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="419" end="429" title="nominative case" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="491" end="501" title="accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="902" end="908" title="Dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="914" end="922" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q468801" start="949" end="965" title="personal pronoun" label="personal pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="968" end="983" title="subjective case" label="subjective case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233197" start="1031" end="1045" title="objective case" label="objective case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105891" start="1100" end="1115" title="possessive case" label="possessive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="1285" end="1292" title="Subject (grammar)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="1300" end="1301" title="Grammatical case" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="1408" end="1414" title="object (grammar)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="1434" end="1436" title="Grammatical case" label="me"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1503" end="1516" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="1522" end="1535" title="locative case" label="locative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004759" start="1583" end="1593" title="Syncretism (linguistics)" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="1614" end="1622" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="1624" end="1631" title="Kannada" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1633" end="1638" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="1640" end="1645" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1647" end="1654" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="1659" end="1666" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="1792" end="1798" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="1873" end="1880" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078803" start="1940" end="1958" title="Torlakian dialects" label="Torlakian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654327" start="1960" end="1969" title="Classical Arabic" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="1974" end="1996" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Modern Standard Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2009" end="2015" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="2017" end="2026" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35392" start="2028" end="2040" title="Demotic Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="2046" end="2051" title="Irish Language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="2063" end="2071" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="2073" end="2081" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="2111" end="2118" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="2136" end="2142" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q838165" start="2144" end="2153" title="Kajkavian language" label="Kajkavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="2155" end="2164" title="Slovenian language" label="Slovenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="2170" end="2177" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="2202" end="2210" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="2212" end="2217" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="2219" end="2227" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="2229" end="2236" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="2238" end="2248" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="2250" end="2256" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="2258" end="2272" title="Serbo-Croatian language" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="2277" end="2286" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="2299" end="2308" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571" start="2310" end="2317" title="Marathi language" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="2345" end="2351" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="2353" end="2362" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29401" start="2364" end="2372" title="Assamese language" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25355" start="2377" end="2388" title="Greenlandic language" label="Greenlandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268" start="2401" end="2411" title="Old Nubian" label="Old Nubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="2416" end="2423" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="2435" end="2441" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="2450" end="2458" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="2467" end="2474" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="2483" end="2492" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34033" start="2505" end="2509" title="Tsez language" label="Tsez"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="2569" end="2579" title="nominative" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="2581" end="2591" title="accusative" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="2593" end="2599" title="dative" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="2604" end="2612" title="genitive" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="2697" end="2708" title="preposition" label="preposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q192997" start="2895" end="2912" title="instrumental case" label="instrumental case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277394" start="3199" end="3204" title="Head (linguistics)" label="heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q613930" start="3247" end="3261" title="Thematic relation" label="thematic roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q392648" start="3276" end="3281" title="agent (grammar)" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170212" start="3298" end="3305" title="patient (grammar)" label="patient"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="3474" end="3493" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="syntagmatic/phrasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q257885" start="3621" end="3636" title="free word order" label="free word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q213484" start="3855" end="3863" title="Anacreon" label="Anacreon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="3932" end="3938" title="Stoics" label="Stoics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194414" start="3973" end="3991" title="Peripatetic school" label="Peripatetic school"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="4079" end="4100" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142838" start="4258" end="4282" title="Proto-Indo-European root" label="Proto-Indo-European root"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="4317" end="4323" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="4524" end="4534" title="declension" label="declension"/>
<link wikidata="Q106427822" start="5315" end="5323" title="Sanskrit nominals" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="5725" end="5736" title="Old English language" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="5755" end="5778" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="5788" end="5793" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35225" start="5795" end="5806" title="Old Persian" label="Old Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="5808" end="5821" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="5827" end="5835" title="Sanskrit language" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q147356" start="6146" end="6168" title="Balto-Slavic languages" label="Balto-Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="6252" end="6261" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="6263" end="6269" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="6274" end="6286" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="6508" end="6525" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q318917" start="6978" end="6996" title="fusional languages" label="fusional languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="6998" end="7009" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="7107" end="7114" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="7169" end="7188" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q209544" start="7201" end="7209" title="analytic language" label="analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q468801" start="7229" end="7245" title="personal pronoun" label="personal pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q437086" start="7364" end="7390" title="Old English declension" label="case system of Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q257885" start="7496" end="7506" title="word order" label="word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="7511" end="7522" title="preposition" label="preposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861696" start="7542" end="7556" title="Saxon genitive" label="Saxon genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378616" start="7606" end="7631" title="English personal pronouns" label="English personal pronouns"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="7699" end="7714" title="nominative case" label="nominative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631398" start="7728" end="7747" title="subjective pronouns" label="subjective pronouns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166170" start="7853" end="7864" title="finite verb" label="finite verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051175" start="7887" end="7897" title="complement (linguistics)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q207509" start="7903" end="7909" title="copula (linguistics)" label="copula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233197" start="7923" end="7935" title="oblique case" label="oblique case"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075064" start="7949" end="7963" title="object pronoun" label="object pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="8078" end="8084" title="object (grammar)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="8213" end="8226" title="genitive case" label="genitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105891" start="8240" end="8259" title="possessive pronouns" label="possessive pronouns"/>
<link wikidata="Q953129" start="8556" end="8565" title="reflexive pronoun" label="reflexive"/>
<link wikidata="Q576271" start="8834" end="8844" title="determiner (linguistics)" label="determiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="10302" end="10312" title="Nominative case" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q332734" start="10328" end="10338" title="Absolutive case" label="absolutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="10341" end="10351" title="Accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q324305" start="10367" end="10375" title="Ergative case" label="ergative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="10378" end="10386" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="10389" end="10395" title="Dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="10398" end="10406" title="Locative case" label="locative"/>
<link wikidata="Q117226378" start="10422" end="10435" title="Prepositional case" label="prepositional"/>
<link wikidata="Q156986" start="10438" end="10446" title="Ablative case" label="ablative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192997" start="10466" end="10478" title="Instrumental case" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q704841" start="10559" end="10573" title="Central German" label="Central German"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624" start="10583" end="10592" title="Colognian dialect" label="Colognian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="10597" end="10610" title="Luxembourgish" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="10655" end="10660" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q845904" start="11212" end="11230" title="The Art of Grammar" label="The Art of Grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="11260" end="11265" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034405" start="11290" end="11304" title="Ars grammatica" label="Ars grammatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q156986" start="11356" end="11369" title="ablative case" label="ablative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004759" start="11511" end="11521" title="Syncretism (linguistics)" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11739" end="11748" title="Icelandic grammar#Nouns" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="11814" end="11822" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q236425" start="12401" end="12417" title="Papuan languages" label="Papuan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="12432" end="12438" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="12440" end="12449" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="12451" end="12458" title="Quechua language" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q33311" start="12460" end="12469" title="Dravidian languages" label="Dravidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="12471" end="12481" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="12507" end="12513" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740893" start="12526" end="12535" title="Amazonian languages" label="Amazonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="12540" end="12560" title="Australian languages" label="Australian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="12644" end="12657" title="Indo-European language" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q33328" start="12659" end="12665" title="Finnic languages" label="Finnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="12671" end="12688" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q595456" start="12820" end="12834" title="Suffixaufnahme" label="double-marking"/>
<link wikidata="Q601360" start="13391" end="13395" title="Latin declension" label="five"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13415" end="13420" title="Ancient Greek grammar#Declensions" label="three"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425884" start="13446" end="13477" title="Slovak declension" label="fifteen noun declension classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="13754" end="13760" title="grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="13762" end="13768" title="grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="13906" end="13922" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="14006" end="14010" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="14017" end="14026" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="14314" end="14334" title="Masculine personal" label="animacy or humanness"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="14463" end="14483" title="Australian Aboriginal languages" label="Australian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q178435" start="14558" end="14579" title="Nominative–accusative alignment" label="nominative-accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q862156" start="14584" end="14603" title="Ergative–absolutive alignment" label="ergative-absolutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q18392860" start="14757" end="14769" title="r-expression" label="r-expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q10511016" start="16100" end="16109" title="Wanyjirra language" label="Wanyjirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q10511016" start="16282" end="16291" title="Wanyjirra language" label="Wanyjirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913852" start="16760" end="16765" title="Bardi language" label="Bardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4536460" start="16867" end="16876" title="Wangkatja language" label="Wangkatja"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="17007" end="17013" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q332734" start="17210" end="17220" title="Absolutive case" label="absolutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q324305" start="17335" end="17343" title="Ergative case" label="ergative"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="17391" end="17397" title="Dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="17447" end="17455" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773161" start="17695" end="17704" title="Sociative case" label="sociative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192997" start="17764" end="17776" title="Instrumental case" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="17824" end="17832" title="Locative case" label="locative"/>
<link wikidata="Q156986" start="17897" end="17905" title="Ablative case" label="ablative"/>
<link wikidata="Q952933" start="18283" end="18292" title="Prolative case" label="prolative"/>
<link wikidata="Q857325" start="18350" end="18359" title="Partitive case" label="partitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q492457" start="18420" end="18432" title="Distributive case" label="distributive"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="20221" end="20227" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="20476" end="20486" title="nominative case" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="20600" end="20608" title="genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="20701" end="20707" title="dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="20808" end="20818" title="accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="20920" end="20936" title="definite article" label="definite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="21006" end="21016" title="Nominative case" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="21134" end="21142" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="21293" end="21299" title="Dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="21461" end="21471" title="Accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="21598" end="21614" title="definite article" label="definite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="21677" end="21687" title="Nominative case" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="21814" end="21822" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="21978" end="21984" title="Dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="22138" end="22148" title="Accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="22279" end="22287" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="22344" end="22352" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="22450" end="22458" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11051" start="22525" end="22530" title="Hindustani language" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="22531" end="22535" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188307" start="22537" end="22547" title="Hindustani grammar" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="23035" end="23055" title="grammatical particle" label="grammatical particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="23155" end="23169" title="Preposition and postposition" label="adpositionally"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="23723" end="23728" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="23849" end="23859" title="nominative case" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="23938" end="23946" title="genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="24039" end="24045" title="dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="24142" end="24152" title="accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q156986" start="24225" end="24233" title="ablative case" label="ablative"/>
<link wikidata="Q185077" start="24379" end="24387" title="vocative case" label="vocative"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="24507" end="24515" title="locative case" label="locative"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="24542" end="24552" title="Milan" label="Mediolanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="24560" end="24577" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="24751" end="24761" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="25338" end="25347" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="25537" end="25544" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="25734" end="25744" title="nominative case" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="25827" end="25835" title="genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="25934" end="25940" title="dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="26054" end="26064" title="accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192997" start="26143" end="26155" title="Instrumental case" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q117226378" start="26240" end="26253" title="Prepositional case" label="prepositional"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="26895" end="26903" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189725" start="26920" end="26926" title="Pāṇini" label="Pāṇini"/>
<link wikidata="Q393800" start="26951" end="26956" title="Theta role" label="roles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27304" end="27315" title="Sanskrit nouns#Basic noun and adjective declension&amp;quot;" label="declensions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27764" end="27775" title="Sanskrit nouns#Basic noun and adjective declension&amp;quot;" label="declensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="27864" end="27869" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="29417" end="29422" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233197" start="29514" end="29526" title="oblique case" label="oblique case"/>
<link wikidata="Q185077" start="29534" end="29547" title="vocative case" label="vocative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="29763" end="29775" title="Postposition" label="Postposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q148877" start="30065" end="30077" title="Assimilation (linguistics)" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154123" start="30102" end="30107" title="schwa" label="schwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593739" start="30127" end="30133" title="fusion (phonetics)" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q392648" start="30922" end="30928" title="agent (linguistics)" label="agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q393800" start="30933" end="30941" title="patient (linguistics)" label="patients"/>
<link wikidata="Q178435" start="30963" end="30984" title="nominative–accusative language" label="Nominative–accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="31174" end="31189" title="nominative case" label="nominative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="31270" end="31285" title="accusative case" label="accusative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q862156" start="31301" end="31320" title="ergative–absolutive language" label="Ergative–absolutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q332734" start="31516" end="31531" title="absolutive case" label="absolutive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q324305" start="31604" end="31617" title="ergative case" label="ergative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q892171" start="31633" end="31652" title="ergative–accusative language" label="Ergative–accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780059" start="31765" end="31782" title="intransitive case" label="intransitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q423343" start="31955" end="31969" title="active–stative language" label="Active–stative"/>
<link wikidata="Q978598" start="32478" end="32485" title="trigger language" label="Trigger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32559" end="32571" title="trigger case" label="trigger case"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="32630" end="32634" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="32635" end="32640" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="32644" end="32651" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="32905" end="32918" title="genitive case" label="genitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="33174" end="33184" title="Adposition" label="Adposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q79890" start="33306" end="33317" title="Finno-Ugric languages" label="Finno-Ugric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="33354" end="33361" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450851" start="33513" end="33531" title="Finnish noun cases" label="Finnish noun cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450851" start="33536" end="33559" title="Finnish locative system" label="Finnish locative system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="33562" end="33570" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401666" start="33583" end="33607" title="Estonian locative system" label="Estonian locative system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="33613" end="33622" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="33688" end="33694" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="33696" end="33704" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34230" start="33710" end="33718" title="Tungusic languages" label="Tungusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="33811" end="33817" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="33822" end="33830" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q37845" start="33883" end="33889" title="Altaic languages" label="Altaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34033" start="33991" end="34004" title="Tsez language" label="Tsez language"/>
<link wikidata="Q27387" start="34008" end="34036" title="Northeast Caucasian languages" label="Northeast Caucasian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33215" start="34097" end="34117" title="constructed language" label="constructed language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35846" start="34118" end="34125" title="Ithkuil" label="Ithkuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q35846" start="34164" end="34170" title="Ilaksh" label="Ilaksh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18514" start="34237" end="34242" title="lemma (morphology)" label="lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897166" start="34350" end="34358" title="markedness" label="unmarked"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="34487" end="34510" title="Agreement (linguistics)" label="Agreement (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048336" start="34513" end="34527" title="Case hierarchy" label="Case hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="34530" end="34540" title="Declension" label="Declension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224448" start="34543" end="34570" title="Differential object marking" label="Differential object marking"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="34573" end="34583" title="Inflection" label="Inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079319" start="34586" end="34611" title="List of grammatical cases" label="List of grammatical cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181580" start="34614" end="34626" title="Phi features" label="Phi features"/>
<link wikidata="Q613930" start="34629" end="34646" title="Thematic relation" label="Thematic relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920935" start="34649" end="34660" title="Verbal case" label="Verbal case"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="34663" end="34678" title="Voice (grammar)" label="Voice (grammar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25670" start="35002" end="35005" title="Digital object identifier" label="DOI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12899" wikidata="Q43250" url="?curid=12899" title="Gestapo">
<text>The  (; ), abbreviated Gestapo (), was the official secret police of Nazi Germany and in German-occupied Europe.

The force was created by Hermann Göring in 1933 by combining the various political police agencies of Prussia into one organisation. On 20 April 1934, oversight of the Gestapo passed to the head of the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS), Heinrich Himmler, who was also appointed Chief of German Police by Hitler in 1936. Instead of being exclusively a Prussian state agency, the Gestapo became a national one as a sub-office of the (SiPo; Security Police). From 27 September 1939, it was administered by the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA). It became known as (Dept) 4 of the RSHA and was considered a sister organisation to the (SD; Security Service).

The Gestapo committed widespread atrocities during its existence. The power of the Gestapo was used to focus upon political opponents, ideological dissenters (clergy and religious organisations), career criminals, the Sinti and Roma population, handicapped persons, homosexuals, and, above all, the Jews. Those arrested by the Gestapo were often held without judicial process, and political prisoners throughout Germany—and from 1941, throughout the occupied territories under the Night and Fog Decree ()—simply disappeared while in Gestapo custody. Contrary to popular perception, the Gestapo was actually a relatively small organization with limited surveillance capability; still it proved extremely effective due to the willingness of ordinary Germans to report on fellow citizens. During World War II, the Gestapo played a key role in the Holocaust. After the war ended, the Gestapo was declared a criminal organisation by the International Military Tribunal (IMT) at the Nuremberg trials, and several top Gestapo members were sentenced to death.

==History==
After Adolf Hitler became Chancellor of Germany, Hermann Göring—future commander of the Luftwaffe and the number-two man in the Nazi Party—was named Interior Minister of Prussia. This gave Göring command of the largest police force in Germany. Soon afterward, Göring detached the political and intelligence sections from the police and filled their ranks with Nazis. On 26 April 1933, Göring merged the two units as the , which was abbreviated by a post office clerk for a franking stamp and became known as the &quot;Gestapo&quot;. He originally wanted to name it the Secret Police Office (), but the German initials, &quot;GPA&quot;, were too similar to those of the Soviet State Political Directorate (, or GPU).

The first commander of the Gestapo was Rudolf Diels, a protégé of Göring. Diels was appointed with the title of chief of (Department 1a) of the Prussian Secret Police. Diels was best known as the primary interrogator of Marinus van der Lubbe after the Reichstag fire. In late 1933, the Reich Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick wanted to integrate all the police forces of the German states under his control. Göring outflanked him by removing the Prussian political and intelligence departments from the state interior ministry. Göring took over the Gestapo in 1934 and urged Hitler to extend the agency&#x27;s authority throughout Germany. This represented a radical departure from German tradition, which held that law enforcement was (mostly) a (state) and local matter. In this, he ran into conflict with (SS) chief Heinrich Himmler who was police chief of the second most powerful German state, Bavaria. Frick did not have the political power to take on Göring by himself so he allied with Himmler. With Frick&#x27;s support, Himmler (pushed on by his right-hand man, Reinhard Heydrich) took over the political police in state after state. Soon only Prussia was left.

Concerned that Diels was not ruthless enough to effectively counteract the power of the (SA), Göring handed over control of the Gestapo to Himmler on 20 April 1934. Also on that date, Hitler appointed Himmler chief of all German police outside Prussia. Heydrich, named chief of the Gestapo by Himmler on 22 April 1934, also continued as head of the SS Security Service (; SD). Himmler and Heydrich both immediately began installing their own personnel in select positions, several of whom were directly from the Bavarian Political Police, such as Heinrich Müller, Franz Josef Huber, and Josef Meisinger. Many of the Gestapo employees in the newly established offices were young and highly educated in a wide variety of academic fields and moreover, represented a new generation of National Socialist adherents, who were hard-working, efficient, and prepared to carry the Nazi state forward through the persecution of their political opponents.

By the spring of 1934, Himmler&#x27;s SS controlled the SD and the Gestapo, but for him, there was still a problem, as technically the SS (and the Gestapo by proxy) was subordinated to the SA, which was under the command of Ernst Röhm. Himmler wanted to free himself entirely from Röhm, whom he viewed as an obstacle. Röhm&#x27;s position was menacing as more than 4.5 million men fell under his command once the militias and veterans organisations were absorbed by the SA, a fact which fuelled Röhm&#x27;s aspirations; his dream of fusing the SA and &quot;Reichswehr&quot; together was undermining Hitler&#x27;s relationships with the leadership of Germany&#x27;s armed forces. Several Nazi chieftains, among them Göring, Joseph Goebbels, Rudolf Hess, and Himmler, began a concerted campaign to convince Hitler to take action against Röhm. Both the SD and Gestapo released information concerning an imminent putsch by the SA. Once persuaded, Hitler acted by setting Himmler&#x27;s SS into action, who then proceeded to murder over 100 of Hitler&#x27;s identified antagonists. The Gestapo supplied the information which implicated the SA and ultimately enabled Himmler and Heydrich to emancipate themselves entirely from the organisation. For the Gestapo, the next two years following the Night of the Long Knives, a term describing the putsch against Röhm and the SA, were characterised by &quot;behind-the-scenes political wrangling over policing&quot;.

On 17 June 1936, Hitler decreed the unification of all police forces in Germany and named Himmler as Chief of German Police. This action effectively merged the police into the SS and removed it from Frick&#x27;s control. Himmler was nominally subordinate to Frick as police chief, but as , he answered only to Hitler. This move also gave Himmler operational control over Germany&#x27;s entire detective force. The Gestapo became a national state agency. Himmler also gained authority over all of Germany&#x27;s uniformed law enforcement agencies, which were amalgamated into the new (Orpo; Order Police), which became a national agency under SS general Kurt Daluege. Shortly thereafter, Himmler created the (Kripo; Criminal Police), merging it with the Gestapo into the (SiPo; Security Police), under Heydrich&#x27;s command. Heinrich Müller was at that time the Gestapo operations chief. He answered to Heydrich, Heydrich answered only to Himmler, and Himmler answered only to Hitler.

The Gestapo had the authority to investigate cases of treason, espionage, sabotage and criminal attacks on the Nazi Party and Germany. The basic Gestapo law passed by the government in 1936 gave the Gestapo to operate without judicial review—in effect, putting it above the law. The Gestapo was specifically exempted from responsibility to administrative courts, where citizens normally could sue the state to conform to laws. As early as 1935, a Prussian administrative court had ruled that the Gestapo&#x27;s actions were not subject to judicial review. The SS officer Werner Best, one-time head of legal affairs in the Gestapo, summed up this policy by saying, &quot;As long as the police carries out the will of the leadership, it is acting legally&quot;.

On 27 September 1939, the security and police agencies of Nazi Germany—with the exception of the Order Police—were consolidated into the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA), headed by Heydrich. The Gestapo became (Department IV) of RSHA and Müller became the Gestapo Chief, with Heydrich as his immediate superior. After Heydrich&#x27;s 1942 assassination, Himmler assumed the leadership of the RSHA until January 1943, when Ernst Kaltenbrunner was appointed chief. Müller remained the Gestapo Chief. His direct subordinate Adolf Eichmann headed the Gestapo&#x27;s Office of Resettlement and then its Office of Jewish Affairs ( or Sub-Department IV, Section B4). During the Holocaust, Eichmann&#x27;s department within the Gestapo coordinated the mass deportation of European Jews to the Nazis&#x27; extermination camps.

The power of the Gestapo included the use of what was called, —&quot;protective custody&quot;, a euphemism for the power to imprison people without judicial proceedings. An oddity of the system was that the prisoner had to sign his own , an order declaring that the person had requested imprisonment—presumably out of fear of personal harm. In addition, political prisoners throughout Germany—and from 1941, throughout the occupied territories under the Night and Fog Decree ()—simply disappeared while in Gestapo custody. Up to 30 April 1944, at least 6,639 persons were arrested under orders. However, the total number of people who disappeared as a result of this decree is not known.

==Counterintelligence==
The Polish government-in-exile in London during World War II received sensitive military information about Nazi Germany from agents and informants throughout Europe. After Germany conquered Poland (in the autumn of 1939), Gestapo officials believed that they had neutralised Polish intelligence activities. However, certain Polish information about the movement of German police and SS units to the East during 1941 German invasion of the Soviet Union was similar to information British intelligence secretly obtained through intercepting and decoding German police and SS messages sent by radio telegraphy.

In 1942, the Gestapo discovered a cache of Polish intelligence documents in Prague and were surprised to see that Polish agents and informants had been gathering detailed military information and smuggling it out to London, via Budapest and Istanbul. The Poles identified and tracked German military trains to the Eastern front and identified four Order Police battalions sent to occupied areas of the Soviet Union in October 1941 that engaged in war crimes and mass murder.

Polish agents also gathered detailed information about the morale of German soldiers in the East. After uncovering a sample of the information the Poles had reported, Gestapo officials concluded that Polish intelligence activity represented a very serious danger to Germany. As late as 6 June 1944, Heinrich Müller—concerned about the leakage of information to the Allies—set up a special unit called that was meant to root out the Polish intelligence network in western and southwestern Europe.

In Austria, there were groups still loyal to the Habsburgs, who unlike most across the Greater German Reich, remained determined to resist the Nazis. These groups became a special focus of the Gestapo because of their insurrectionist goals—the overthrow of the Nazi regime, the re-establishment of an independent Austria under Habsburg leadership—and Hitler&#x27;s hatred of the Habsburg family. Hitler vehemently rejected the centuries&#x27; old Habsburg pluralist principles of &quot;live and let live&quot; with regard to ethnic groups, peoples, minorities, religions, cultures and languages. Habsburg loyalist Karl Burian&#x27;s (who was later executed) plan to blow up the Gestapo headquarters in Vienna represented a unique attempt to act aggressively against the Gestapo. Burian&#x27;s group had also set up a secret courier service to Otto von Habsburg in Belgium. Individuals in Austrian resistance groups led by Heinrich Maier also managed to pass along the plans and the location of production facilities for V-1, V-2 rockets, Tiger tanks, and aircraft (Messerschmitt Bf 109, Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet, etc.) to the Allies. The Maier group informed very early about the mass murder of Jews. The resistance group, later discovered by the Gestapo because of a double agent of the Abwehr, was in contact with Allen Dulles, the head of the US Office of Strategic Services in Switzerland. Although Maier and the other group members were severely tortured, the Gestapo did not uncover the essential involvement of the resistance group in Operation Crossbow and Operation Hydra.

==Suppression of resistance and persecution==
Early in the regime&#x27;s existence, harsh measures were meted out to political opponents and those who resisted Nazi doctrine, such as members of the Communist Party of Germany (KPD); a role originally performed by the SA until the SD and Gestapo undermined their influence and took control of Reich security. Because the Gestapo seemed omniscient and omnipotent, the atmosphere of fear they created led to an overestimation of their reach and strength; a faulty assessment which hampered the operational effectiveness of underground resistance organisations.

===Trade unions===
Shortly after the Nazis came to power, they decided to dissolve the 28 federations of the General German Trade Union Confederation, because Hitler—after noting their success in the works council elections—intended to consolidate all German workers under the Nazi government&#x27;s administration, a decision he made on 7 April 1933. As a preface to this action, Hitler decreed May 1 as National Labor Day to celebrate German workers, a move the trade union leaders welcomed. With their trade union flags waving, Hitler gave a rousing speech to the 1.5 million people assembled on Berlin&#x27;s that was nationally broadcast, during which he extolled the nation&#x27;s revival and working class solidarity. On the following day, the newly formed Gestapo officers, who had been shadowing some 58 trade union leaders, arrested them wherever they could find them—many in their homes. Meanwhile, the SA and police occupied trade union headquarters, arrested functionaries, confiscated their property and assets; all by design so as to be replaced on 12 May by the German Labour Front (DAF), a Nazi organisation placed under the leadership of Robert Ley. For their part, this was the first time the Gestapo operated under its new name since its 26 April 1933 founding in Prussia.

===Religious dissent===
Many parts of Germany (where religious dissent existed upon the Nazi seizure of power) saw a rapid transformation; a change as noted by the Gestapo in conservative towns such as Würzburg, where people acquiesced to the regime either through accommodation, collaboration, or simple compliance. Increasing religious objections to Nazi policies led the Gestapo to carefully monitor church organisations. For the most part, members of the church did not offer political resistance but simply wanted to ensure that organizational doctrine remained intact.

However, the Nazi regime sought to suppress any source of ideology other than its own, and set out to muzzle or crush the churches in the so-called . When Church leaders (clergy) voiced their misgiving about the euthanasia program and Nazi racial policies, Hitler intimated that he considered them &quot;traitors to the people&quot; and went so far as to call them &quot;the destroyers of Germany&quot;. The extreme anti-semitism and neo-pagan heresies of the Nazis caused some Christians to outright resist, and Pope Pius XI to issue the encyclical Mit brennender Sorge denouncing Nazism and warning Catholics against joining or supporting the Party. Some pastors, like the Protestant clergyman Dietrich Bonhoeffer, paid for their opposition with their lives.

In an effort to counter the strength and influence of spiritual resistance, Nazi records reveal that the Gestapo&#x27;s monitored the activities of bishops very closely—instructing that agents be set up in every diocese, that the bishops&#x27; reports to the Vatican should be obtained and that the bishops&#x27; areas of activity must be found out. Deans were to be targeted as the &quot;eyes and ears of the bishops&quot; and a &quot;vast network&quot; established to monitor the activities of ordinary clergy: &quot;The importance of this enemy is such that inspectors of security police and of the security service will make this group of people and the questions discussed by them their special concern&quot;.

In &quot;Dachau: The Official History 1933–1945&quot;, Paul Berben wrote that clergy were watched closely, and frequently denounced, arrested and sent to Nazi concentration camps: &quot;One priest was imprisoned in Dachau for having stated that there were good folk in England too; another suffered the same fate for warning a girl who wanted to marry an S.S. man after abjuring the Catholic faith; yet another because he conducted a service for a deceased communist&quot;. Others were arrested simply on the basis of being &quot;suspected of activities hostile to the State&quot; or that there was reason to &quot;suppose that his dealings might harm society&quot;. Over 2,700 Catholic, Protestant, and Orthodox clergy were imprisoned at Dachau alone. After Heydrich (who was staunchly anti-Catholic and anti-Christian) was assassinated in Prague, his successor, Ernst Kaltenbrunner, relaxed some of the policies and then disbanded Department IVB (religious opponents) of the Gestapo.

===Homosexuality===
Violence and arrest were not confined to that opposing political parties, membership in trade unions, or those with dissenting religious opinions, but also homosexuality. It was viewed negatively by Hitler. Homosexuals were correspondingly considered a threat to the (National Community). From the Nazis rise to national power in 1933, the number of court verdicts against homosexuals steadily increased and only declined once the Second World War started. In 1934, a special Gestapo office was set up in Berlin to deal with homosexuality.

Despite male homosexuality being considered a greater danger to &quot;national survival&quot;, lesbianism was likewise viewed as unacceptable—deemed gender nonconformity—and a number of individual reports on lesbians can be found in Gestapo files. Between 1933 and 1935, some 4,000 men were arrested; between 1936 and 1939, another 30,000 men were convicted. If homosexuals showed any signs of sympathy to the Nazis&#x27; identified racial enemies, they were considered an even greater danger. According to Gestapo case files, the majority of those arrested for homosexuality were males between eighteen and twenty-five years of age.

===Student opposition===
Between June 1942 and March 1943, student protests were calling for an end to the Nazi regime. These included the non-violent resistance of Hans and Sophie Scholl, two leaders of the White Rose student group. However, resistance groups and those who were in moral or political opposition to the Nazis were stalled by the fear of reprisals from the Gestapo. Fearful of an internal overthrow, the forces of the Gestapo were unleashed on the opposition. Groups like the White Rose and others, such as the Edelweiss Pirates, and the Swing Youth, were placed under close Gestapo observation. Some participants were sent to concentration camps. Leading members of the most famous of these groups, the White Rose, were arrested by the police and turned over to the Gestapo. For several leaders the punishment was death. During the first five months of 1943, the Gestapo arrested thousands suspected of resistance activities and carried out numerous executions. Student opposition leaders were executed in late February, and a major opposition organisation, the Oster Circle, was destroyed in April 1943. Efforts to resist the Nazi regime amounted to very little and had only minor chances of success, particularly since a broad percentage of the German people did not support such actions.

===General opposition and military conspiracy===
Between 1934 and 1938, opponents of the Nazi regime and their fellow travellers began to emerge. Among the first to speak out were religious dissenters but following in their wake were educators, aristocratic businessmen, office workers, teachers, and others from nearly every walk of life. Most people quickly learned that open opposition was dangerous since Gestapo informants and agents were widespread. However, a significant number of them still worked against the National Socialist government.

In May 1935, the Gestapo broke up and arrested members of the &quot;Markwitz Circle&quot;, a group of former socialists in contact with Otto Strasser, who sought Hitler&#x27;s downfall. From the mid-1930s into the early 1940s—various groups made up of communists, idealists, working-class people, and far-right conservative opposition organisations covertly fought against Hitler&#x27;s government, and several of them fomented plots that included Hitler&#x27;s assassination. Nearly all of them, including: the Römer Group, Robby Group, Solf Circle, , the Party of the Radical Middle Class, , and were either discovered or infiltrated by the Gestapo. This led to corresponding arrests, being sent to concentration camps and execution. One of the methods employed by the Gestapo to contend with these resistance factions was &#x27;protective detention&#x27; which facilitated the process in expediting dissenters to concentration camps and against which there was no legal defence.

Early efforts to resist the Nazis with aid from abroad were hindered when the opposition&#x27;s peace feelers to the Western Allies did not meet with success. This was partly because of the Venlo incident of 9 November 1939, in which SD and Gestapo agents, posing as anti-Nazis in the Netherlands, kidnapped two British Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) officers after having lured them to a meeting to discuss peace terms. This prompted Winston Churchill to ban any further contact with the German opposition. Later, the British and Americans did not want to deal with anti-Nazis because they were fearful that the Soviet Union would believe they were attempting to make deals behind their back.

The German opposition was in an unenviable position by the late spring and early summer of 1943. On one hand, it was next to impossible for them to overthrow Hitler and the party; on the other, the Allied demand for an unconditional surrender meant no opportunity for a compromise peace, which left the military and conservative aristocrats who opposed the regime no option (in their eyes) other than continuing the military struggle. Despite the fear of the Gestapo after mass arrests and executions in the spring, the opposition still plotted and planned. One of the more famous schemes, Operation Valkyrie, involved a number of senior German officers and was carried out by Colonel Claus Schenk Graf von Stauffenberg. In an attempt to assassinate Hitler, Stauffenberg planted a bomb underneath a conference table inside the Wolf&#x27;s Lair field headquarters. Known as the 20 July plot, this assassination attempt failed and Hitler was only slightly injured. Reports indicate that the Gestapo was caught unaware of this plot as they did not have sufficient protections in place at the appropriate locations nor did they take any preventative steps. Stauffenberg and his group were shot on 21 July 1944; meanwhile, his fellow conspirators were rounded up by the Gestapo and sent to a concentration camp. Thereafter, there was a show trial overseen by Roland Freisler, followed by their execution.

Some Germans were convinced that it was their duty to apply all possible expedients to end the war as quickly as possible. Sabotage efforts were undertaken by members of the (military intelligence) leadership, as they recruited people known to oppose the Nazi regime. The Gestapo cracked down ruthlessly on dissidents in Germany, just as they did everywhere else. Opposition became more difficult. Arrests, torture, and executions were common. Terror against &quot;state enemies&quot; had become a way of life to such a degree that the Gestapo&#x27;s presence and methods were eventually normalised in the minds of people living in Nazi Germany.

==Organisation==
In January 1933, Hermann Göring, Hitler&#x27;s minister without portfolio, was appointed the head of the Prussian Police and began filling the political and intelligence units of the Prussian Secret Police with Nazi Party members. A year after the organisation&#x27;s inception, Göring wrote in a British publication about having created the organisation on his own initiative and how he was &quot;chiefly responsible&quot; for the elimination of the Marxist and Communist threat to Germany and Prussia. Describing the activities of the organisation, Göring boasted about the utter ruthlessness required for Germany&#x27;s recovery, the establishment of concentration camps for that purpose, and even went on to claim that excesses were committed in the beginning, recounting how beatings took place here and there. On 26 April 1933, he reorganised the force&#x27;s as the (better-known by the &quot;sobriquet&quot; Gestapo), a secret state police intended to serve the Nazi cause. Less than two weeks later in early May 1933, the Gestapo moved into their Berlin headquarters at Prinz-Albrecht-Straße 8.

As a result of its 1936 merger with the Kripo (National criminal police) to form sub-units of the (SiPo; Security Police), the Gestapo was officially classified as a government agency. Himmler&#x27;s subsequent appointment to (Chief of German Police) and status as made him independent of Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick&#x27;s nominal control.

The SiPo was placed under the direct command of Reinhard Heydrich who was already chief of the Nazi Party&#x27;s intelligence service, the (SD). The idea was to fully identify and integrate the party agency (SD) with the state agency (SiPo). Most SiPo members joined the SS and held a rank in both organisations. Nevertheless, in practice there was jurisdictional overlap and operational conflict between the SD and Gestapo.
In September 1939, the SiPo and SD were merged into the newly created (RSHA; Reich Security Main Office). Both the Gestapo and Kripo became distinct departments within the RSHA. Although the was officially disbanded, the term SiPo was figuratively used to describe any RSHA personnel throughout the remainder of the war. In lieu of naming convention changes, the original construct of the SiPo, Gestapo, and Kripo cannot be fully comprehended as &quot;discrete entities&quot;, since they ultimately formed &quot;a conglomerate in which each was wedded to each other and the SS through its Security Service, the SD&quot;.

The creation of the RSHA represented the formalisation, at the top level, of the relationship under which the SD served as the intelligence agency for the security police. A similar co-ordination existed in the local offices. Within Germany and areas which were incorporated within the Reich for the purpose of civil administration, local offices of the Gestapo, criminal police, and SD were formally separate. They were subject to co-ordination by inspectors of the security police and SD on the staffs of the local higher SS and police leaders, however, and one of the principal functions of the local SD units was to serve as the intelligence agency for the local Gestapo units. In the occupied territories, the formal relationship between local units of the Gestapo, criminal police, and SD was slightly closer.

The Gestapo became known as RSHA (&quot;Department or Office IV&quot;) with Heinrich Müller as its chief. In January 1943, Himmler appointed Ernst Kaltenbrunner RSHA chief; almost seven months after Heydrich had been assassinated. The specific internal departments of were as follows:
* Department A (Political Opponents)
** Communists (A1)
** Counter-sabotage (A2)
** Reactionaries, liberals, and opposition (A3)
** Protective services (A4)
* Department B (Sects and Churches)
** Catholicism (B1)
** Protestantism (B2)
** Freemasons and other churches (B3)
** Jewish affairs (B4)
* Department C (Administration and Party Affairs), central administrative office of the Gestapo, responsible for card files of all personnel including all officials.
** Files, card, indexes, information, and administration (C1)
** Protective custody (C2)
** Press office (C3)
** NSDAP matters (C4)
* Department D (Occupied Territories), administration for regions outside the .
** Protectorate affairs, Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, regions of Yugoslavia, Greece (D1)
*** 1st Belgrade Special Combat detachment
** General Government(D2)
** Confidential office – hostile foreigners, emigrants (D3)
** Occupied territories – France, Belgium, Holland, Norway, Denmark (D4)
** Occupied Eastern territories (D5)
* Department E (Security and counterintelligence)
** In the (E1)
** Policy and economic formation (E2)
** West (E3)
** Scandinavia (North)(E4)
** East (E5)
** South (E6)

In 1941 , the central command office of the Gestapo was formed. However, these internal departments remained and the Gestapo continued to be a department under the RSHA umbrella. The local offices of the Gestapo, known as Gestapo and , answered to a local commander known as the (&quot;Inspector of the Security Police and Security Service&quot;) who, in turn, was under the dual command of of the Gestapo and also his local SS and Police Leader.

In total, there were some fifty-four regional Gestapo offices across the German federal states. The Gestapo also maintained offices at all Nazi concentration camps, held an office on the staff of the SS and Police Leaders, and supplied personnel as needed to formations such as the . Personnel assigned to these auxiliary duties were often removed from the Gestapo chain of command and fell under the authority of branches of the SS. It was the Gestapo chief, SS-&quot;Brigadierführer&quot; Heinrich Müller, who kept Hitler abreast of the killing operations in the Soviet Union and who issued orders to the four that their continual work in the east was to be &quot;presented to the Führer.&quot;

===Female criminal investigation career===
According to regulations issued by the Reich Security Main Office in 1940, women who had been trained in social work or having a similar education could be hired as female detectives. Female youth leaders, lawyers, business administrators with experience in social work, female leaders in the and personnel administrators in the Bund Deutscher Mädel were hired as detectives after a one-year course, if they had several years professional experience. Later, nurses, kindergarten teachers, and trained female commercial employees with an aptitude for police work were hired as female detectives after a two-year course as and could promote to a . After another two or three years in that grade, the female detective could advance to . Further promotions to and were also possible.

==Membership==
In 1933, there was no purge of the German police forces. The vast majority of Gestapo officers came from the police forces of the Weimar Republic; members of the SS, the SA, and the Nazi Party also joined the Gestapo but were less numerous. By March 1937, the Gestapo employed an estimated 6,500 people in fifty-four regional offices across the Reich. Additional staff were added in March 1938 consequent the annexation of Austria and again in October 1938 with the acquisition of the Sudetenland. In 1939, only 3,000 out of the total of 20,000 Gestapo men held SS ranks, and in most cases, these were honorary. One man who served in the Prussian Gestapo in 1933 recalled that most of his co-workers &quot;were by no means all Nazis. For the most part they were young professional civil service officers...&quot; The Nazis valued police competence more than politics, so in general in 1933, almost all of the men who served in the various state police forces under the Weimar Republic stayed on in their jobs. In Würzburg, which is one of the few places in Germany where most of the Gestapo records survived, every member of the Gestapo was a career policeman or had a police background.

The Canadian historian Robert Gellately wrote that most Gestapo men were not Nazis, but at the same time were not opposed to the Nazi regime, which they were willing to serve, in whatever task they were called upon to perform. Over time, membership in the Gestapo included ideological training, particularly once Werner Best assumed a leading role for training in April 1936. Employing biological metaphors, Best emphasised a doctrine which encouraged members of the Gestapo to view themselves as &#x27;doctors&#x27; to the &#x27;national body&#x27; in the struggle against &quot;pathogens&quot; and &quot;diseases&quot;; among the implied sicknesses were &quot;communists, Freemasons, and the churches—and above and behind all these stood the Jews&quot;. Heydrich thought along similar lines and advocated both defensive and offensive measures on the part of the Gestapo, so as to prevent any subversion or destruction of the National Socialist body.

Whether trained as police originally or not, Gestapo agents themselves were shaped by their socio-political environment. Historian George C. Browder contends that there was a four-part process (authorisation, bolstering, routinisation, and dehumanisation) in effect, which legitimised the psycho-social atmosphere conditioning members of the Gestapo to radicalised violence. Browder also describes a sandwich effect, where from above; Gestapo agents were subjected to ideologically oriented racism and criminal biological theories; and from below, the Gestapo was transformed by SS personnel who did not have the proper police training, which showed in their propensity for unrestrained violence. This admixture certainly shaped the Gestapo&#x27;s public image which they sought to maintain despite their increasing workload; an image which helped them identify and eliminate enemies of the Nazi state.

==Population ratios, methods, and effectiveness==
Contrary to popular belief, the Gestapo was not the all-pervasive, omnipotent agency in German society. In Germany proper, many towns and cities had fewer than 50 official Gestapo personnel. For example, in 1939 Stettin and Frankfurt am Main only had a total of 41 Gestapo men combined. In Düsseldorf, the local Gestapo office of only 281 men were responsible for the entire Lower Rhine region, which comprised 4 million people. In lower Franconia, which included Würzburg, there were only twenty-two Gestapo officers overseeing 840,000 or more inhabitants; this meant that the Nazi secret police &quot;was reliant on Germans spying on each other&quot;. These &quot;V-men&quot;, as undercover Gestapo agents were known, were used to infiltrate Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) and Communist opposition groups, but this was more the exception than the rule. The Gestapo office in Saarbrücken had 50 full-term informers in 1939. The District Office in Nuremberg, which had the responsibility for all of northern Bavaria, employed a total of 80–100 full-term informers between 1943 and 1945. The majority of Gestapo informers were not full-term employees working undercover, but were rather ordinary citizens who chose to denounce other people to the Gestapo.

According to Canadian historian Robert Gellately&#x27;s analysis of the local offices established, the Gestapo was—for the most part—made up of bureaucrats and clerical workers who depended upon denunciations by citizens for their information. Gellately argued that it was because of the widespread willingness of Germans to inform on each other to the Gestapo that Germany between 1933 and 1945 was a prime example of panopticism. The Gestapo—at times—was overwhelmed with denunciations and most of its time was spent sorting out the credible from the less credible denunciations. Many of the local offices were understaffed and overworked, struggling with the paper load caused by so many denunciations. Gellately has also suggested that the Gestapo was &quot;a reactive organisation...constructed within German society and whose functioning was structurally dependent on the continuing co-operation of German citizens&quot;.

After 1939, when many Gestapo personnel were called up for war-related work such as service with the , the level of overwork and understaffing at the local offices increased. For information about what was happening in German society, the Gestapo continued to be mostly dependent upon denunciations. 80% of all Gestapo investigations were started in response to information provided by denunciations by ordinary Germans; while 10% were started in response to information provided by other branches of the German government and another 10% started in response to information that the Gestapo itself unearthed. The information supplied by denunciations often led the Gestapo in determining who was arrested.

The popular picture of the Gestapo with its spies everywhere terrorising German society has been rejected by many historians as a myth invented after the war as a cover for German society&#x27;s widespread complicity in allowing the Gestapo to work. Work done by social historians such as Detlev Peukert, Robert Gellately, Reinhard Mann, Inge Marssolek, René Otto, Klaus-Michael Mallmann and Paul Gerhard, which by focusing on what the local offices were doing has shown the Gestapo″s almost total dependence on denunciations from ordinary Germans, and very much discredited the older &quot;Big Brother&quot; picture with the Gestapo having its eyes and ears everywhere. For example, of the 84 cases in Würzburg of (&quot;race defilement&quot;—sexual relations with non-Aryans), 45 (54%) were started in response to denunciations by ordinary people, two (2%) by information provided by other branches of the government, 20 (24%) via information gained during interrogations of people relating to other matters, four (5%) from information from (Nazi) NSDAP organisations, two (2%) during &quot;political evaluations&quot; and 11 (13%) have no source listed while none were started by Gestapo″s own &quot;observations&quot; of the people of Würzburg.

An examination of 213 denunciations in Düsseldorf showed that 37% were motivated by personal conflicts, no motive could be established in 39%, and 24% were motivated by support for the Nazi regime. The Gestapo always showed a special interest in denunciations concerning sexual matters, especially cases concerning with Jews or between Germans and foreigners, in particular Polish slave workers; the Gestapo applied even harsher methods to the foreign workers in the country, especially those from Poland, Jews, Catholics and homosexuals. As time went by, anonymous denunciations to the Gestapo caused trouble to various NSDAP officials, who often found themselves being investigated by the Gestapo.

Of the political cases, 61 people were investigated for suspicion of belonging to the KPD, 44 for the SPD and 69 for other political parties. Most of the political investigations took place between 1933 and 1935 with the all-time high of 57 cases in 1935. After that year, political investigations declined with only 18 investigations in 1938, 13 in 1939, two in 1941, seven in 1942, four in 1943 and one in 1944. The &quot;other&quot; category associated with non-conformity included everything from a man who drew a caricature of Hitler to a Catholic teacher suspected of being lukewarm about teaching National Socialism in his classroom. The &quot;administrative control&quot; category concerned those who were breaking the law concerning residency in the city. The &quot;conventional criminality&quot; category concerned economic crimes such as money laundering, smuggling and homosexuality.

Normal methods of investigation included various forms of blackmail, threats and extortion to secure &quot;confessions&quot;. Beyond that, sleep deprivation and various forms of harassment were used as investigative methods. Failing that, torture and planting evidence were common methods of resolving a case, especially if the case concerned someone Jewish. Brutality on the part of interrogators—often prompted by denunciations and followed with roundups—enabled the Gestapo to uncover numerous resistance networks; it also made them seem like they knew everything and could do anything they wanted.

While the total number of Gestapo officials was limited when contrasted against the represented populations, the average (Nazi term for the &quot;member of the German people&quot;) was typically not under observation, so the statistical ratio between Gestapo officials and inhabitants is &quot;largely worthless and of little significance&quot; according to some recent scholars. As historian Eric Johnson remarked, &quot;The Nazi terror was selective terror&quot;, with its focus upon political opponents, ideological dissenters (clergy and religious organisations), career criminals, the Sinti and Roma population, handicapped persons, homosexuals and above all, upon the Jews. &quot;Selective terror&quot; by the Gestapo, as mentioned by Johnson, is also supported by historian Richard Evans who states that, &quot;Violence and intimidation rarely touched the lives of most ordinary Germans. Denunciation was the exception, not the rule, as far as the behaviour of the vast majority of Germans was concerned.&quot; The involvement of ordinary Germans in denunciations also needs to be put into perspective so as not to exonerate the Gestapo. As Evans makes clear, &quot;...it was not the ordinary German people who engaged in surveillance, it was the Gestapo; nothing happened until the Gestapo received a denunciation, and it was the Gestapo&#x27;s active pursuit of deviance and dissent that was the only thing that gave denunciations meaning.&quot; The Gestapo&#x27;s effectiveness remained in the ability to &quot;project&quot; omnipotence...they co-opted the assistance of the German population by using denunciations to their advantage; proving in the end a powerful, ruthless and effective organ of terror under the Nazi regime that was seemingly everywhere. Lastly, the Gestapo&#x27;s effectiveness, while aided by denunciations and the watchful eye of ordinary Germans, was more the result of the co-ordination and co-operation amid the various police organs within Germany, the assistance of the SS, and the support provided by the various Nazi Party organisations; all of them together forming an organised persecution network.

==Operations in Nazi-occupied territories==
As an instrument of Nazi power, terror, and repression, the Gestapo operated throughout occupied Europe. Much like their affiliated organisations, the SS and the SD, the Gestapo &quot;played a leading part&quot; in enslaving and deporting workers from occupied territory, torturing and executing civilians, singling out and murdering Jews, and subjecting Allied prisoners of war to terrible treatment. To this end, the Gestapo was &quot;a vital component both in Nazi repression and the Holocaust.&quot; Once the German armies advanced into enemy territory, they were accompanied by staffed by officers from the Gestapo and Kripo, who usually operated in the rear areas to administer and police the occupied land. Whenever a region came fully under German military occupational jurisdiction, the Gestapo administered all executive actions under the military commander&#x27;s authority, albeit operating relatively independent of it.

A former partisan and Soviet officer named Hersch Gurewicz attested to the torture methods used by the Gestapo. He recalled a partisan was strapped to a table in a room and &quot;a German turned the lever and the table moved apart in sections like a rack. The man screamed and his leg bones snapped through his skin. The lever turned again and his arms ripped in jagged tears. After the man fainted, his torturers shot him dead.&quot; He also claimed that he had been strapped down and a wire slowly forced up his nose, into his lung, causing him to go unconscious. Later he was tied to a horse, which was made to gallop full speed, and recalled being smashed into the ground repeatedly, before being knocked out by a solid object.

Occupation meant administration and policing, a duty assigned to the SS, the SD, and the Gestapo even before hostilities began, as was the case for Czechoslovakia. Correspondingly, Gestapo offices were established in a territory once occupied. Some locals aided the Gestapo, whether as professional police auxiliaries or in other duties. Nonetheless, operations performed either by German members of the Gestapo or auxiliaries from willing collaborators of other nationalities were inconsistent in both disposition and effectiveness. Varying degrees of pacification and police enforcement measures were necessary in each place, dependent on how cooperative or resistant the locals were to Nazi mandates and racial policies.

Throughout the Eastern territories, the Gestapo and other Nazi organisations co-opted the assistance of indigenous police units, nearly all of whom were uniformed and able to carry out drastic actions. Many of the auxiliary police personnel operating on behalf of German Order Police, the SD, and Gestapo were members of the , which included staffing by Ukrainians, Belarusians, Russians, Estonians, Lithuanians, and Latvians. While in many countries the Nazis occupied in the East, the local domestic police forces supplemented German operations, noted Holocaust historian, Raul Hilberg, asserts that &quot;those of Poland were least involved in anti-Jewish actions.&quot; Nonetheless, German authorities ordered the mobilisation of reserve Polish police forces, known as the Blue Police, which strengthened the Nazi police presence and carried out numerous &quot;police&quot; functions; in some cases, its functionaries even identified and rounded up Jews or performed other unsavory duties on behalf of their German masters.

In places like Denmark, there were some 550 uniformed Danes in Copenhagen working with the Gestapo, patrolling and terrorising the local population at the behest of their German overseers, many of whom were arrested after the war. Other Danish civilians, like in many places across Europe, acted as Gestapo informants but this should not be seen as wholehearted support for the Nazi program, as motives for cooperation varied. Whereas in France, the number of members in the (French Gestapo) who worked on behalf of the Nazis was upwards of 30,000 to 32,000; they conducted operations nearly indistinguishable from their German equivalents.

==Nuremberg trials==

Between 14 November 1945 and 3 October 1946, the Allies established an International Military Tribunal (IMT) to try 22 major Nazi war criminals and six groups for crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity. Nineteen of the 22 were convicted, and twelve—Martin Bormann (in absentia), Hans Frank, Wilhelm Frick, Hermann Göring, Alfred Jodl, Ernst Kaltenbrunner, Wilhelm Keitel, Joachim von Ribbentrop, Alfred Rosenberg, Fritz Sauckel, Arthur Seyss-Inquart, Julius Streicher—were given the death penalty. Three—Walther Funk, Rudolf Hess, Erich Raeder—received life terms; and the remaining four—Karl Dönitz, Konstantin von Neurath, Albert Speer, and Baldur von Schirach—received shorter prison sentences. Three others—Hans Fritzsche, Hjalmar Schacht, and Franz von Papen—were acquitted. At that time, the Gestapo was condemned as a criminal organisation, along with the SS. However, Gestapo leader Heinrich Müller was never tried, as he disappeared at the end of the war.

Leaders, organisers, investigators and accomplices participating in the formulation or execution of a common plan or conspiracy to commit the crimes specified were declared responsible for all acts performed by any persons in execution of such plan. The official positions of defendants as heads of state or holders of high government offices were not to free them from responsibility or mitigate their punishment; nor was that a defendant acted pursuant to an order of a superior to excuse him from responsibility, although it might be considered by the IMT in mitigation of punishment.

At the trial of any individual member of any group or organisation, the IMT was authorised to declare (in connection with any act of which the individual was convicted) that the group or organisation to which he belonged was a criminal organisation. When a group or organisation was thus declared criminal, the competent national authority of any signatory had the right to bring persons to trial for membership in that organisation, with the criminal nature of the group or organisation assumed proved.

The IMT subsequently convicted three of the groups: the Nazi leadership corps, the SS (including the SD) and the Gestapo. Gestapo members Hermann Göring, Ernst Kaltenbrunner and Arthur Seyss-Inquart were individually convicted. While three groups were acquitted of collective war crimes charges, this did not relieve individual members of those groups from conviction and punishment under the denazification programme. Members of the three convicted groups, however, were subject to apprehension by Britain, the United States, the Soviet Union, and France. These groups—the Nazi Party and government leadership, the German General staff and High Command (OKW); the (SA); the (SS), including the (SD); and the Gestapo—had an aggregate membership exceeding two million, making a large number of their members liable to trial when the organisations were convicted.

==Aftermath==
In 1997, Cologne transformed the former regional Gestapo headquarters in Cologne—the EL-DE Haus—into a museum to document the Gestapo&#x27;s actions.

After the war, U.S. Counterintelligence Corps employed the former Lyon Gestapo chief Klaus Barbie for his anti-communist efforts and also helped him escape to Bolivia.

==Leadership==


===Timeline===
==Principal agents and officers==
* Heinrich Baab (SiPo-SD Frankfurt)
* Klaus Barbie (SiPo-SD Lyon)
* Werner Best (SiPo-SD Copenhagen)
* Karl Bömelburg (Head of Gestapo, Southern France)
* Theodor Dannecker (SiPo-SD Paris)
* Rudolf Diels (Gestapo Chief 1933–1934)
* Adolf Eichmann (RSHA Berlin)
* Gerhard Flesch
* Hermann Göring (Founder of the Gestapo)
* Viktor Harnischfeger (Düsseldorf Gestapo Criminal Commissar)
* Reinhard Heydrich (SD, SiPo, Gestapo Chief 1934–1939, RSHA Chief 1939–1942)
* Heinrich Himmler ()
* Ernst Kaltenbrunner (RSHA Chief 1943–1945)
* Herbert Kappler (SD Chief Rome)
* Werner Knab
* Helmut Knochen (Paris)
* Kurt Lischka (Paris)
* Ernst Misselwitz ( SiPo-SD Paris)
* Heinrich Müller (Gestapo Chief 1939–1945)
* Carl Oberg (Paris)
* Pierre Paoli (Head of Gestapo, Central France)
* Oswald Poche (Chief of Frankfurt Lindenstrasse station)
* Henry Rinnan (Norwegian agent)
* Karl Eberhard Schöngarth (SiPo-SD General Government; Netherlands)
* Max Wielen
==Ranks and uniforms==
The Gestapo was a secretive plainclothes agency and agents typically wore civilian suits. There were strict protocols protecting the identity of Gestapo field personnel. When asked for identification, an operative was required only to present his warrant disc and not a picture identification. This disc identified the operative as a member of the Gestapo without revealing personal information, except when ordered to do so by an authorised official.

Leitstellung (district office) staff did wear the grey SS service uniform, but with police-pattern shoulderboards, and SS rank insignia on the left collar patch. The right collar patch was black without the sig runes. The SD sleeve diamond (SD ) insignia was worn on the lower left sleeve, even by SiPo men who were not in the SD. Uniforms worn by Gestapo men assigned to the in occupied territories, were at first indistinguishable from the Waffen-SS field uniform. Complaints from the Waffen-SS led to a change of rank insignia shoulder boards from those of the Waffen-SS to those of the .

The Gestapo maintained police detective ranks which were used for all officers, both those who were and who were not concurrently SS members.

*Junior career = .
*Senior career = 
Sources:

;Rank insignia
* Source:

==See also==
* Geheime Feldpolizei
* Hamburg State Police Headquarters

==Notes==
==Citations==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* Bauz, Ingrid; Sigrid Brüggemann; Roland Maier, eds. (2013). &quot;Die Geheime Staatspolizei in Württemberg und Hohenzollern&quot;. Stuttgart: Schmetterling. .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Krausnick, Helmut, et al. (1968). &quot;Anatomy of the SS State&quot;. New York; Walker and Company. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* Festung Furulund – magasinet – Dagbladet.no 
* Collection of testimonies concerning Gestapo activity in occupied Poland during WWII in &quot;Chronicles of Terror&quot; database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="4" end="4" title="Gestapo" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="11" end="22" title="Syllabic abbreviation" label="abbreviated"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="23" end="30" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="52" end="65" title="secret police" label="secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="69" end="81" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="89" end="111" title="German-occupied Europe" label="German-occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="139" end="153" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q161036" start="216" end="223" title="Free State of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="322" end="335" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="348" end="364" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="618" end="644" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reich Security Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q840648" start="984" end="989" title="Sinti" label="Sinti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="994" end="998" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="1147" end="1165" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q579924" start="1247" end="1267" title="Night and Fog Decree" label="Night and Fog Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288449" start="1278" end="1289" title="forced disappearance" label="disappeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1559" end="1571" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1606" end="1619" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="1743" end="1759" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1837" end="1849" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="1857" end="1878" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="1880" end="1894" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="1919" end="1928" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="1959" end="1969" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654355" start="1980" end="1997" title="Interior Minister of Prussia" label="Interior Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="2001" end="2008" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444571" start="2304" end="2312" title="franking" label="franking"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2500" end="2506" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q836763" start="2507" end="2534" title="State Political Directorate" label="State Political Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q60940" start="2587" end="2599" title="Rudolf Diels" label="Rudolf Diels"/>
<link wikidata="Q480016" start="2692" end="2714" title="Prussian Secret Police" label="Prussian Secret Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q157888" start="2768" end="2789" title="Marinus van der Lubbe" label="Marinus van der Lubbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q153992" start="2800" end="2814" title="Reichstag fire" label="Reichstag fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q76887" start="2858" end="2871" title="Wilhelm Frick" label="Wilhelm Frick"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="3365" end="3381" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="3445" end="3452" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="3618" end="3635" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q812259" start="4231" end="4256" title="Bavarian Political Police" label="Bavarian Political Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q58030" start="4266" end="4281" title="Heinrich Müller (Gestapo)" label="Heinrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q72774" start="4283" end="4300" title="Franz Josef Huber" label="Franz Josef Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q64910" start="4306" end="4321" title="Josef Meisinger" label="Josef Meisinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q58583" start="4888" end="4898" title="Ernst Röhm" label="Ernst Röhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="5077" end="5084" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="5573" end="5579" title="putsch" label="putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q130783" start="5953" end="5977" title="Night of the Long Knives" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q57576" start="6774" end="6786" title="Kurt Daluege" label="Kurt Daluege"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="7162" end="7169" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="7182" end="7190" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="7334" end="7349" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q60714" start="7679" end="7690" title="Werner Best" label="Werner Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="8006" end="8032" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reich Security Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q78473" start="8292" end="8311" title="Ernst Kaltenbrunner" label="Ernst Kaltenbrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q28085" start="8391" end="8405" title="Adolf Eichmann" label="Adolf Eichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="8541" end="8550" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="8667" end="8686" title="extermination camps" label="extermination camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="8786" end="8795" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="9043" end="9061" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q579924" start="9143" end="9163" title="Night and Fog Decree" label="Night and Fog Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288449" start="9174" end="9185" title="forced disappearance" label="disappeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="9406" end="9432" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="9574" end="9598" title="Invasion of Poland" label="Germany conquered Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="9818" end="9833" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="German invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9841" end="9853" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="9992" end="10008" title="radio telegraphy" label="radio telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="10087" end="10093" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="10239" end="10247" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="10252" end="10260" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q55945694" start="10359" end="10382" title="Order Police battalions" label="Order Police battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="10458" end="10467" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q750215" start="10473" end="10484" title="mass murder" label="mass murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="11033" end="11042" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730596" start="11598" end="11609" title="Karl Burian" label="Karl Burian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76343" start="11827" end="11844" title="Otto von Habsburg" label="Otto von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q542959" start="11906" end="11920" title="Heinrich Maier" label="Heinrich Maier"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="12004" end="12007" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="12009" end="12019" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801544" start="12022" end="12032" title="Tiger tank" label="Tiger tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="12049" end="12069" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q155360" start="12071" end="12097" title="Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet" label="Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="12302" end="12314" title="Allen Dulles" label="Allen Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="12335" end="12363" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766984" start="12528" end="12546" title="Operation Crossbow" label="Operation Crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264163" start="12551" end="12566" title="Operation Hydra (1943)" label="Operation Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12729" end="12742" title="Nazism#Ideology and programme" label="Nazi doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="12767" end="12793" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424662" start="12954" end="12964" title="Omniscience" label="omniscient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141803" start="12969" end="12979" title="Omnipotence" label="omnipotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q312526" start="14256" end="14275" title="German Labour Front" label="German Labour Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q58645" start="14334" end="14344" title="Robert Ley" label="Robert Ley"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="15219" end="15225" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154494" start="15260" end="15270" title="Action T4" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="15464" end="15477" title="Antisemitism" label="anti-semitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="15482" end="15491" title="Modern paganism" label="neo-pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="15561" end="15573" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q162663" start="15598" end="15618" title="Mit brennender Sorge" label="Mit brennender Sorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q76326" start="15744" end="15763" title="Dietrich Bonhoeffer" label="Dietrich Bonhoeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="16069" end="16076" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="16680" end="16704" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17204" end="17212" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="17214" end="17224" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="17230" end="17238" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q57820" start="18874" end="18878" title="Hans Scholl" label="Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q76972" start="18883" end="18896" title="Sophie Scholl" label="Sophie Scholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q153364" start="18917" end="18927" title="White Rose" label="White Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q153364" start="19201" end="19211" title="White Rose" label="White Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q153349" start="19236" end="19253" title="Edelweiss Pirates" label="Edelweiss Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q512889" start="19263" end="19274" title="Swing Youth" label="Swing Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q57409" start="19788" end="19800" title="Hans Oster" label="Oster Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="20263" end="20275" title="aristocratic" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76640" start="20705" end="20718" title="Otto Strasser" label="Otto Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q322408" start="21107" end="21118" title="Solf Circle" label="Solf Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q838247" start="21536" end="21549" title="legal defence" label="legal defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="21677" end="21683" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q605575" start="21742" end="21756" title="Venlo incident" label="Venlo incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="21837" end="21848" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="21872" end="21899" title="Secret Intelligence Service" label="Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="21990" end="22007" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q508967" start="22840" end="22858" title="Operation Valkyrie" label="Operation Valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q21209" start="22935" end="22969" title="Claus Schenk Graf von Stauffenberg" label="Claus Schenk Graf von Stauffenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157153" start="23077" end="23093" title="Wolf&amp;#x27;s Lair" label="Wolf&amp;#x27;s Lair"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="23127" end="23139" title="20 July plot" label="20 July plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q57601" start="23604" end="23619" title="Roland Freisler" label="Roland Freisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="23774" end="23782" title="Sabotage" label="Sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937160" start="24362" end="24388" title="minister without portfolio" label="minister without portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="24526" end="24536" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="24766" end="24773" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="24810" end="24817" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="25215" end="25224" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="26268" end="26294" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reich Security Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858950" start="27829" end="27859" title="Operation Anthropoid" label="Heydrich had been assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="28153" end="28163" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761377" start="28690" end="28728" title="1st Belgrade Special Combat detachment" label="1st Belgrade Special Combat detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q187668" start="28800" end="28809" title="emigrants" label="emigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q655130" start="29521" end="29541" title="SS and Police Leader" label="SS and Police Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="30390" end="30401" title="social work" label="social work"/>
<link wikidata="Q38780" start="30614" end="30634" title="Bund Deutscher Mädel" label="Bund Deutscher Mädel"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="31566" end="31577" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="32050" end="32065" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999" start="32094" end="32102" title="Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q506120" start="32293" end="32309" title="Robert Gellately" label="Robert Gellately"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33354" end="33371" title="George C. Browder" label="George C. Browder"/>
<link wikidata="Q788590" start="33417" end="33430" title="authorisation" label="authorisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495037" start="33463" end="33477" title="dehumanisation" label="dehumanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416483" start="33576" end="33587" title="radicalised" label="radicalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="33714" end="33720" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="34467" end="34477" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999" start="34641" end="34649" title="Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="34921" end="34955" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724" start="35064" end="35075" title="Saarbrücken" label="Saarbrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="35135" end="35144" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="35195" end="35202" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q506120" start="35475" end="35491" title="Robert Gellately" label="Robert Gellately"/>
<link wikidata="Q828310" start="35862" end="35873" title="panopticism" label="panopticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q908604" start="37342" end="37359" title="social history" label="social historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q92524" start="37368" end="37382" title="Detlev Peukert" label="Detlev Peukert"/>
<link wikidata="Q98410" start="37444" end="37466" title="Klaus-Michael Mallmann" label="Klaus-Michael Mallmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q788594" start="37670" end="37681" title="Authoritarian personality" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999" start="37782" end="37790" title="Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="37849" end="37854" title="Aryan" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="38368" end="38378" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983410" start="38703" end="38723" title="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation" label="Polish slave workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="38855" end="38866" title="homosexuals" label="homosexuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q166269" start="38950" end="38955" title="NSDAP/AO" label="NSDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="39879" end="39895" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="39897" end="39906" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q34284" start="39985" end="39994" title="blackmail" label="blackmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="40008" end="40017" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="40166" end="40173" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432702" start="40178" end="40195" title="planting evidence" label="planting evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q29530429" start="40375" end="40383" title="Roundup (history)" label="roundups"/>
<link wikidata="Q840648" start="41120" end="41125" title="Sinti" label="Sinti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="41130" end="41134" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="41147" end="41166" title="Disability" label="handicapped persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189956" start="41425" end="41437" title="Denunciation" label="Denunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="41759" end="41771" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q693994" start="45886" end="45897" title="Blue Police" label="Blue Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="46873" end="46904" title="International Military Tribunal" label="International Military Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496097" start="46965" end="46985" title="crimes against peace" label="crimes against peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="46987" end="46996" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="47002" end="47025" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q58030" start="47715" end="47730" title="Heinrich Müller (Gestapo)" label="Heinrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q650219" start="49062" end="49082" title="Arthur Seyss-Inquart" label="Arthur Seyss-Inquart"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="49277" end="49291" title="denazification" label="denazification"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="49383" end="49390" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="49396" end="49409" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="49415" end="49427" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="49433" end="49439" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="49507" end="49537" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="General staff and High Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="49770" end="49777" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q615547" start="49846" end="49856" title="EL-DE Haus" label="EL-DE Haus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137074" start="49932" end="49957" title="Counterintelligence Corps" label="Counterintelligence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q77088" start="49997" end="50009" title="Klaus Barbie" label="Klaus Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="50071" end="50078" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16522121" start="50149" end="50162" title="Heinrich Baab" label="Heinrich Baab"/>
<link wikidata="Q77088" start="50185" end="50197" title="Klaus Barbie" label="Klaus Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q60714" start="50215" end="50226" title="Werner Best" label="Werner Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q82410" start="50250" end="50264" title="Karl Bömelburg" label="Karl Bömelburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q62471" start="50302" end="50319" title="Theodor Dannecker" label="Theodor Dannecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q60940" start="50338" end="50350" title="Rudolf Diels" label="Rudolf Diels"/>
<link wikidata="Q28085" start="50379" end="50393" title="Adolf Eichmann" label="Adolf Eichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q70883" start="50410" end="50424" title="Gerhard Flesch" label="Gerhard Flesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="50427" end="50441" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="50532" end="50549" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="50610" end="50626" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q78473" start="50632" end="50651" title="Ernst Kaltenbrunner" label="Ernst Kaltenbrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q61861" start="50677" end="50692" title="Herbert Kappler" label="Herbert Kappler"/>
<link wikidata="Q107281" start="50711" end="50722" title="Werner Knab" label="Werner Knab"/>
<link wikidata="Q62675" start="50725" end="50739" title="Helmut Knochen" label="Helmut Knochen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61550" start="50750" end="50762" title="Kurt Lischka" label="Kurt Lischka"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896578" start="50773" end="50789" title="Ernst Misselwitz" label="Ernst Misselwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q58030" start="50809" end="50824" title="Heinrich Müller (Gestapo)" label="Heinrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q61815" start="50853" end="50863" title="Carl Oberg" label="Carl Oberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386497" start="50874" end="50886" title="Pierre Paoli" label="Pierre Paoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109487" start="50923" end="50935" title="Oswald Poche" label="Oswald Poche"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132543" start="50981" end="50993" title="Henry Rinnan" label="Henry Rinnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61000" start="51014" end="51038" title="Karl Eberhard Schöngarth" label="Karl Eberhard Schöngarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795380" start="51083" end="51093" title="Max Wielen" label="Max Wielen"/>
<link wikidata="Q799000" start="51364" end="51376" title="Badge" label="warrant disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q160552" start="51654" end="51683" title="Ordnungspolizei" label="police-pattern shoulderboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q9298753" start="51777" end="51785" title="sig rune" label="sig rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q548226" start="52394" end="52413" title="Geheime Feldpolizei" label="Geheime Feldpolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325141" start="52416" end="52449" title="Hamburg State Police Headquarters" label="Hamburg State Police Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603809" start="52709" end="52726" title="Helmut Krausnick" label="Krausnick, Helmut"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12900" wikidata="Q474628" url="?curid=12900" title="Grammatical conjugation">
<text>In linguistics, conjugation () is the creation of derived forms of a verb from its principal parts by inflection (alteration of form according to rules of grammar). For instance, the verb &quot;break&quot; can be conjugated to form the words &quot;break&quot;, &quot;breaks&quot;, and &quot;broke&quot;. While English has a relatively simple conjugation, other languages such as French and Arabic or Spanish are more complex, with each verb having dozens of conjugated forms. Some languages such as Georgian and Basque (some verbs only) have highly complex conjugation systems with hundreds of possible conjugations for every verb.

Verbs may inflect for grammatical categories such as person, number, gender, case, tense, aspect, mood, voice, possession, definiteness, politeness, causativity, clusivity, interrogatives, transitivity, valency, polarity, telicity, volition, mirativity, evidentiality, animacy, associativity, pluractionality, and reciprocity. Verbs may also be affected by agreement, polypersonal agreement, incorporation, noun class, noun classifiers, and verb classifiers. Agglutinative and polysynthetic languages tend to have the most complex conjugations, although some fusional languages such as Archi can also have extremely complex conjugation. Typically the principal parts are the root and/or several modifications of it (stems). All the different forms of the same verb constitute a lexeme, and the canonical form of the verb that is conventionally used to represent that lexeme (as seen in dictionary entries) is called a lemma.

The term conjugation is applied only to the inflection of verbs, and not of other parts of speech (inflection of nouns and adjectives is known as declension). Also it is generally restricted to denoting the formation of finite forms of a verb – these may be referred to as &quot;conjugated forms&quot;, as opposed to non-finite forms, such as an infinitive, gerund, or participle which respectively comprise their own grammatical categories.

&quot;Conjugation&quot; is also the traditional term for a group of verbs that share a similar conjugation pattern in a particular language (a &quot;verb class&quot;). For example, Latin is said to have four conjugations of verbs. This means that any regular Latin verb can be conjugated in any person, number, tense, mood, and voice by knowing which of the four conjugation groups it belongs to, and its principal parts. A verb that does not follow all of the standard conjugation patterns of the language is said to be an irregular verb. The system of all conjugated variants of a particular verb or class of verbs is called a verb paradigm; this may be presented in the form of a conjugation table.

==Verbal agreement==
Verbal agreement, or concord, is a morpho-syntactic construct in which properties of the subject and/or objects of a verb are indicated by the verb form. Verbs are then said to agree with their subjects (resp. objects).

Many English verbs exhibit subject agreement of the following sort: whereas &quot;I go&quot;, &quot;you go&quot;, &quot;we go&quot;, &quot;they go&quot; are all grammatical in standard English, &quot;he go&quot; is not (except in the subjunctive, as &quot;They requested that &quot;he go&quot; with them&quot;). Instead, a special form of the verb &quot;to go&quot; has to be used to produce &quot;he goes&quot;. On the other hand &quot;I goes&quot;, &quot;you goes&quot; etc. are not grammatical in standard English. (Things are different in some English dialects that lack agreement.) A few English verbs have no special forms that indicate subject agreement (&quot;I may&quot;, &quot;you may&quot;, &quot;he may&quot;), and the verb &quot;to be&quot; has an additional form &quot;am&quot; that can only be used with the pronoun &quot;I&quot; as the subject.

Verbs in written French exhibit more intensive agreement morphology than English verbs: (I am), (&quot;you are&quot;, singular informal), (she is), (we are), (&quot;you are&quot;, plural), (they are). Historically, English used to have a similar verbal paradigm. Some historic verb forms are used by Shakespeare as slightly archaic or more formal variants (&quot;I do&quot;, &quot;thou dost&quot;, &quot;he doth&quot;) of the modern forms.

Some languages with verbal agreement can leave certain subjects implicit when the subject is fully determined by the verb form. In Spanish, for instance, subject pronouns do not need to be explicitly present, but in French, its close relative, they are obligatory. The Spanish equivalent to the French (I am) can be simply (lit. &quot;am&quot;). The pronoun (I) in the explicit form is used only for emphasis or to clear ambiguity in complex texts.

Some languages have a richer agreement system in which verbs agree also with some or all of their objects. Ubykh exhibits verbal agreement for the subject, direct object, indirect object, benefaction and ablative objects (, &quot;you gave it to him for me&quot;).

Basque can show agreement not only for subject, direct object and indirect object but it also can exhibit agreement for the listener as the implicit benefactor: means &quot;they brought us the car&quot; (neuter agreement for the listener), but means &quot;they brought us the car&quot; (agreement for feminine singular listener).

Languages with a rich agreement morphology facilitate relatively free word order without leading to increased ambiguity. The canonical word order in Basque is subject–object–verb, but all permutations of subject, verb and object are permitted.

===Nonverbal person agreement===
In some languages, predicative adjectives and copular complements receive a form of person agreement that is distinct from that used on ordinary predicative verbs. Although that is a form of conjugation in that it refers back to the person of the subject, it is not &quot;verbal&quot; because it always derives from pronouns that have become clitic to the nouns to which they refer. An example of nonverbal person agreement, along with contrasting verbal conjugation, can be found from Beja (person agreement affixes in bold):

* , “you (fem.) are big”
* , “you (masc.) are a sheik”
* , “he flees”

Another example can be found from Ket:

* , “I am a Tungus”
* , “I am standing”

In Turkic, and a few Uralic and Australian Aboriginal languages, predicative adjectives and copular complements take affixes that are identical to those used on predicative verbs, but their negation is different. For example, in Turkish:

* “you are running”
* “you are a sergeant”

Under negation, that becomes (negative affixes in bold):

* “you are not running”
* “you are not a sergeant”

Therefore, the person agreement affixes used with predicative adjectives and nominals in Turkic languages are considered to be nonverbal in character. In some analyses, they are viewed as a form of verbal takeover by a copular strategy.

==Factors that affect conjugation==
These common grammatical categories affect how verbs can be conjugated:
*Finite verb forms:
**Grammatical person
**Grammatical number
**Grammatical gender
**Grammatical tense
**Grammatical aspect
**Grammatical mood
**Grammatical voice
*Non-finite verb forms.

Here are other factors that may affect conjugation:
*Degree of formality (see T–V distinction, Honorific speech in Japanese, Korean speech levels)
*Clusivity (of personal pronouns)
*Transitivity
*Valency

==Examples==
Indo-European languages usually inflect verbs for several grammatical categories in complex paradigms, although some, like English, have simplified verb conjugation to a large extent. Below is the conjugation of the verb &quot;to be&quot; in the present tense (of the infinitive, if it exists, and indicative moods), in English, German, Yiddish, Dutch, Afrikaans, Icelandic, Faroese, Swedish, Norwegian, Latvian, Bulgarian, Serbo-Croatian, Polish, Slovenian, Macedonian, Urdu or Hindi, Bengali, Persian, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Russian, Albanian, Armenian, Irish, Ukrainian, Ancient Attic Greek and Modern Greek. This is usually the most irregular verb. The similarities in corresponding verb forms may be noticed. Some of the conjugations may be disused, like the English &quot;thou&quot;-form, or have additional meanings, like the English &quot;you&quot;-form, which can also stand for second person singular or be impersonal.

:1 Archaic, poetical; used only with the pronoun &#x27;thou&#x27;.
:2 In Flemish dialects.
:3 In the bokmål written standard.
:4 In the nynorsk written standard. &quot;vera&quot; and &quot;vere&quot; are both alternate forms.
:5 Archaic
:6 Attic.
:7 &#x27;eínai&#x27; is only used as a noun (&quot;being, existence&quot;).
:8 Ptc: .
:9 In the Tosk and Geg dialects, respectively.
:10 Existential: هست (hæst) has another meaning. Usage of (&quot;æ&quot;) is considered to be colloquial, now. See, Indo-European copula
:11 With the Singular they 3rd person pronoun.
:12 Bengali verbs are further conjugated according to formality. There are three verb forms for 2nd person pronouns: হও (&quot;hôo&quot;, familiar), হোস (&quot;hoś&quot;, very familiar) and হন (&quot;hôn&quot;, polite). Also two forms for 3rd person pronouns: হয় (&quot;hôy&quot;, familiar) and হন (&quot;hôn&quot;, polite). Plural verb forms are exact same as singular.
:13 Valencian.
:14 Western varieties only.

== Conjugation classes ==
=== Pama-Nyungan languages ===
One common feature of Pama–Nyungan languages, the largest family of Australian Aboriginal languages, is the notion of conjugation classes, which are a set of groups into which each lexical verb falls. They determine how a verb is conjugated for Tense–aspect–mood. The classes can but do not universally correspond to the transitivity or valency of the verb in question. Generally, of the two to six conjugation classes in a Pama-Nyungan language, two classes are open with a large membership and allow for new coinages, and the remainder are closed and of limited membership.

==== Wati ====
In Wati languages, verbs generally fall into four classes:

* l class
* ∅ class
* n class
* ng class

They are labelled by using common morphological components of verb endings in each respective class in infinitival forms. In the Wanman language these each correspond to la&quot;, &quot;ya&quot;, &quot;rra&quot;, and wa&quot; verbs respectively.

See also a similar table of verb classes and conjugations in Pitjantjatjara, a Wati language wherein the correlating verb classes are presented below also by their imperative verbal endings -la, -∅, -ra and -wa respectively
==== Ngayarta ====
Ngarla, a member of the Ngayarda sub-family of languages has a binary conjugation system labelled:

* l class
* ∅ class

In the case of Ngarla, there is a notably strong correlation between conjugation class and transitivity, with transitive/ditransitive verbs falling in the l-class and intransitive/semi-transitive verbs in the ∅-class.

These classes even extend to how verbs are nominalized as instruments with the l-class verb including the addition of an &quot;/l/&quot; before the nominalizing suffix and the blank class remaining blank:

l-class example:

∅-class example

==== Yidiny ====
Yidiny has a ternary verb class system with two open classes and one closed class (~20 members). Verbs are classified as:

* -n class (open, intransitive/semi-transitive)
* -l class (open, transitive/ditransitive)
* -r class (closed, intransitive)

==See also==

*Agreement (linguistics)
*Declension (nouns, adjectives, &quot;etc.&quot;)
*Inflection
*Redundancy (linguistics)
*Screeve
*Strong inflection
*Verb
*Verb argument
*Volition (linguistics)
*Weak inflection

=== Conjugations by language ===
*:Category:Grammatical conjugation
*Indo-European copula
*Archivium: Italian verbs conjugator, for regular and irregular verbs

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="3" end="14" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="16" end="27" title="Grammatical conjugation" label="conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="69" end="73" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q953928" start="83" end="98" title="principal parts" label="principal parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="102" end="112" title="inflection" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="155" end="162" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="379" end="385" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="390" end="396" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="400" end="407" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="499" end="507" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="512" end="518" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q980357" start="655" end="677" title="grammatical category" label="grammatical categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="686" end="692" title="grammatical person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="694" end="700" title="grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="702" end="708" title="grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="710" end="714" title="grammatical case" label="case"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="716" end="721" title="grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="723" end="729" title="Grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="731" end="735" title="grammatical mood" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="737" end="742" title="grammatical voice" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543662" start="744" end="754" title="possession (linguistics)" label="possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182686" start="756" end="768" title="definiteness" label="definiteness"/>
<link wikidata="Q281287" start="770" end="780" title="politeness" label="politeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737190" start="782" end="793" title="Causative" label="causativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q311784" start="795" end="804" title="clusivity" label="clusivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12021746" start="806" end="819" title="interrogative" label="interrogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q830012" start="822" end="834" title="Transitivity (grammar)" label="transitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412952" start="836" end="843" title="Valency (linguistics)" label="valency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745428" start="845" end="853" title="Affirmation and negation" label="polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336024" start="855" end="863" title="telicity" label="telicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940204" start="865" end="873" title="Volition (linguistics)" label="volition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356464" start="875" end="885" title="mirativity" label="mirativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223979" start="887" end="900" title="evidentiality" label="evidentiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250335" start="902" end="909" title="animacy" label="animacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001077" start="926" end="941" title="pluractionality" label="pluractionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964083" start="947" end="958" title="Reciprocal (grammar)" label="reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="990" end="999" title="agreement (linguistics)" label="agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401947" start="1001" end="1023" title="polypersonal agreement" label="polypersonal agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q727018" start="1025" end="1038" title="Incorporation (linguistics)" label="incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598075" start="1040" end="1050" title="noun class" label="noun class"/>
<link wikidata="Q63153" start="1052" end="1067" title="noun classifier" label="noun classifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q63153" start="1074" end="1089" title="verb classifier" label="verb classifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q393272" start="1092" end="1105" title="Agglutinative" label="Agglutinative"/>
<link wikidata="Q48641" start="1110" end="1132" title="polysynthetic language" label="polysynthetic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q318917" start="1192" end="1209" title="fusional language" label="fusional language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34915" start="1219" end="1224" title="Archi language" label="Archi"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="1308" end="1312" title="root (linguistics)" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q210523" start="1349" end="1353" title="stem (linguistics)" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q111352" start="1411" end="1417" title="lexeme" label="lexeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q18514" start="1551" end="1556" title="lemma (morphology)" label="lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="1672" end="1676" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="1682" end="1691" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="1705" end="1715" title="declension" label="declension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166170" start="1779" end="1791" title="finite verb" label="finite forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050494" start="1876" end="1892" title="non-finite verb" label="non-finite forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="1905" end="1915" title="infinitive" label="infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="1917" end="1923" title="gerund" label="gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="1928" end="1938" title="participle" label="participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2183" end="2188" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55955536" start="2253" end="2260" title="regular verb" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q55955536" start="2526" end="2540" title="irregular verb" label="irregular verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="2631" end="2644" title="Grammatical conjugation" label="verb paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="2685" end="2702" title="Grammatical conjugation" label="conjugation table"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="2761" end="2767" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morpho"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="2768" end="2777" title="syntax" label="syntactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="2815" end="2822" title="subject (grammar)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="2830" end="2836" title="object (grammar)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="2843" end="2847" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="2903" end="2908" title="agreement (linguistics)" label="agree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2952" end="2959" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q473746" start="3181" end="3192" title="subjunctive" label="subjunctive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218391" start="3826" end="3832" title="French verbs" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="3866" end="3876" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124935" start="3936" end="3944" title="T–V distinction" label="informal"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="4109" end="4120" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982067" start="4314" end="4322" title="null-subject language" label="implicit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="4381" end="4388" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36931" start="4807" end="4812" title="Ubykh language" label="Ubykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="4965" end="4971" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="5455" end="5474" title="subject–object–verb" label="subject–object–verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="5605" end="5614" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q207509" start="5620" end="5627" title="copula (linguistics)" label="copular"/>
<link wikidata="Q6959045" start="5719" end="5735" title="predicative verb" label="predicative verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="5890" end="5898" title="pronouns" label="pronouns"/>
<link wikidata="Q213458" start="5916" end="5922" title="clitic" label="clitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33025" start="6060" end="6064" title="Beja language" label="Beja"/>
<link wikidata="Q33485" start="6207" end="6210" title="Ket language" label="Ket"/>
<link wikidata="Q868179" start="6225" end="6231" title="Tungusic peoples" label="Tungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="6257" end="6263" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="6275" end="6281" title="Uralic languages" label="Uralic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="6286" end="6317" title="indigenous Australian languages" label="Australian Aboriginal languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745428" start="6444" end="6452" title="negation (linguistics)" label="negation"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="6483" end="6490" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q980357" start="6934" end="6956" title="grammatical category" label="grammatical categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166170" start="6994" end="7011" title="Finite verb" label="Finite verb forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="7015" end="7033" title="Grammatical person" label="Grammatical person"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="7036" end="7054" title="Grammatical number" label="Grammatical number"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="7057" end="7075" title="Grammatical gender" label="Grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="7078" end="7095" title="Grammatical tense" label="Grammatical tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="7098" end="7116" title="Grammatical aspect" label="Grammatical aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="7119" end="7135" title="Grammatical mood" label="Grammatical mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="7138" end="7155" title="Grammatical voice" label="Grammatical voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050494" start="7157" end="7178" title="Non-finite verb" label="Non-finite verb forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124935" start="7259" end="7274" title="T–V distinction" label="T–V distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11013002" start="7276" end="7304" title="Honorific speech in Japanese" label="Honorific speech in Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007118" start="7306" end="7326" title="Korean speech levels" label="Korean speech levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q311784" start="7329" end="7338" title="Clusivity" label="Clusivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q830012" start="7363" end="7375" title="Transitivity (grammatical category)" label="Transitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412952" start="7377" end="7384" title="Valency (linguistics)" label="Valency"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="7399" end="7422" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="7431" end="7438" title="inflection" label="inflect"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="7491" end="7499" title="Inflectional paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="7719" end="7726" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="7728" end="7734" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="7736" end="7743" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="7745" end="7750" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="7752" end="7761" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="7763" end="7772" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25258" start="7774" end="7781" title="Faroese language" label="Faroese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="7783" end="7790" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="7792" end="7801" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="7803" end="7810" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="7812" end="7821" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="7823" end="7837" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="7839" end="7845" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="7847" end="7856" title="Slovenian language" label="Slovenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="7858" end="7868" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="7870" end="7874" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="7878" end="7883" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="7885" end="7892" title="Bengali Language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="7894" end="7901" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="7903" end="7908" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7910" end="7916" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="7918" end="7925" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="7927" end="7934" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="7936" end="7946" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="7948" end="7955" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="7957" end="7965" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="7967" end="7975" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="7977" end="7982" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="7984" end="7993" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q506588" start="7995" end="8014" title="Ancient Attic Greek" label="Ancient Attic Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="8019" end="8031" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022000" start="8199" end="8203" title="thou" label="thou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165897" start="8268" end="8271" title="you" label="you"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532682" start="8338" end="8348" title="generic you" label="impersonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25167" start="8452" end="8458" title="bokmål" label="bokmål"/>
<link wikidata="Q25164" start="8487" end="8494" title="nynorsk" label="nynorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630230" start="8847" end="8867" title="Indo-European copula" label="Indo-European copula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437264" start="8881" end="8894" title="Singular they" label="Singular they"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124935" start="8969" end="8978" title="T–V distinction" label="formality"/>
<link wikidata="Q33942" start="9410" end="9432" title="Pama–Nyungan languages" label="Pama–Nyungan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="9456" end="9487" title="Australian Aboriginal languages" label="Australian Aboriginal languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751097" start="9633" end="9650" title="Tense–aspect–mood" label="Tense–aspect–mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974669" start="9983" end="9997" title="Wati languages" label="Wati languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967989" start="10207" end="10226" title="Wanman language" label="the Wanman language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4536460" start="10408" end="10421" title="Wati language" label="Wati language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915860" start="10572" end="10578" title="Ngarla language" label="Ngarla"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153490" start="10596" end="10604" title="Ngayarda languages" label="Ngayarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053283" start="11170" end="11176" title="Yidiny language" label="Yidiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="11434" end="11457" title="Agreement (linguistics)" label="Agreement (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="11459" end="11469" title="Declension" label="Declension"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="11509" end="11519" title="Inflection" label="Inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q14942359" start="11521" end="11545" title="Redundancy (linguistics)" label="Redundancy (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650662" start="11547" end="11554" title="Screeve" label="Screeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481903" start="11556" end="11573" title="Strong inflection" label="Strong inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="11575" end="11579" title="Verb" label="Verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185614" start="11581" end="11594" title="Verb argument" label="Verb argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940204" start="11596" end="11618" title="Volition (linguistics)" label="Volition (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977953" start="11620" end="11635" title="Weak inflection" label="Weak inflection"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11671" end="11704" title=":Category:Grammatical conjugation" label=":Category:Grammatical conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630230" start="11706" end="11726" title="Indo-European copula" label="Indo-European copula"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12902" wikidata="Q908381" url="?curid=12902" title="Gomoku">
<text>Gomoku, also called &quot;Five in a Row&quot;, is an abstract strategy board game. It is traditionally played with Go pieces (black and white stones) on a 15×15 Go board while in the past a 19×19 board was standard. Because pieces are typically not moved or removed from the board, gomoku may also be played as a paper-and-pencil game. The game is known in several countries under different names. 

==Rules==
Players alternate turns placing a stone of their color on an empty intersection. Black plays first. The winner is the first player to form an unbroken line of five stones of their color horizontally, vertically, or diagonally. In some rules, this line must be exactly five stones long; six or more stones in a row does not count as a win and is called an overline. If the board is completely filled and no one has made a line of 5 stones, then the game ends in a draw.

==Origin==
Historical records indicate that the origins of gomoku can be traced back to the mid-1700s during the Edo period. It is said that the 10th generation of Kuwanaya Buemon, a merchant who frequented the Nijō family, was highly skilled in this game, which subsequently spread among the people. By the late Edo period, around 1850, books had been published on gomoku. The earliest published book on gomoku that can be verified is the in 1856.

The name &quot;gomoku&quot; is from the Japanese language, in which it is referred to as . &quot;Go&quot; means five, &quot;moku&quot; is a counter word for pieces and &quot;narabe&quot; means &quot;line-up&quot;. The game is popular in China, where it is called &quot;Wuziqi&quot; (五子棋). &quot;Wu&quot; (五 wǔ) means &quot;five&quot;, &quot;zi&quot; (子 zǐ) means &quot;piece&quot;, and &quot;qi&quot; (棋 qí) refers to a board game category in Chinese. The game is also popular in Korea, where it is called &quot;omok&quot; (오목 [五目]) which has the same structure and origin as the Japanese name.

In the nineteenth century, the game was introduced to Britain where it was known as Go Bang, said to be a corruption of the Japanese word &quot;goban&quot;, which was itself adapted from the Chinese &quot;k&#x27;i pan (qí pán)&quot; &quot;go-board.&quot;

== First-player advantage ==
Gomoku has a strong advantage for the first player when unrestricted.

Championships in gomoku previously used the &quot;Pro&quot; opening rule, which mandated that the first player place the first stone in the center of the board. The second player&#x27;s stone placement was unrestricted. The first player&#x27;s second stone had to be placed at least three intersections away from the first player&#x27;s first stone. This rule was used in the 1989 and 1991 world championships. When the win–loss ratio of these two championships was calculated, the first player (black) won 67 percent of games.

This was deemed too unbalanced for tournament play, so tournament gomoku adopted the Swap2 opening protocol in 2009. In Swap2, the first player places three stones, two black and one white, on the board. The second player then selects one of three options: play as black, play as white and place another white stone, or place two more stones, one white and one black, and let the first player choose the color.

The win ratio of the first player has been calculated to be around 52 percent using the Swap2 opening protocol, greatly balancing the game and largely evening out the first-player advantage.

==Variants==

=== Freestyle gomoku ===
Freestyle gomoku has no restrictions on either player and allows a player to win by creating a line of five or more stones, with each player alternating turns placing one stone at a time.

==== Swap after 1st move ====
The rule of &quot;swap after 1st move&quot; is a variant of the freestyle gomoku rule, and is mostly played in China. The game can be played on a 19×19 or 15×15 board. As per the rule, once the first player places a black stone on the board, the second player has the right to swap colors. The rest of the game proceeds as freestyle gomoku. This rule is set to balance the advantage of black in a simple way.

=== Renju ===
Black (the player who makes the first move) has long been known to have an advantage, even before L. Victor Allis proved that black can force a win (see below). Renju attempts to mitigate this imbalance with extra rules that aim to reduce black&#x27;s first player advantage.

It is played on a 15×15 board, with the rules of three and three, four and four, and overlines applied to Black only.
* The rule of three and three bans a move that simultaneously forms two open rows of three stones (rows not blocked by an opponent&#x27;s stone at either end).
* The rule of four and four bans a move that simultaneously forms two rows of four stones (open or not).
*Overlines prevent a player from winning if they form a line of 6 or more stones.
Renju also makes use of various tournament opening rules, such as Soosõrv-8, the current international standard.

=== Caro ===
In Caro, (also called gomoku+, popular among Vietnamese), the winner must have an overline or an unbroken row of five stones that is not blocked at either end (overlines are immune to this rule). This makes the game more balanced and provides more power for White to defend.

=== Omok ===
Omok is similar to Freestyle gomoku; however, it is played on a 19×19 board and includes the rule of &quot;three and three.&quot;

=== Ninuki-renju ===
Also called Wu, Ninuki Renju is a variant which adds capturing to the game; A pair of stones of the same color may be captured by the opponent by means of custodial capture (sandwiching a line of two stones lengthwise). The winner is the player either to make a perfect five in a row, or to capture five pairs of the opponent&#x27;s stones. It uses a 15x15 board and the rules of three and three and overlines. It also allows the game to continue after a player has formed a row of five stones if their opponent can capture a pair across the line.

=== Pente ===
Pente is related to Ninuki-Renju, and has the same custodial capture method, but is most often played on a 19x19 board and does not use the rules of three and three, four and four, or overlines.

=== Tournament Opening Rules ===
Tournament rules are used in professional play to balance the game and mitigate the first player advantage. The tournament rule used for the gomoku world championships since 2009 is the Swap2 opening rule. For all of the following professional rules, an overline (six or more stones in a row) does not count as a win.
==== Pro ====
The first player&#x27;s first stone must be placed in the center of the board. The second player&#x27;s first stone may be placed anywhere on the board. The first player&#x27;s second stone must be placed at least three intersections away from the first stone (two empty intersections in between the two stones).

==== Long Pro ====
The first player&#x27;s first stone must be placed in the center of the board. The second player&#x27;s first stone may be placed anywhere on the board. The first player&#x27;s second stone must be placed at least four intersections away from the first stone (three empty intersections in between the two stones).
==== Swap ====
The tentative first player places three stones (two black, and one white) anywhere on the board. The tentative second player then chooses which color to play as. Play proceeds from there as normal with white playing their second stone.

==== Swap2 ====
The tentative first player places three stones on the board, two black and one white. The tentative second player then has three options:

# They can choose to play as white and place a second white stone
# They can swap their color and choose to play as black
# Or they can place two more stones, one black and one white, and pass the choice of which color to play back to the tentative first player.

Because the tentative first player doesn&#x27;t know where the tentative second player will place the additional stones if they take option 3, the swap2 opening protocol limits excessive studying of a line by only one of the players.

== Theoretical generalizations ==
&quot;m&quot;,&quot;n&quot;,&quot;k&quot;-games are a generalization of gomoku to a board with &quot;m&quot;×&quot;n&quot; intersections, and &quot;k&quot; in a row needed to win. Connect Four is (7,6,4) with piece placement restricted to the lowest unoccupied place in a column.

Connect(&quot;m&quot;,&quot;n&quot;,&quot;k&quot;,&quot;p&quot;,&quot;q&quot;) games are another generalization of gomoku to a board with &quot;m&quot;×&quot;n&quot; intersections, &quot;k&quot; in a row needed to win, &quot;p&quot; stones for each player to place, and &quot;q&quot; stones for the first player to place for the first move only. In particular, Connect(&quot;m&quot;,&quot;n&quot;,6,2,1) is called Connect6.

==Example game==

This game on the 15×15 board is adapted from the paper &quot;Go-Moku and Threat-Space Search&quot;.

The opening moves show clearly black&#x27;s advantage. An open row of three (one that is not blocked by an opponent&#x27;s stone at either end) has to be blocked immediately, or countered with a threat elsewhere on the board. If not blocked or countered, the open row of three will be extended to an open row of four, which threatens to win in two ways.

White has to block open rows of three at moves 10, 14, 16 and 20, but black only has to do so at move 9.
Move 20 is a blunder for white (it should have been played next to black 19). Black can now force a win against any defense by white, starting with move 21.
There are two forcing sequences for black, depending on whether white 22 is played next to black 15 or black 21. The diagram on the right shows the first sequence. All the moves for white are forced. Such long forcing sequences are typical in gomoku, and expert players can read out forcing sequences of 20 to 40 moves rapidly and accurately.
The diagram on the right shows the second forcing sequence. This diagram shows why white 20 was a blunder; if it had been next to black 19 (at the position of move 32 in this diagram) then black 31 would not be a threat and so the forcing sequence would fail.

==World championships==
World Gomoku Championships have occurred 2 times in 1989, 1991.
Since 2009 tournament play has resumed, with the opening rule changed to swap2.

List of the tournaments occurred and title holders follows.

== Computers and gomoku ==
Researchers have been applying artificial intelligence techniques to playing gomoku for several decades. Joseph Weizenbaum published a short paper in Datamation in 1962 entitled &quot;How to Make a Computer Appear Intelligent&quot; that described the strategy used in a gomoku program that could beat novice players. In 1994, L. Victor Allis raised the algorithm of proof-number search (pn-search) and dependency-based search (db-search), and proved that when starting from an empty 15×15 board, the first player has a winning strategy using these searching algorithms. This applies to both free-style gomoku and standard gomoku without any opening rules. It seems very likely that black wins on larger boards too. In any size of a board, freestyle gomoku is an &quot;m&quot;,&quot;n&quot;,&quot;k&quot;-game, hence it is known that the first player can force a win or a draw. In 2001, Allis&#x27;s winning strategy was also approved for renju, a variation of gomoku, when there was no limitation on the opening stage.

However, neither the theoretical values of all legal positions, nor the opening rules such as Swap2 used by the professional gomoku players have been solved yet, so the topic of gomoku artificial intelligence is still a challenge for computer scientists, such as the problem on how to improve the gomoku algorithms to make them more strategic and competitive. Most state-of-the-art gomoku algorithms are based on the alpha-beta pruning framework.

Reisch proved that Generalized gomoku is PSPACE-complete. He also observed that the reduction can be adapted to the rules of k-in-a-Row for fixed k. Although he did not specify exactly which values of k are allowed, the reduction would appear to generalize to any k ≥ 5.

There exist several well-known tournaments for gomoku programs since 1989. The Computer Olympiad started with the gomoku game in 1989, but gomoku has not been in the list since 1993. The Renju World Computer Championship was started in 1991, and held for 4 times until 2004. The Gomocup tournament has been held annually since 2000, with more than thirty participants from about ten countries taking part. The Hungarian Computer Go-Moku Tournament was played twice in 2005. There were also two Computer vs. Human tournaments played in the Czech Republic, in 2006 and 2011. Not until 2017 did the computer programs prove capable of outperforming the world human champion in public competitions. In the Gomoku World Championship 2017, there was a match between the world champion program Yixin and the world champion human player Rudolf Dupszki. Yixin won the match with a score of 2–0.

== In popular culture ==
Gomoku was featured in a 2018 Korean drama by Baek Seung-Hwa starring Park Se-wan. The film follows Baduk Lee (Park Se-wan), a former go prodigy who retired after a humiliating loss on time. Years later, Baduk Lee works part time at a go club, where she meets Ahn Kyung Kim, who introduces her to an Omok (Korean gomoku) tournament. Lee is initially uninterested and considers Omok a children&#x27;s game, but after her roommate loses money on an impulse purchase, she enters the tournament for the prize money and loses badly, being humiliated once again. Afterwards, she begins training to redeem herself and becomes a serious omok player.

In the video game Vintage Story omok boards and pieces (made of gold and lead) can occasionally be found in ruins or as part of luxury traders&#x27; inventory. The board and pieces are functional, allowing players to have actual omok matches. In-universe, omok is so far the only game surviving from the times before the Rot.

==See also==
* Renju
* Pente
* Pegity
* Connect6
* Connection game
* Reversi

==References==
==Further reading==
* Five-in-a-Row (Renju) For Beginners to Advanced Players 

==External links==
* Gomoku World
* Renju International Federation website
* Gomocup tournament</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q573573" start="53" end="70" title="Abstract strategy game" label="abstract strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="71" end="81" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="115" end="117" title="Go (game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347716" start="313" end="334" title="paper-and-pencil game" label="paper-and-pencil game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="1370" end="1387" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q203" start="1442" end="1446" title="5" label="five"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116774" start="1470" end="1482" title="Japanese counter word" label="counter word"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="1487" end="1492" title="Go stone" label="piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1567" end="1572" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1732" end="1733" title=":zh:棋" label="棋"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="1810" end="1815" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17640628" start="2070" end="2075" title="Go board" label="goban"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2332" end="2335" title="#Pro" label="Pro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2896" end="2901" title="#Swap2" label="Swap2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139103" start="4087" end="4092" title="Renju" label="Renju"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925676" start="4195" end="4210" title="L. Victor Allis" label="L. Victor Allis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156321" start="4905" end="4914" title="Soosõrv opening rule" label="Soosõrv-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q589985" start="5960" end="5965" title="Pente" label="Pente"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711932" start="8118" end="8165" title="m,n,k-game" label="&amp;quot;m&amp;quot;,&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;,&amp;quot;k&amp;quot;-games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532477" start="8172" end="8186" title="generalized game" label="generalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17254" start="8298" end="8310" title="Connect Four" label="Connect Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532477" start="8496" end="8510" title="generalized game" label="generalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073196" start="8813" end="8821" title="Connect6" label="Connect6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10188" end="10214" title="World Gomoku Championships" label="World Gomoku Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="10452" end="10475" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q75778" start="10526" end="10543" title="Joseph Weizenbaum" label="Joseph Weizenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037061" start="10571" end="10581" title="Datamation" label="Datamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925676" start="10747" end="10762" title="L. Victor Allis" label="L. Victor Allis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711932" start="11183" end="11229" title="m,n,k-game" label="&amp;quot;m&amp;quot;,&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;,&amp;quot;k&amp;quot;-game"/>
<link wikidata="Q329338" start="11806" end="11822" title="state-of-the-art" label="state-of-the-art"/>
<link wikidata="Q570496" start="11858" end="11876" title="alpha-beta pruning" label="alpha-beta pruning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532477" start="11908" end="11919" title="Generalized game" label="Generalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q905967" start="11930" end="11945" title="PSPACE-complete" label="PSPACE-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157463" start="12240" end="12257" title="Computer Olympiad" label="Computer Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231017" start="12440" end="12447" title="Gomocup" label="Gomocup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12947" end="12952" title="Yixin (software)" label="Yixin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139103" start="14057" end="14062" title="Renju" label="Renju"/>
<link wikidata="Q589985" start="14065" end="14070" title="Pente" label="Pente"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387408" start="14073" end="14079" title="Pegity" label="Pegity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073196" start="14082" end="14090" title="Connect6" label="Connect6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161688" start="14093" end="14108" title="Connection game" label="Connection game"/>
<link wikidata="Q748139" start="14111" end="14118" title="Reversi" label="Reversi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12903" wikidata="Q1061350" url="?curid=12903" title="Gegenschein">
<text>Gegenschein (; ; ) or counterglow is a faintly bright spot in the night sky centered at the antisolar point. The backscatter of sunlight by interplanetary dust causes this optical phenomenon, being a zodiacal light and part of its zodiacal light band.

==Explanation==
Like zodiacal light, gegenschein is sunlight scattered by interplanetary dust. Most of this dust orbits the Sun near the ecliptic plane, with a possible concentration of particles centered at the point of the Earth–Sun system.

Gegenschein is distinguished from zodiacal light by its high angle of reflection of the incident sunlight on the dust particles. It forms a slightly brighter elliptical spot of 8–10° across directly opposite the Sun within the dimmer band of zodiacal light and zodiac constellation. The intensity of the gegenschein is relatively enhanced because each dust particle is seen at full phase, having a difficult to measure apparent magnitude of +5 to +6, with a very low surface brightness in the +10 to +12 magnitude range.

== History ==
It is commonly stated that the gegenschein was first described by the French Jesuit astronomer and professor (1692–1776) in 1730. Further observations were supposedly made by the German explorer Alexander von Humboldt during his South American journey from 1799 to 1803. It was Humboldt who first used the German term &quot;Gegenschein&quot;. However, research conducted in 2021 by Texas State University astronomer and professor Donald Olson discovered that the Danish astronomer Theodor Brorsen was actually the first person to observe and describe one in 1854, although Brorsen had thought that Pézenas had observed it first. Olson believes what Pézenas actually observed was an auroral event, as he described the phenomenon as having a red glow; Olson found many other reports of auroral activity from around Europe and Asia on the same date Pézenas made his observation. Humboldt&#x27;s report instead described glowing triangular patches on both the western and eastern horizons shortly after sunset, while true gegenschein is most visible near local midnight when it is highest in the sky.

Brorsen published the first thorough investigations of the gegenschein in 1854. T. W. Backhouse discovered it independently in 1876, as did Edward Emerson Barnard in 1882. In modern times, the gegenschein is not visible in most inhabited regions of the world due to light pollution.

==See also==
*Antisolar point
*Earth&#x27;s shadow
*Heiligenschein
*Interplanetary dust cloud
*Kordylewski cloud
*Opposition surge, the apparent brightening of a coarse surface or an aggregate of many particles when illuminated from directly behind the observer
*Sylvanshine

== References ==
== External links ==

*Gegenschein page on EarthSky.org
*Photos of gegenschein on SwissEduc.ch taken from Stromboli volcano
*&quot;Zodiacal Light and the Gegenschein&quot;, an essay by J. E. Littleton
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1061350" start="0" end="11" title="Gegenschein" label="Gegenschein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061350" start="22" end="33" title="Gegenschein" label="counterglow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153471" start="66" end="75" title="night sky" label="night sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429633" start="92" end="107" title="antisolar point" label="antisolar point"/>
<link wikidata="Q916258" start="113" end="124" title="backscatter" label="backscatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="128" end="136" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q986563" start="140" end="159" title="interplanetary dust" label="interplanetary dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q14506045" start="172" end="190" title="optical phenomenon" label="optical phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204079" start="200" end="214" title="zodiacal light" label="zodiacal light"/>
<link wikidata="Q204079" start="274" end="288" title="zodiacal light" label="zodiacal light"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546227" start="314" end="323" title="light scattering by particles" label="scattered"/>
<link wikidata="Q986563" start="327" end="346" title="interplanetary dust cloud" label="interplanetary dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="390" end="398" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196575" start="558" end="577" title="angle of incidence (optics)" label="angle of reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562" start="687" end="704" title="opposition (astronomy)" label="directly opposite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027206" start="816" end="835" title="opposition surge" label="relatively enhanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059855" start="874" end="884" title="phase angle (astronomy)" label="full phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="916" end="934" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048103" start="964" end="982" title="surface brightness" label="surface brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="1110" end="1116" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="1228" end="1250" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495387" start="1415" end="1437" title="Texas State University" label="Texas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q106825569" start="1463" end="1475" title="Donald Olson (astronomer)" label="Donald Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q712812" start="1514" end="1529" title="Theodor Brorsen" label="Theodor Brorsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q204999" start="2271" end="2293" title="Edward Emerson Barnard" label="Edward Emerson Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="2397" end="2412" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429633" start="2429" end="2444" title="Antisolar point" label="Antisolar point"/>
<link wikidata="Q387392" start="2446" end="2465" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s shadow" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519436" start="2467" end="2481" title="Heiligenschein" label="Heiligenschein"/>
<link wikidata="Q986563" start="2483" end="2508" title="Interplanetary dust cloud" label="Interplanetary dust cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430362" start="2510" end="2527" title="Kordylewski cloud" label="Kordylewski cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027206" start="2529" end="2545" title="Opposition surge" label="Opposition surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660713" start="2678" end="2689" title="Sylvanshine" label="Sylvanshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131148" start="2814" end="2831" title="Stromboli" label="Stromboli volcano"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12904" wikidata="Q36975" url="?curid=12904" title="Glyph">
<text>A glyph ( ) is any kind of purposeful mark. In typography, a glyph is &quot;the specific shape, design, or representation of a character&quot;. It is a particular graphical representation, in a particular typeface, of an element of written language. A grapheme, or part of a grapheme (such as a diacritic), or sometimes several graphemes in combination (a composed glyph) can be represented by a glyph.

== Glyphs, graphemes and characters ==

In most languages written in any variety of the Latin alphabet except English, the use of diacritics to signify a sound mutation is common. For example, the grapheme requires two glyphs: the basic and the grave accent . In general, a diacritic is regarded as a glyph, even if it is contiguous with the rest of the character like a cedilla in French, Catalan or Portuguese, the ogonek in several languages, or the stroke on a Polish &quot;Ł&quot;. Although these marks originally had no independent meaning, they have since acquired meaning in the field of mathematics and computing, for instance.

Conversely, in the languages of Western Europe, the dot on a lower-case is not a glyph in itself because it does not convey any distinction, and an in which the dot has been accidentally omitted is still likely to be recognized correctly. However, in Turkish and adjacent languages, this dot is a glyph because that language has two distinct versions of the letter &quot;i&quot;, with and without a dot. 

In Japanese syllabaries, some of the characters are made up of more than one separate mark, but in general these separate marks are not glyphs because they have no meaning by themselves. However, in some cases, additional marks fulfil the role of diacritics, to differentiate distinct characters. Such additional marks constitute glyphs. 

Some characters such as &quot;æ&quot; in Icelandic and the &quot;ß&quot; in German may be regarded as glyphs. They were originally typographic ligatures, but over time have become characters in their own right; these languages treat them as unique letters. However, a ligature such as &quot;fi&quot;, that is treated in some typefaces as a single unit, is arguably not a glyph as this is just a design choice of that typeface, essentially an allographic feature, and includes more than one grapheme. In normal handwriting, even long words are often written &quot;joined up&quot;, without the pen leaving the paper, and the form of each written letter will often vary depending on which letters precede and follow it, but that does not make the whole word into a single glyph.

Older models of typewriters required the use of multiple glyphs to depict a single character, as an overstruck apostrophe and period to create an exclamation mark. If there is more than one allograph of a unit of writing, and the choice between them depends on context or on the preference of the author, they now have to be treated as separate glyphs, because mechanical arrangements have to be available to differentiate between them and to print whichever of them is required. 

In computing as well as typography, the term &quot;character&quot; refers to a grapheme or grapheme-like unit of text, as found in natural language writing systems (&quot;scripts&quot;). In typography and computing, the range of graphemes is broader than in a written language in other ways too: a typeface often has to cope with a range of different languages each of which contribute their own graphemes, and it may also be required to print non-linguistic symbols such as dingbats. The range of glyphs required increases correspondingly. In summary, in typography and computing, a glyph is a graphical unit.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="2" end="7" title="Glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="47" end="57" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="205" end="213" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545446" start="252" end="260" title="grapheme" label="grapheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="295" end="304" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="492" end="506" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="534" end="543" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q627319" start="649" end="661" title="grave accent" label="grave accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q245421" start="775" end="782" title="cedilla" label="cedilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="786" end="792" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="794" end="801" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="805" end="815" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q684050" start="821" end="827" title="ogonek" label="ogonek"/>
<link wikidata="Q345137" start="882" end="883" title="Ł" label="Ł"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586558" start="1094" end="1097" title="Tittle" label="dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="1293" end="1300" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426605" start="1422" end="1426" title="İ" label="with"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379086" start="1431" end="1444" title="Dotless I" label="without a dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q182133" start="1460" end="1471" title="syllabary" label="syllabaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="1695" end="1704" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9990" start="1818" end="1819" title="æ" label="æ"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="1829" end="1838" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="1853" end="1854" title="ß" label="ß"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1864" end="1870" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="1931" end="1940" title="Ligature (writing)" label="ligatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118549" start="2230" end="2239" title="allograph" label="allograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545446" start="2278" end="2286" title="grapheme" label="grapheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="2581" end="2591" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q436048" start="2676" end="2686" title="apostrophe" label="apostrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q172008" start="2691" end="2697" title="full stop" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q166764" start="2711" end="2727" title="exclamation mark" label="exclamation mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="3050" end="3059" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="3098" end="3107" title="character (computing)" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="3178" end="3194" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="3195" end="3209" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q199172" start="3522" end="3529" title="dingbat" label="dingbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027879" start="3642" end="3651" title="graphics" label="graphical"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12905" wikidata="Q212954" url="?curid=12905" title="Goth subculture">
<text>Goth is a subculture that began in the United Kingdom during the early 1980s. It was developed by fans of gothic rock, an offshoot of the post-punk music genre. Post-punk artists who anticipated the gothic rock genre and helped develop and shape the subculture include Siouxsie and the Banshees, Bauhaus, the Cure and Joy Division.

The goth subculture has survived much longer than others of the same era, and has continued to diversify and spread throughout the world. Its imagery and cultural proclivities indicate influences from 19th-century Gothic fiction and from horror films. The scene is centered on music festivals, nightclubs, and organized meetings, especially in Western Europe. The subculture has associated tastes in music, aesthetics and fashion.

The music preferred by goths includes a number of styles such as gothic rock, death rock, cold wave, dark wave and ethereal wave. The Gothic fashion style draws influences from punk, new wave, New Romantic fashion and the dressing styles of earlier periods such as the Victorian, Edwardian and Belle Époque eras. The style most often includes dark (usually solid black) attire, dark makeup and black hair.

==Music==
===Origins and development===

The term &quot;gothic rock&quot; was coined by music critic John Stickney in 1967 to describe a meeting he had with Jim Morrison in a dimly lit wine-cellar, which he called &quot;the perfect room to honor the Gothic rock of the Doors&quot;. That same year, the Velvet Underground song &quot;All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties&quot; created a kind of &quot;mesmerizing gothic-rock masterpiece&quot; according to music historian Kurt Loder. In the late 1970s, the &quot;gothic&quot; adjective was used to describe the atmosphere of post-punk bands such as Siouxsie and the Banshees, Magazine, and Joy Division. In a live review about a Siouxsie and the Banshees&#x27; concert in July 1978, critic Nick Kent wrote, concerning their music, &quot;[P]arallels and comparisons can now be drawn with gothic rock architects like the Doors and, certainly, early Velvet Underground&quot;. In March 1979, in his review of Magazine&#x27;s second album &quot;Secondhand Daylight&quot;, Kent noted there was &quot;a new austere sense of authority&quot; in the music, with a &quot;dank neo-Gothic sound&quot;. Later that year, the term was also used by Joy Division&#x27;s manager, Tony Wilson on 15 September in an interview for the BBC TV programme&#x27;s &quot;Something Else&quot;. Wilson described Joy Division as &quot;gothic&quot; compared to the pop mainstream, right before a live performance of the band. The term was later applied to &quot;newer bands such as Bauhaus who had arrived in the wake of Joy Division and Siouxsie and the Banshees&quot;. Bauhaus&#x27;s first single issued in 1979, &quot;Bela Lugosi&#x27;s Dead&quot;, is generally credited as the starting point of the gothic rock genre.

In 1979, &quot;Sounds&quot; described Joy Division as &quot;Gothic&quot; and &quot;theatrical&quot;. In February 1980, &quot;Melody Maker&quot; qualified the same band as &quot;masters of this Gothic gloom&quot;. Critic Jon Savage would later say that their singer Ian Curtis wrote &quot;the definitive Northern Gothic statement&quot;. However, it was not until the early 1980s that gothic rock became a coherent music subgenre within post-punk, and followers of these bands started to come together as a distinctly recognizable movement. They may have taken the &quot;goth&quot; mantle from a 1981 article published in UK rock weekly &quot;Sounds&quot;: &quot;The face of Punk Gothique&quot;, written by Steve Keaton. In a text about the audience of UK Decay, Keaton asked: &quot;Could this be the coming of Punk Gothique? With Bauhaus flying in on similar wings could it be the next big thing?&quot; The F Club night in Leeds in Northern England, which had opened in 1977 firstly as a punk club, became instrumental to the development of the goth subculture in the 1980s. In July 1982, the opening of the Batcave in London&#x27;s Soho provided a prominent meeting point for the emerging scene, which would be briefly labelled &quot;positive punk&quot; by the &quot;NME&quot; in a special issue with a front cover in early 1983. The term &quot;Batcaver&quot; was then used to describe old-school goths.
Outside the British scene, deathrock developed in California during the late 1970s and early 1980s as a distinct branch of American punk rock, with acts such as Christian Death, Kommunity FK and 45 Grave at the forefront.

===Gothic genre===
The bands that defined and embraced the gothic rock genre included Bauhaus, early Adam and the Ants, the Cure, the Birthday Party, Southern Death Cult, Specimen, Sex Gang Children, UK Decay, Virgin Prunes, Killing Joke, and the Damned. Near the peak of this first generation of the gothic scene in 1983, &quot;The Face&quot; Paul Rambali recalled &quot;several strong Gothic characteristics&quot; in the music of Joy Division. In 1984, Joy Division&#x27;s bassist Peter Hook named Play Dead as one of their heirs: &quot;If you listen to a band like Play Dead, who I really like, Joy Division played similar music to Play Dead.&quot;
By the mid-1980s, bands began proliferating and became increasingly popular, including the Sisters of Mercy, the Mission, Alien Sex Fiend, the March Violets, Xmal Deutschland, the Membranes, and Fields of the Nephilim. Record labels like Factory, 4AD and Beggars Banquet released much of this music in Europe, and through a vibrant import music market in the US, the subculture grew, especially in New York and Los Angeles, California, where many nightclubs featured &quot;gothic/industrial&quot; nights and bands like Black Tape for a Blue Girl, Theatre of Ice, Human Drama and The Wake became key figures for the genre to expand on an nationwide level. The popularity of 4AD bands resulted in the creation of similar US labels, such as Wax Trax! Records and Projekt.

The 1990s saw further growth for some 1980s bands and the emergence of many new acts, as well as new goth-centric US record labels such as Cleopatra Records, among others. According to Dave Simpson of &quot;The Guardian&quot;, &quot;[I]n the 90s, goths all but disappeared as dance music became the dominant youth cult&quot;. As a result, the goth movement went underground and fractured into cyber goth, shock rock, industrial metal, gothic metal, and Medieval folk metal. Marilyn Manson was seen as a &quot;goth-shock icon&quot; by &quot;Spin&quot;.

==Art, historical and cultural influences==
The Goth subculture of the 1980s drew inspiration from a variety of sources. Some of them were modern or contemporary, others were centuries-old or ancient. Michael Bibby and Lauren M. E. Goodlad liken the subculture to a bricolage. Among the music-subcultures that influenced it were punk, new wave, and glam. But it also drew inspiration from B-movies, Gothic literature, horror films, vampire cults and traditional mythology. Among the mythologies that proved influential in Goth were Celtic mythology, Christian mythology, and various traditions of Paganism.

The figures that the movement counted among its historic canon of ancestors were equally diverse. They included the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), Comte de Lautréamont (1846–1870), Salvador Dalí (1904–1989) and Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980). Writers that have had a significant influence on the movement also represent a diverse canon. They include Ann Radcliffe (1764–1823), John William Polidori (1795–1821), Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849), Sheridan Le Fanu (1814–1873), Bram Stoker (1847–1912), Oscar Wilde (1854–1900), H. P. Lovecraft (1890–1937), Anne Rice (1941–2021), William Gibson (1948–present), Ian McEwan (1948–present), Storm Constantine (1956–2021), and Poppy Z. Brite (1967–present).

===18th and 19th centuries===
Gothic literature is a genre of fiction that combines romance and dark elements to produce mystery, suspense, terror, horror and the supernatural. According to David H. Richter, settings were framed to take place at &quot;...ruinous castles, gloomy churchyards, claustrophobic monasteries, and lonely mountain roads&quot;. Typical characters consisted of the cruel parent, sinister priest, courageous victor, and the helpless heroine, along with supernatural figures such as demons, vampires, ghosts, and monsters. Often, the plot focused on characters ill-fated, internally conflicted, and innocently victimized by harassing malicious figures. In addition to the dismal plot focuses, the literary tradition of the gothic was to also focus on individual characters that were gradually going insane.

English author Horace Walpole, with his 1764 novel &quot;The Castle of Otranto&quot; is one of the first writers who explored this genre. The American Revolutionary War-era &quot;American Gothic&quot; story of the Headless Horseman, immortalized in &quot;The Legend of Sleepy Hollow&quot; (published in 1820) by Washington Irving, marked the arrival in the New World of dark, romantic storytelling. The tale was composed by Irving while he was living in England, and was based on popular tales told by colonial Dutch settlers of the Hudson Valley, New York. The story would be adapted to film in 1922, in 1949 as the animated &quot;The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad&quot;, and again in 1999.

Throughout the evolution of the goth subculture, classic Romantic, Gothic and horror literature has played a significant role. E. T. A. Hoffmann (1776–1822), Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849), Charles Baudelaire (1821–1867), H. P. Lovecraft (1890–1937), and other tragic and Romantic writers have become as emblematic of the subculture as the use of dark eyeliner or dressing in black. Baudelaire, in fact, in his preface to &quot;Les Fleurs du mal&quot; (&quot;Flowers of Evil&quot;) penned lines that could serve as a sort of goth malediction:

&lt;poem&gt;&quot;C&#x27;est l&#x27;Ennui! —l&#x27;œil chargé d&#x27;un pleur involontaire,&quot;
&quot;Il rêve d&#x27;échafauds en fumant son houka.&quot;
&quot;Tu le connais, lecteur, ce monstre délicat,&quot;
&quot;—Hypocrite lecteur,—mon semblable,—mon frère!&quot;

It is Boredom! — an eye brimming with an involuntary tear,
He dreams of the gallows while smoking his water-pipe.
You know him, reader, this delicate monster,
—Hypocrite reader,—my twin,—my brother!&lt;/poem&gt;

====Visual art influences====
The gothic subculture has influenced different artists—not only musicians—but also painters and photographers. In particular their work is based on mystic, morbid and romantic motifs. In photography and painting the spectrum varies from erotic artwork to romantic images of vampires or ghosts. There is a marked preference for dark colours and sentiments, similar to Gothic fiction. At the end of the 19th century, painters like John Everett Millais and John Ruskin invented a new kind of Gothic.

===20th century influences===

Some people credit Jalacy &quot;Screamin&#x27; Jay&quot; Hawkins, perhaps best known for his 1956 song &quot;I Put A Spell on You&quot;, as a foundation of modern goth style and music. Some people credit the band Bauhaus&#x27; first single &quot;Bela Lugosi&#x27;s Dead&quot;, released in August 1979, with the start of goth subculture.

In the early 90s, Jack Off Jill, fronted by vocalist Jessicka, pioneered the &#x27;Riot Goth&#x27; sound, combining elements of the goth and riot grrrl genres. Through their lyrics, the band tackled issues such as misogyny and racism, giving them significant underground appeal.

===21st century influences===

The British sitcom &quot;The IT Crowd&quot; featured a recurring goth character named Richmond Avenal, played by Noel Fielding. Fielding said in an interview that he himself had been a goth at age fifteen and that he had a series of goth girlfriends. This was the first time he dabbled in makeup. Fielding said that he loved his girlfriends dressing him up.

The game &quot;Visigoths vs. Mall Goths&quot; (2020) by Lucian Kahn is about &quot;two versions of Goths – the ancient Roman peoples and the black-clad teenagers&quot; and is set in LA in the 1990s.

==Characteristics of the scene==
===Icons===
Goth icons include several bandleaders: Siouxsie Sioux, of Siouxsie and the Banshees; Robert Smith, of the Cure; Peter Murphy, of Bauhaus; Dave Vanian, of The Damned; Rozz Williams, of Christian Death; Olli Wisdom, leader of the band Specimen and keyboardist Jonathan Melton aka Jonny Slut, who evolved the Batcave style. Nick Cave was dubbed as &quot;the grand lord of gothic lushness&quot;.

===Fashion===

====Influences====
One female role model is Theda Bara, the 1910s femme fatale known for her dark eyeshadow. In 1977, Karl Lagerfeld hosted the Soirée Moratoire Noir party, specifying &quot;tenue tragique noire absolument obligatoire&quot; (black tragic dress absolutely required). The event included elements associated with leatherman style.

Siouxsie Sioux was particularly influential on the dress style of the gothic rock scene; Paul Morley of &quot;NME&quot; described Siouxsie and the Banshees&#x27; 1980 gig at Futurama: &quot;[Siouxsie was] modeling her newest outfit, the one that will influence how all the girls dress over the next few months. About half the girls at Leeds had used Sioux as a basis for their appearance, hair to ankle&quot;. Robert Smith, Musidora, Bela Lugosi, Bettie Page, Vampira, Morticia Addams, Nico, Rozz Williams, David Bowie and Lux Interior are also style icons.

The 1980s established designers such as Drew Bernstein of Lip Service, and the 1990s saw a surge of US-based gothic fashion designers, many of whom continue to evolve the style to the present day. Style magazines such as &quot;Gothic Beauty&quot; have given repeat features to a select few gothic fashion designers who began their labels in the 1990s, such as Kambriel, Rose Mortem, and Tyler Ondine of Heavy Red.

American model Gabbriette who has been known for her goth aesthetic, has been at the forefront of what has been dubbed the &quot;Succubus Chic&quot; trend of 2023.

====Styling====
Gothic fashion is marked by conspicuously dark, antiquated, and homogeneous features. It is stereotyped as eerie, mysterious, complex, and exotic. A dark, sometimes morbid fashion and style of dress, typical gothic fashion includes colored black hair and black period-styled clothing. Both male and female goths can wear dark eyeliner and dark fingernail polish, most especially black. Styles are often borrowed from punk fashion and—more currently—from the Victorian and Elizabethan periods. It also frequently expresses pagan, occult or other religious imagery. Gothic fashion and styling may also feature silver jewelry and piercings.
Ted Polhemus described goth fashion as a &quot;profusion of black velvets, lace, fishnets and leather tinged with scarlet or purple, accessorized with tightly laced corsets, gloves, precarious stilettos and silver jewelry depicting religious or occult themes&quot;. Of the male &quot;goth look&quot;, goth historian Pete Scathe draws a distinction between the Sid Vicious archetype of black spiky hair and black leather jacket in contrast to the gender ambiguous individuals wearing makeup. The first is the early goth gig-going look, which was essentially punk, whereas the second evolved into the Batcave nightclub look. Early goth gigs were often very hectic affairs, and the audience dressed accordingly.

In contrast to the LARP-based Victorian and Elizabethan pomposity of the 2000s, the more Romantic side of 1980s trad-goth—mainly represented by women—was characterized by new wave/post-punk-oriented hairstyles (both long and short, partly shaved and teased) and street-compliant clothing, including black frill blouses, midi dresses or tea-length skirts, and floral lace tights, Dr. Martens, spike heels (pumps), and pointed-toe buckle boots (winklepickers), sometimes supplemented with accessories such as bracelets, chokers and bib necklaces. This style, retroactively referred to as &quot;Ethergoth&quot;, took its inspiration from Siouxsie Sioux and mid-1980s musicians from the 4AD roster like Elizabeth Fraser and Lisa Gerrard.

&quot;The New York Times&quot; noted: &quot;The costumes and ornaments are a glamorous cover for the genre&#x27;s somber themes. In the world of Goth, nature itself lurks as a malign protagonist, causing flesh to rot, rivers to flood, monuments to crumble and women to turn into slatterns, their hair streaming and lipstick askew&quot;.

Cintra Wilson declares that the origins of the dark romantic style are found in the &quot;Victorian cult of mourning&quot;. Valerie Steele is an expert in the history of the style.

====Reciprocity====

Goth fashion has a reciprocal relationship with the fashion world. In the later part of the first decade of the 21st century, designers such as Alexander McQueen, Anna Sui, Rick Owens, Gareth Pugh, Ann Demeulemeester, Philipp Plein, Hedi Slimane, John Richmond, John Galliano, Olivier Theyskens and Yohji Yamamoto brought elements of goth to runways. This was described as &quot;Haute Goth&quot; by Cintra Wilson in the &quot;New York Times&quot;.

Thierry Mugler, Claude Montana, Jean Paul Gaultier and Christian Lacroix have also been associated with the fashion trend. In Spring 2004, Riccardo Tisci, Jean Paul Gaultier, Raf Simons and Stefano Pilati dressed their models as &quot;glamorous ghouls dressed in form-fitting suits and coal-tinted cocktail dresses&quot;. Swedish designer Helena Horstedt and jewelry artist Hanna Hedman also practice a goth aesthetic.

===Films and television===

Some of the early gothic rock and deathrock artists adopted traditional horror film images and drew on horror film soundtracks for inspiration. Their audience responded by adopting appropriate dress and props. Use of standard horror film props such as swirling smoke, rubber bats, and cobwebs featured as gothic club décor from the beginning in The Batcave. Such references in bands&#x27; music and images were originally tongue-in-cheek, but as time went on, bands and members of the subculture took the connection more seriously. As a result, morbid, supernatural and occult themes became more noticeably serious in the subculture. The interconnection between horror and goth was highlighted in its early days by &quot;The Hunger&quot;, a 1983 vampire film starring David Bowie, Catherine Deneuve and Susan Sarandon. The film featured gothic rock group Bauhaus performing &quot;Bela Lugosi&#x27;s Dead&quot; in a nightclub. Tim Burton created a storybook atmosphere filled with darkness and shadow in some of his films like &quot;Beetlejuice&quot; (1988), &quot;Batman&quot; (1989), &quot;Edward Scissorhands&quot; (1990), &quot;Batman Returns&quot; (1992) and the stop motion films &quot;The Nightmare Before Christmas&quot; (1993), which was produced/co-written by Burton, and &quot;Corpse Bride&quot; (2005), which he co-produced. The Nickelodeon cartoon &quot;Invader Zim&quot; is also based on the goth subculture.

As the subculture became well-established, the connection between goth and horror fiction became almost a cliché, with goths quite likely to appear as characters in horror novels and film. For example, &quot;The Craft&quot;, &quot;The Crow&quot;, &quot;The Matrix&quot; and &quot;Underworld&quot; film series drew directly on goth music and style. The dark comedies &quot;Beetlejuice&quot;, &quot;The Faculty&quot;, &quot;American Beauty&quot;, &quot;Wedding Crashers&quot;, and a few episodes of the animated TV show &quot;South Park&quot; portray or parody the goth subculture. In &quot;South Park&quot;, several of the fictional schoolchildren are depicted as goths. The goth kids on the show are depicted as finding it annoying to be confused with the Hot Topic &quot;vampire&quot; kids from the episode &quot;The Ungroundable&quot; in season 12, and even more frustrating to be compared with emo kids. The goth kids are usually depicted listening to gothic music, writing or reading Gothic poetry, drinking coffee, flipping their hair, and smoking.

Morticia Addams from The Addams Family created by Charles Addams is a fictional character and the mother in the Addams Family. Morticia was played by Carolyn Jones in the 1964 television show &quot;The Addams Family&quot; and by Anjelica Huston in the 1991 version, and voiced by Charlize Theron in 2019 animated film.

A recurring sketch in the 1990s on NBC&#x27;s &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; was &quot;Goth Talk&quot;, in which a public access channel broadcast hosted by unpopular young goths would continually be interrupted by the more &quot;normal&quot; kids in school. The sketch featured series regulars Will Ferrell, Molly Shannon, and Chris Kattan.

===Books and magazines===

A prominent American literary influence on the gothic scene was provided by Anne Rice&#x27;s re-imagining of the vampire in 1976. In &quot;The Vampire Chronicles&quot;, Rice&#x27;s characters were depicted as self-tormentors who struggled with alienation, loneliness, and the human condition. Not only did the characters torment themselves, but they also depicted a surreal world that focused on uncovering its splendour. These Chronicles assumed goth attitudes, but they were not intentionally created to represent the gothic subculture. Their romance, beauty, and erotic appeal attracted
many goth readers, making her works popular from the 1980s through the 1990s. While Goth has embraced Vampire literature both in its 19th century form and in its later incarnations, Rice&#x27;s postmodern take on the vampire mythos has had a &quot;special resonance&quot; in the subculture. Her vampire novels feature intense emotions, period clothing, and &quot;cultured decadence&quot;. Her vampires are socially alienated monsters, but they are also stunningly attractive. Rice&#x27;s goth readers tend to envision themselves in much the same terms and view characters like Lestat de Lioncourt as role models.

Richard Wright&#x27;s novel &quot;Native Son&quot; contains gothic imagery and themes that demonstrate the links between blackness and the gothic; themes and images of &quot;premonitions, curses, prophecies, spells, veils, demonic possessions, graves, skeletons&quot; are present, suggesting gothic influence. Other classic themes of the gothic are present in the novel, such as transgression and unstable identities of race, class, gender, and nationality.

The re-imagining of the vampire continued with the release of Poppy Z. Brite&#x27;s book &quot;Lost Souls&quot; in October 1992. Despite the fact that Brite&#x27;s first novel was criticized by some mainstream sources for allegedly &quot;lack[ing] a moral center: neither terrifyingly malevolent supernatural creatures nor (like Anne Rice&#x27;s protagonists) tortured souls torn between good and evil, these vampires simply add blood-drinking to the amoral panoply of drug abuse, problem drinking and empty sex practiced by their human counterparts&quot;, many of these so-called &quot;human counterparts&quot; identified with the teen angst and goth music references therein, keeping the book in print. Upon release of a special 10th anniversary edition of &quot;Lost Souls&quot;, &quot;Publishers Weekly&quot;—the same periodical that criticized the novel&#x27;s &quot;amorality&quot; a decade prior—deemed it a &quot;modern horror classic&quot; and acknowledged that Brite established a &quot;cult audience&quot;.

The 2002 release &quot;21st Century Goth&quot; by Mick Mercer, an author, noted music journalist and leading historian of gothic rock, explored the modern state of the goth scene around the world, including South America, Japan, and mainland Asia. His previous 1997 release, &quot;Hex Files: The Goth Bible&quot;, similarly took an international look at the subculture.

In the US, &quot;Propaganda&quot; was a gothic subculture magazine founded in 1982. In Italy, &quot;Ver Sacrum&quot; covers the Italian goth scene, including fashion, sexuality, music, art and literature. Some magazines, such as the now-defunct &quot;Dark Realms&quot; and &quot;Goth Is Dead&quot; included goth fiction and poetry. Other magazines cover fashion (e.g., &quot;Gothic Beauty&quot;); music (e.g., &quot;Severance&quot;) or culture and lifestyle (e.g., &quot;Althaus&quot; e-zine).

On 31 October 2011, ECW Press published the &quot;Encyclopedia Gothica&quot; written by author and poet Liisa Ladouceur with illustrations done by Gary Pullin. This non-fiction book describes over 600 words and phrases relevant to Goth subculture.

Brian Craddock&#x27;s 2017 novel Eucalyptus Goth charts a year in the life of a household of 20-somethings in Brisbane, Australia. The central characters are deeply entrenched in the local gothic subculture, with the book exploring themes relevant to the characters, notably unemployment, mental health, politics, and relationships.

In 2023, several books about the music genre and the subculture, were released. John Robb&#x27;s &quot;The Art of Darkness: The History of Goth&quot; was hailed in &quot;The Times&quot; as a &quot;new magestrial survey&quot;, and Cathi Unsworth&#x27;s &quot;Season of the Witch: The Book of Goth&quot; was praised in &quot;Mojo&quot; as a &quot;superb history of the dark and all its risings&quot;.

===Graphic art===

Visual contemporary graphic artists with this aesthetic include Gerald Brom, Dave McKean, and Trevor Brown as well as illustrators Edward Gorey, Charles Addams, Lorin Morgan-Richards, and James O&#x27;Barr. The artwork of Polish surrealist painter Zdzisław Beksiński is often described as gothic. British artist Anne Sudworth published a book on gothic art in 2007.

===Events===

There are large annual goth-themed festivals in Germany, including Wave-Gotik-Treffen in Leipzig and M&#x27;era Luna in Hildesheim, both annually attracting tens of thousands of people. Castle Party is the biggest goth festival in Poland.

===Interior design===
In the 1980s, goths decorated their walls and ceilings with black fabrics and accessories like rosaries, crosses and plastic roses. Black furniture and cemetery-related objects such as candlesticks, death lanterns and skulls were also part of their interior design. In the 1990s, the interior design approach of the 1980s was replaced by a less macabre style.

==Sociology==
===Gender and sexuality===
Since the late 1970s, the UK goth scene refused &quot;traditional standards of sexual propriety&quot; and accepted and celebrated &quot;unusual, bizarre or deviant sexual practices&quot;. In the 2000s, many members &quot;claim overlapping memberships in the queer, polyamorous, bondage-discipline/sadomasochism, and pagan communities&quot;.

Though sexual empowerment is not unique to women in the goth scene, it remains an important part of many goth women&#x27;s experience: The scene&#x27;s &quot;celebration of active sexuality&quot; enables goth women to &quot;resist mainstream notions of passive femininity&quot;. They have an &quot;active sexuality&quot; approach which creates &quot;gender egalitarianism&quot; within the scene, as it &quot;allows them to engage in sexual play with multiple partners while sidestepping most of the stigma and dangers that women who engage in such behavior&quot; outside the scene frequently incur, while continuing to &quot;see themselves as strong&quot;.

Men dress up in an androgynous way: &quot;Men &#x27;gender blend,&#x27; wearing makeup and skirts&quot;. In contrast, the &quot;women are dressed in sexy feminine outfits&quot; that are &quot;highly sexualized&quot; and which often combine &quot;corsets with short skirts and fishnet stockings&quot;. Androgyny is common among the scene: &quot;androgyny in Goth subcultural style often disguises or even functions to reinforce conventional gender roles&quot;. It was only &quot;valorised&quot; for male goths, who adopt a &quot;feminine&quot; appearance, including &quot;make-up, skirts and feminine accessories&quot; to &quot;enhance masculinity&quot; and facilitate traditional heterosexual courting roles.

===Identity===
While goth is a music-based scene, the goth subculture is also characterized by particular aesthetics, outlooks, and a &quot;way of seeing and of being seen&quot;. In more recent years, goths have been able to meet people with similar interests, learn from each other and take part in the scene through social media, manifesting in the same practices which take place in goth clubs. This is not a new phenomenon since before the rise of social media online forums had the same function for goths. Observers have raised the issue of to what degree individuals are truly members of the goth subculture. On one end of the spectrum is the &quot;Uber goth&quot;, a person who is described as seeking a pallor so much that they apply &quot;as much white foundation and white powder as possible&quot;. On the other end of the spectrum exists what another writer terms &quot;poseurs&quot; – &quot;goth wannabes, usually young kids going through a goth phase who do not hold to goth sensibilities but want to be part of the goth crowd&quot;. It has been said that a &quot;mall goth&quot; is a teen who dresses in a goth style and spends time in malls with a Hot Topic store, but who does not know much about goth subculture or its music, thus making them a poseur. In one case, even a well-known performer has been labelled with the pejorative term – a &quot;number of goths, especially those who belonged to this subculture before the late-1980s, reject Marilyn Manson as a poseur who undermines the true meaning of goth&quot;.

===Media and academic commentary===
The BBC described academic research that indicated that goths are &quot;refined and sensitive, keen on poetry and books, not big on drugs or anti-social behaviour&quot;. Teens often stay in the subculture &quot;into their adult life&quot;, and they are likely to become well-educated and enter professions such as medicine or law. The subculture carries on appealing to teenagers who are looking for meaning and for identity. The scene teaches teens that there are difficult aspects to life that you &quot;have to make an attempt to understand&quot; or explain.

&quot;The Guardian&quot; reported that a &quot;glue binding the [goth] scene together was drug use&quot;; however, in the scene, drug use was varied. Goth is one of the few subculture movements that is not associated with a single drug, in the way that the Hippie subculture is associated with cannabis and the Mod subculture is associated with amphetamines. A 2006 study of young goths found that those with higher levels of goth identification had higher drug use.

===Perception on nonviolence===
A study conducted by the University of Glasgow, involving 1,258 youth interviewed at ages 11, 13, 15 and 19, found goth subculture to be strongly nonviolent and tolerant, thus providing &quot;valuable social and emotional support&quot; to teens vulnerable to self harm and mental illness.

====School shootings====
In the weeks following the 1999 Columbine High School massacre, media reports about the teen gunmen, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, portrayed them as part of a gothic cult. An increased suspicion of goth subculture subsequently manifested in the media. This led to a moral panic over teen involvement in goth subculture and a number of other activities, such as violent video games. Harris and Klebold had initially been thought to be members of &quot;The Trenchcoat Mafia&quot;, an informal club within Columbine High School. Later, such characterizations were considered incorrect.

Media reported that the gunman in the 2006 Dawson College shooting in Montreal, Quebec, Kimveer Singh Gill, was interested in goth subculture. Gill&#x27;s self-professed love of Goth culture was the topic of media interest, and it was widely reported that the word &quot;Goth&quot;, in Gill&#x27;s writings, was a reference to the alternative industrial and goth subculture rather than a reference to gothic rock music. Gill, who committed suicide after the attack, wrote in his online journal: &quot;I&#x27;m so sick of hearing about jocks and preps making life hard for the goths and others who look different, or are different&quot;. Gill described himself in his profile on Vampirefreaks.com as &quot;Trench[...] the Angel of Death&quot; and he stated that &quot;Metal and Goth kick ass&quot;. An image gallery on Gill&#x27;s Vampirefreaks.com blog had photos of him pointing a gun at the camera or wearing a long black trench coat.

Mick Mercer stated that Gill was &quot;not a Goth. Never a Goth. The bands he listed as his chosen form of ear-bashing were relentlessly metal and standard grunge, rock and goth metal, with some industrial presence&quot;. Mercer stated that &quot;Kimveer Gill listened to metal&quot;, &quot;He had nothing whatsoever to do with Goth&quot; and further commented &quot;I realise that like many [neophyte], Kimveer Gill may even have believed he somehow was a Goth, because they&#x27;re [Neophytes] only really noted for spectacularly missing the point&quot;.

===Prejudice and violence directed at goths===
In part because of public misunderstanding surrounding gothic aesthetics, people in the goth subculture sometimes suffer prejudice, discrimination, and intolerance. As is the case with members of various other subcultures and alternative lifestyles, outsiders sometimes marginalize goths, either by intention or by accident. Actress Christina Hendricks talked of being bullied as a goth at school and how difficult it was for her to deal with societal pressure: &quot;Kids can be pretty judgmental about people who are different. But instead of breaking down and conforming, I stood firm. That is also probably why I was unhappy. My mother was mortified and kept telling me how horrible and ugly I looked. Strangers would walk by with a look of shock on their face, so I never felt pretty. I just always felt awkward&quot;.

On 11 August 2007, while walking through Stubbylee Park in Bacup, Lancashire, a young couple, Sophie Lancaster and Robert Maltby, were attacked by a group of teenagers. Lancaster subsequently died from the severe head injuries she suffered in the attack. It later emerged that the attackers had attacked the couple because they were goths. On 29 April 2008, two of the attackers, Ryan Herbert and Brendan Harris, were convicted for the murder of Lancaster and given life sentences. Three others were given lesser sentences for the assault on her boyfriend Robert Maltby. In delivering the sentence, Judge Anthony Russell stated, &quot;This was a hate crime against these completely harmless people targeted because their appearance was different to yours&quot;. He went on to defend the goth community, calling goths &quot;perfectly peaceful, law-abiding people who pose no threat to anybody&quot;. Judge Russell added that he &quot;recognised it as a hate crime without Parliament having to tell him to do so and had included that view in his sentencing&quot;. Despite this ruling, a bill to add discrimination based on subculture affiliation to the definition of hate crime in British law was not presented to parliament.

In 2013, police in Manchester announced they would be treating attacks on members of alternative subcultures, such as goths, the same as they do for attacks based on race, religion, and sexual orientation.

A more recent phenomenon is the emergence of goth YouTubers who very often address the prejudice and violence against goths. These personalities create videos as a response to problems that they personally face, which include challenges such as bullying, and dealing with negative descriptions of themselves. Viewers often engage closely with these YouTubers, asking them for advice on how to deal with related personal struggles and getting responses in the form of personal messages or videos. These interactions take the form of an informal mentoring which contributes to the building of solidarity within the goth scene.

===Self-harm study===
A study published on the &quot;British Medical Journal&quot; concluded that &quot;identification as belonging to the Goth subculture [at some point in their lives] was the best predictor of self harm and attempted suicide [among young teens]&quot;, and that it was most possibly due to self-selection, with people committing self harm joining the goth subculture in order to get support from individuals with similar experiences.

According to &quot;The Guardian&quot;, some goth teens are more likely to harm themselves or attempt suicide. A medical journal study of 1,300 Scottish schoolchildren until their teen years found that the 53% of the 25 goth teens sampled had attempted to harm themselves and 47% had attempted suicide. The study found that the &quot;correlation was stronger than any other predictor&quot;.

The authors held that most self-harm by teens was done before joining the subculture, and that joining the subculture would actually protect them and help them deal with distress in their lives, while cautioning that the study was based on a small sample size and needed replication to confirm the results. The study was criticized for using only a small sample of goth teens and not taking into account other influences and differences between types of goths.

==See also==
* Emo subculture
* Dark academia
* Visual kei

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Robb, John (2023). &quot;The Art of Darkness : The History Of Goth&quot;. Louder Than War Books. 
* 
* 
* Unsworth, Cathi (2023). &quot;Season of the Witch: The Book of Goth&quot;. Nine Eight Books. 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* A first-person account of an individual&#x27;s life within the Goth subculture.
* A chronological/aesthetic history of Goth covering the spectrum from Gothic architecture to the Cure.
* Includes a lengthy explanation of Gothic history, music, fashion, and proposes a link between mystic/magical spirituality and dark subcultures.
* Covering literature, music, cinema, BDSM, fashion, and subculture topics.
* 
* An international survey of the Goth scene.
* An exploration of the modern state of the Goth subculture worldwide.
* A global view of the goth scene from its birth in the late 1970s to the present day.
* An etiquette guide to &quot;gently persuade others in her chosen subculture that being a polite Goth is much, much more subversive than just wearing T-shirts with &quot;edgy&quot; sayings on them&quot;.
* An illustrated view of the goth subculture.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212954" start="0" end="4" title="Goth subculture" label="Goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="10" end="20" title="subculture" label="subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="39" end="53" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="106" end="117" title="gothic rock" label="gothic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="138" end="147" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="269" end="294" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q180582" start="296" end="303" title="Bauhaus (band)" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="305" end="313" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q172763" start="318" end="330" title="Joy Division" label="Joy Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="547" end="561" title="Gothic fiction" label="Gothic fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="571" end="582" title="horror film" label="horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="677" end="691" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="769" end="774" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164252" start="843" end="853" title="death rock" label="death rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343562" start="855" end="864" title="Cold wave music" label="cold wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840596" start="866" end="875" title="dark wave" label="dark wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q284543" start="880" end="893" title="ethereal wave" label="ethereal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423086" start="942" end="946" title="punk fashion" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q597240" start="958" end="970" title="New Romantic" label="New Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070623" start="1034" end="1043" title="Victorian fashion" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557800" start="1045" end="1054" title="1900s in Western fashion" label="Edwardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q466887" start="1059" end="1071" title="Belle Époque" label="Belle Époque"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="1228" end="1239" title="gothic rock" label="gothic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q44301" start="1329" end="1341" title="Jim Morrison" label="Jim Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="1437" end="1446" title="the Doors" label="the Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="1474" end="1492" title="Velvet Underground" label="Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613885" start="1504" end="1531" title="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties" label="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446871" start="1633" end="1643" title="Kurt Loder" label="Kurt Loder"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="1736" end="1745" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="1760" end="1785" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475584" start="1787" end="1795" title="Magazine (band)" label="Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q172763" start="1801" end="1813" title="Joy Division" label="Joy Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q517464" start="1901" end="1910" title="Nick Kent" label="Nick Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336102" start="2151" end="2170" title="Secondhand Daylight" label="Secondhand Daylight"/>
<link wikidata="Q478601" start="2372" end="2383" title="Tony Wilson" label="Tony Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560092" start="2454" end="2468" title="Something Else (UK TV series)" label="Something Else"/>
<link wikidata="Q180582" start="2661" end="2668" title="Bauhaus (band)" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q815090" start="2800" end="2823" title="Bela Lugosi&amp;#x27;s Dead" label="Bela Lugosi&amp;#x27;s Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="3027" end="3039" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q117379" start="3122" end="3132" title="Jon Savage" label="Jon Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q207867" start="3167" end="3177" title="Ian Curtis" label="Ian Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="3315" end="3329" title="music subgenre" label="music subgenre"/>
<link wikidata="Q265718" start="3543" end="3549" title="Sounds (magazine)" label="Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001964" start="3653" end="3661" title="UK Decay" label="UK Decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760274" start="3808" end="3814" title="F Club" label="F Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="3824" end="3829" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q770812" start="4009" end="4016" title="Batcave (club)" label="Batcave"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4020" end="4026" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q124010" start="4034" end="4038" title="Soho" label="Soho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164252" start="4333" end="4342" title="deathrock" label="deathrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4356" end="4366" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="4438" end="4447" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079267" start="4467" end="4482" title="Christian Death" label="Christian Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042301" start="4484" end="4496" title="Kommunity FK" label="Kommunity FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262336" start="4501" end="4509" title="45 Grave" label="45 Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798554" start="4630" end="4647" title="Adam and the Ants" label="Adam and the Ants"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="4649" end="4657" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147045" start="4659" end="4677" title="The Birthday Party (band)" label="the Birthday Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049828" start="4679" end="4698" title="Southern Death Cult" label="Southern Death Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575024" start="4700" end="4708" title="Specimen (band)" label="Specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508167" start="4710" end="4727" title="Sex Gang Children" label="Sex Gang Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001964" start="4729" end="4737" title="UK Decay" label="UK Decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281958" start="4739" end="4752" title="Virgin Prunes" label="Virgin Prunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q250421" start="4754" end="4766" title="Killing Joke" label="Killing Joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q940536" start="4772" end="4782" title="The Damned (band)" label="the Damned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634273" start="4858" end="4866" title="The Face (magazine)" label="The Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734924" start="4873" end="4885" title="Paul Rambali" label="Paul Rambali"/>
<link wikidata="Q431244" start="5012" end="5022" title="Peter Hook" label="Peter Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392098" start="5029" end="5038" title="Play Dead (band)" label="Play Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q751814" start="5268" end="5288" title="the Sisters of Mercy" label="the Sisters of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778916" start="5290" end="5301" title="The Mission (band)" label="the Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541561" start="5303" end="5318" title="Alien Sex Fiend" label="Alien Sex Fiend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051173" start="5320" end="5337" title="the March Violets" label="the March Violets"/>
<link wikidata="Q644458" start="5339" end="5355" title="Xmal Deutschland" label="Xmal Deutschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628005" start="5357" end="5370" title="the Membranes" label="the Membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q378948" start="5376" end="5398" title="Fields of the Nephilim" label="Fields of the Nephilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q578943" start="5419" end="5426" title="Factory Records" label="Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="5428" end="5431" title="4AD" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q126039" start="5436" end="5451" title="Beggars Banquet Records" label="Beggars Banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="5579" end="5587" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5592" end="5615" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290182" start="5700" end="5726" title="Black Tape for a Blue Girl" label="Black Tape for a Blue Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777511" start="5728" end="5742" title="Theatre of Ice" label="Theatre of Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682642" start="5744" end="5755" title="Human Drama" label="Human Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773242" start="5760" end="5768" title="The Wake (American band)" label="The Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545760" start="5919" end="5936" title="Wax Trax! Records" label="Wax Trax! Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922861" start="5941" end="5948" title="Projekt Records" label="Projekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397901" start="6090" end="6107" title="Cleopatra Records" label="Cleopatra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="6158" end="6170" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="6227" end="6238" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q176497" start="6344" end="6354" title="Cybergoth" label="cyber goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045695" start="6356" end="6366" title="shock rock" label="shock rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q208494" start="6368" end="6384" title="industrial metal" label="industrial metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178145" start="6386" end="6398" title="gothic metal" label="gothic metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186327" start="6425" end="6439" title="Marilyn Manson" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="6491" end="6495" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q913510" start="6770" end="6779" title="bricolage" label="bricolage"/>
<link wikidata="Q153946" start="6833" end="6837" title="Punk subculture" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="6839" end="6847" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="6853" end="6857" title="Glam rock" label="glam"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="6893" end="6900" title="B-movie" label="B-movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="6903" end="6920" title="Gothic fiction" label="Gothic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="6922" end="6933" title="horror film" label="horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q909421" start="6936" end="6949" title="Vampire lifestyle" label="vampire cults"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="6966" end="6975" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106575" start="7036" end="7052" title="Celtic mythology" label="Celtic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084084" start="7054" end="7073" title="Christian mythology" label="Christian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="7101" end="7109" title="Paganism" label="Paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="7228" end="7254" title="Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood" label="Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="7256" end="7275" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q294181" start="7289" end="7309" title="Comte de Lautréamont" label="Comte de Lautréamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="7323" end="7336" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="7353" end="7369" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q231944" start="7490" end="7503" title="Ann Radcliffe" label="Ann Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q364264" start="7517" end="7538" title="John William Polidori" label="John William Polidori"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="7552" end="7567" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q326467" start="7581" end="7597" title="Sheridan Le Fanu" label="Sheridan Le Fanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="7611" end="7622" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="7636" end="7647" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="7661" end="7676" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q184785" start="7690" end="7699" title="Anne Rice" label="Anne Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="7713" end="7727" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190379" start="7744" end="7754" title="Ian McEwan" label="Ian McEwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q441793" start="7771" end="7788" title="Storm Constantine" label="Storm Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q450868" start="7806" end="7820" title="Poppy Z. Brite" label="Poppy Z. Brite"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="7868" end="7885" title="Gothic literature" label="Gothic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="8343" end="8348" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="8351" end="8358" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="8361" end="8366" title="ghost" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q276453" start="8373" end="8380" title="monster" label="monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="8683" end="8697" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q548576" start="8725" end="8746" title="The Castle of Otranto" label="The Castle of Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="8810" end="8836" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475916" start="8882" end="8899" title="Headless Horseman (Legend of Sleepy Hollow)" label="Headless Horseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q72309" start="8923" end="8950" title="The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" label="The Legend of Sleepy Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q181667" start="8980" end="8997" title="Washington Irving" label="Washington Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="9201" end="9214" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="9216" end="9224" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987481" start="9245" end="9268" title="The Headless Horseman (1922 film)" label="adapted to film in 1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q863963" start="9300" end="9338" title="The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad" label="The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q150471" start="9493" end="9510" title="E. T. A. Hoffmann" label="E. T. A. Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="9524" end="9539" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="9553" end="9571" title="Charles Baudelaire" label="Charles Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="9585" end="9600" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q216578" start="9791" end="9808" title="Les Fleurs du mal" label="Les Fleurs du mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159606" start="10850" end="10870" title="John Everett Millais" label="John Everett Millais"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255949" start="10875" end="10886" title="John Ruskin (painting)" label="John Ruskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q455754" start="10969" end="11014" title="Screamin&amp;#x27; Jay Hawkins" label="Jalacy &amp;quot;Screamin&amp;#x27; Jay&amp;quot; Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057197" start="11059" end="11079" title="I Put a Spell on You" label="I Put A Spell on You"/>
<link wikidata="Q815090" start="11196" end="11219" title="Bela Lugosi&amp;#x27;s Dead" label="Bela Lugosi&amp;#x27;s Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677151" start="11306" end="11319" title="Jack Off Jill" label="Jack Off Jill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556623" start="11341" end="11349" title="Jessicka" label="Jessicka"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="11429" end="11439" title="riot grrrl" label="riot grrrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q918098" start="11603" end="11617" title="British sitcom" label="British sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q239672" start="11624" end="11636" title="The IT Crowd" label="The IT Crowd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11685" end="11700" title="List of The IT Crowd characters#Richmond Avenal" label="Richmond Avenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388430" start="11712" end="11725" title="Noel Fielding" label="Noel Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q117771507" start="11973" end="11997" title="Visigoths vs. Mall Goths" label="Visigoths vs. Mall Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q117273118" start="12014" end="12025" title="Lucian Kahn" label="Lucian Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="12243" end="12257" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q491252" start="12289" end="12301" title="Robert Smith (musician)" label="Robert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q505692" start="12316" end="12328" title="Peter Murphy (musician)" label="Peter Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293089" start="12342" end="12353" title="Dave Vanian" label="Dave Vanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q644917" start="12370" end="12383" title="Rozz Williams" label="Rozz Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575024" start="12437" end="12445" title="Specimen (band)" label="Specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q770812" start="12510" end="12517" title="Batcave (club)" label="Batcave"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="12525" end="12534" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q234615" start="12656" end="12666" title="Theda Bara" label="Theda Bara"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="12678" end="12690" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q76716" start="12730" end="12744" title="Karl Lagerfeld" label="Karl Lagerfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470206" start="12938" end="12948" title="leather subculture" label="leatherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="12957" end="12971" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="13027" end="13038" title="gothic rock" label="gothic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q707039" start="13046" end="13057" title="Paul Morley" label="Paul Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="13067" end="13070" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="13087" end="13112" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q491252" start="13367" end="13379" title="Robert Smith (musician)" label="Robert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q453602" start="13381" end="13389" title="Musidora" label="Musidora"/>
<link wikidata="Q34529" start="13391" end="13402" title="Bela Lugosi" label="Bela Lugosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61898" start="13404" end="13415" title="Bettie Page" label="Bettie Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q237813" start="13417" end="13424" title="Maila Nurmi" label="Vampira"/>
<link wikidata="Q500727" start="13426" end="13441" title="Morticia Addams" label="Morticia Addams"/>
<link wikidata="Q44634" start="13443" end="13447" title="Nico" label="Nico"/>
<link wikidata="Q644917" start="13449" end="13462" title="Rozz Williams" label="Rozz Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="13464" end="13475" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592889" start="13480" end="13492" title="Lux Interior" label="Lux Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q24050398" start="13556" end="13585" title="Drew Bernstein" label="Drew Bernstein of Lip Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104919" start="13625" end="13639" title="gothic fashion" label="gothic fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587861" start="13743" end="13756" title="Gothic Beauty" label="Gothic Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367869" start="13886" end="13897" title="Rose Mortem" label="Rose Mortem"/>
<link wikidata="Q122400214" start="13946" end="13956" title="Gabbriette" label="Gabbriette"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="14305" end="14310" title="clothing" label="dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991639" start="14344" end="14351" title="Hair colouring" label="colored"/>
<link wikidata="Q8243409" start="14438" end="14446" title="Eye liner" label="eyeliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423086" start="14529" end="14541" title="punk fashion" label="punk fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070623" start="14570" end="14579" title="Victorian fashion" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14584" end="14595" title="1550–1600 in Western European fashion#Elizabethan Style" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60469796" start="14657" end="14674" title="religious symbolism" label="religious imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="14720" end="14726" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693613" start="14750" end="14762" title="Ted Polhemus" label="Ted Polhemus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15479" end="15483" title="Live action role-playing game#Genres" label="LARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126126" start="15839" end="15850" title="Dr. Martens" label="Dr. Martens"/>
<link wikidata="Q351134" start="15903" end="15916" title="winklepickers" label="winklepickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q289569" start="16159" end="16175" title="Elizabeth Fraser" label="Elizabeth Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q40580" start="16180" end="16192" title="Lisa Gerrard" label="Lisa Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16201" end="16219" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070623" start="16623" end="16632" title="Victorian fashion" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q526185" start="16657" end="16671" title="Valerie Steele" label="Valerie Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q207939" start="16880" end="16897" title="Alexander McQueen" label="Alexander McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q262789" start="16899" end="16907" title="Anna Sui" label="Anna Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q556462" start="16909" end="16919" title="Rick Owens" label="Rick Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416101" start="16921" end="16932" title="Gareth Pugh" label="Gareth Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q466241" start="16934" end="16952" title="Ann Demeulemeester" label="Ann Demeulemeester"/>
<link wikidata="Q73234" start="16954" end="16967" title="Philipp Plein" label="Philipp Plein"/>
<link wikidata="Q558" start="16969" end="16981" title="Hedi Slimane" label="Hedi Slimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182364" start="16983" end="16996" title="John Richmond (fashion designer)" label="John Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q313607" start="16998" end="17011" title="John Galliano" label="John Galliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547018" start="17013" end="17030" title="Olivier Theyskens" label="Olivier Theyskens"/>
<link wikidata="Q707890" start="17035" end="17049" title="Yohji Yamamoto" label="Yohji Yamamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q862473" start="17185" end="17199" title="Thierry Mugler" label="Thierry Mugler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096995" start="17201" end="17215" title="Claude Montana" label="Claude Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q242868" start="17217" end="17235" title="Jean Paul Gaultier" label="Jean Paul Gaultier"/>
<link wikidata="Q350844" start="17240" end="17257" title="Christian Lacroix" label="Christian Lacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430391" start="17324" end="17338" title="Riccardo Tisci" label="Riccardo Tisci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347583" start="17360" end="17370" title="Raf Simons" label="Raf Simons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213079" start="17375" end="17389" title="Stefano Pilati" label="Stefano Pilati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993049" start="18055" end="18070" title="tongue-in-cheek" label="tongue-in-cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="18186" end="18198" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="18203" end="18209" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q814334" start="18354" end="18364" title="The Hunger (1983 film)" label="The Hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="18401" end="18412" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q106418" start="18414" end="18431" title="Catherine Deneuve" label="Catherine Deneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="18436" end="18450" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="18559" end="18569" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q320384" start="18665" end="18676" title="Beetlejuice" label="Beetlejuice"/>
<link wikidata="Q116852" start="18697" end="18703" title="Batman (1989 film)" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q217182" start="18724" end="18743" title="Edward Scissorhands" label="Edward Scissorhands"/>
<link wikidata="Q189054" start="18764" end="18778" title="Batman Returns" label="Batman Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="18800" end="18811" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q322328" start="18824" end="18854" title="The Nightmare Before Christmas" label="The Nightmare Before Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q164417" start="18920" end="18932" title="Corpse Bride" label="Corpse Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="18973" end="18984" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q607346" start="18999" end="19010" title="Invader Zim" label="Invader Zim"/>
<link wikidata="Q937005" start="19264" end="19273" title="The Craft (film)" label="The Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635144" start="19287" end="19295" title="The Crow (franchise)" label="The Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014087" start="19309" end="19319" title="The Matrix (franchise)" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q82332" start="19336" end="19346" title="Underworld (film series)" label="Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q320384" start="19428" end="19439" title="Beetlejuice" label="Beetlejuice"/>
<link wikidata="Q373267" start="19453" end="19464" title="The Faculty (film)" label="The Faculty"/>
<link wikidata="Q25139" start="19478" end="19493" title="American Beauty (1999 film)" label="American Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q238866" start="19507" end="19523" title="Wedding Crashers" label="Wedding Crashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="19580" end="19590" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294032" start="19812" end="19821" title="Hot Topic" label="Hot Topic"/>
<link wikidata="Q909421" start="19828" end="19835" title="Vampire lifestyle" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q464395" start="19870" end="19886" title="The Ungroundable" label="The Ungroundable"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926" start="19953" end="19956" title="emo" label="emo"/>
<link wikidata="Q500727" start="20111" end="20126" title="Morticia Addams" label="Morticia Addams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817916" start="20132" end="20149" title="The Addams Family" label="The Addams Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q361106" start="20161" end="20175" title="Charles Addams" label="Charles Addams"/>
<link wikidata="Q238895" start="20261" end="20274" title="Carolyn Jones" label="Carolyn Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q266532" start="20303" end="20332" title="The Addams Family (1964 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Addams Family&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q190998" start="20340" end="20355" title="Anjelica Huston" label="Anjelica Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210947" start="20363" end="20375" title="The Addams Family (1991 film)" label="1991 version"/>
<link wikidata="Q80046" start="20391" end="20406" title="Charlize Theron" label="Charlize Theron"/>
<link wikidata="Q54825652" start="20410" end="20428" title="The Addams Family (2019 film)" label="2019 animated film"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="20483" end="20502" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q218503" start="20727" end="20739" title="Will Ferrell" label="Will Ferrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q239145" start="20741" end="20754" title="Molly Shannon" label="Molly Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q741909" start="20760" end="20772" title="Chris Kattan" label="Chris Kattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184785" start="20878" end="20887" title="Anne Rice" label="Anne Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q840516" start="20941" end="20963" title="The Vampire Chronicles" label="The Vampire Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425557" start="21494" end="21512" title="Vampire literature" label="Vampire literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="21586" end="21596" title="Postmodernism" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="21798" end="21816" title="social alienation" label="socially alienated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295321" start="21969" end="21988" title="Lestat de Lioncourt" label="Lestat de Lioncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136974" start="21992" end="22002" title="role model" label="role model"/>
<link wikidata="Q319820" start="22006" end="22020" title="Richard Wright (author)" label="Richard Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q165599" start="22040" end="22050" title="Native Son" label="Native Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q450868" start="22527" end="22541" title="Poppy Z. Brite" label="Poppy Z. Brite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994458" start="22560" end="22570" title="Lost Souls (Poppy Z. Brite novel)" label="Lost Souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096635" start="23254" end="23271" title="Publishers Weekly" label="Publishers Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310497" start="23534" end="23545" title="Mick Mercer" label="Mick Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="23691" end="23704" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="23706" end="23711" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="23726" end="23730" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250052" start="23872" end="23882" title="Propaganda (magazine)" label="Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587861" start="24230" end="24243" title="Gothic Beauty" label="Gothic Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322780" start="24370" end="24379" title="ECW Press" label="ECW Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="24709" end="24717" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395065" start="25013" end="25022" title="John Robb (musician)" label="John Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="25103" end="25112" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942146" start="25163" end="25177" title="Cathi Unsworth" label="Cathi Unsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="25256" end="25260" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q956879" start="25416" end="25427" title="Gerald Brom" label="Gerald Brom"/>
<link wikidata="Q721300" start="25429" end="25440" title="Dave McKean" label="Dave McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444568" start="25446" end="25458" title="Trevor Brown (artist)" label="Trevor Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q982401" start="25483" end="25495" title="Edward Gorey" label="Edward Gorey"/>
<link wikidata="Q361106" start="25497" end="25511" title="Charles Addams" label="Charles Addams"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486589" start="25513" end="25534" title="Lorin Morgan-Richards" label="Lorin Morgan-Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353665" start="25540" end="25557" title="James O&amp;#x27;Barr" label="James O&amp;#x27;Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q169246" start="25600" end="25618" title="Zdzisław Beksiński" label="Zdzisław Beksiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768825" start="25664" end="25677" title="Anne Sudworth" label="Anne Sudworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="25781" end="25788" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q836514" start="25800" end="25818" title="Wave-Gotik-Treffen" label="Wave-Gotik-Treffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="25822" end="25829" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q695820" start="25834" end="25849" title="M&amp;#x27;era Luna" label="M&amp;#x27;era Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185" start="25853" end="25863" title="Hildesheim" label="Hildesheim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25919" end="25931" title="Castle Party" label="Castle Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="26655" end="26660" title="queer" label="queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272026" start="26662" end="26673" title="Polyamory" label="polyamorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q190845" start="26675" end="26707" title="BDSM" label="bondage-discipline/sadomasochism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="26713" end="26718" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180225" start="27643" end="27649" title="corset" label="corset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777874" start="27673" end="27689" title="fishnet stocking" label="fishnet stocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q207959" start="27698" end="27707" title="Androgyny" label="Androgyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="28213" end="28223" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690958" start="28989" end="28995" title="poseur" label="poseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q105564098" start="29185" end="29194" title="mall goth" label="mall goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294032" start="29271" end="29280" title="Hot Topic" label="Hot Topic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186327" start="29568" end="29582" title="Marilyn Manson" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="29683" end="29686" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="30248" end="30260" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="30332" end="30340" title="Recreational drugs" label="drug use"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="30499" end="30505" title="Hippie" label="Hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="30536" end="30544" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503685" start="30553" end="30567" title="Mod subculture" label="Mod subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445303" start="30587" end="30599" title="amphetamines" label="amphetamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="30767" end="30788" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="31089" end="31119" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine High School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268542" start="31158" end="31187" title="Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold" label="Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="31324" end="31335" title="moral panic" label="moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q64112" start="31685" end="31708" title="Dawson College shooting" label="Dawson College shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="31712" end="31720" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="31722" end="31728" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q64112" start="31730" end="31748" title="Kimveer Singh Gill" label="Kimveer Singh Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="31985" end="31995" title="industrial music" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="32043" end="32054" title="gothic rock" label="gothic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="32082" end="32089" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q161936" start="32363" end="32377" title="Personifications of death" label="Angel of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310497" start="32580" end="32591" title="Mick Mercer" label="Mick Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="32717" end="32722" title="heavy metal music" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="32736" end="32742" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="32744" end="32748" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178145" start="32753" end="32763" title="goth metal" label="goth metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="32775" end="32785" title="Industrial music" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="33306" end="33315" title="prejudice" label="prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="33317" end="33331" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q183225" start="33337" end="33348" title="Toleration" label="intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736526" start="33411" end="33432" title="alternative lifestyle" label="alternative lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q210462" start="33518" end="33537" title="Christina Hendricks" label="Christina Hendricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514944" start="34069" end="34074" title="Bacup" label="Bacup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="34076" end="34086" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938066" start="34104" end="34120" title="Murder of Sophie Lancaster" label="Sophie Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920572" start="34223" end="34236" title="Head injury" label="head injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q546003" start="36121" end="36144" title="British Medical Journal" label="British Medical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q622527" start="36280" end="36289" title="self-harm" label="self harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q934451" start="37389" end="37403" title="Emo subculture" label="Emo subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q97452932" start="37406" end="37419" title="Dark academia" label="Dark academia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131425" start="37422" end="37432" title="Visual kei" label="Visual kei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395065" start="37501" end="37511" title="John Robb (musician)" label="Robb, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942146" start="37607" end="37622" title="Cathi Unsworth" label="Unsworth, Cathi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12908" wikidata="Q901028" url="?curid=12908" title="Global warming potential">
<text>Global warming potential (GWP) is a measure of how much heat a greenhouse gas traps in the atmosphere over a specific time period, relative to carbon dioxide (). It is expressed as a multiple of warming caused by the same mass of carbon dioxide (). Therefore, by definition has a GWP of 1. For other gases it depends on how strongly the gas absorbs thermal radiation, how quickly the gas leaves the atmosphere, and the time frame considered.

For example, methane has a GWP over 20 years (GWP-20) of 81.2 meaning that, a leak of a tonne of methane is equivalent to emitting 81.2 tonnes of carbon dioxide measured over 20 years. As methane has a much shorter atmospheric lifetime than carbon dioxide, its GWP is much less over longer time periods, with a GWP-100 of 27.9 and a GWP-500 of 7.95.

The carbon dioxide equivalent (e or eq or -e or -eq) can be calculated from the GWP. For any gas, it is the mass of that would warm the earth as much as the mass of that gas. Thus it provides a common scale for measuring the climate effects of different gases. It is calculated as GWP times mass of the other gas.

== Definition ==
The global warming potential (GWP) is defined as an &quot;index measuring the radiative forcing following an emission of a unit mass of a given substance, accumulated over a chosen time horizon, relative to that of the reference substance, carbon dioxide (CO2). The GWP thus represents the combined effect of the differing times these substances remain in the atmosphere and their effectiveness in causing radiative forcing.&quot;

In turn, &quot;radiative forcing&quot; is a scientific concept used to quantify and compare the external drivers of change to Earth&#x27;s energy balance. Radiative forcing is the change in energy flux in the atmosphere caused by natural or anthropogenic factors of climate change as measured in watts per meter squared.

=== GWP in policymaking ===
As governments develop policies to combat emissions from high-GWP sources, policymakers have chosen to use the 100-year GWP scale as the standard in international agreements. The Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol sets the global phase-down of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), a group of high-GWP compounds. It requires countries to use a set of GWP100 values equal to those published in the IPCC&#x27;s Fourth Assessment Report (AR4). This allows policymakers to have one standard for comparison instead of changing GWP values in new assessment reports. One exception to the GWP100 standard exists: New York state’s Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act requires the use of GWP20, despite being a different standard from all other countries participating in phase downs of HFCs.

== Calculated values ==
=== Current values (IPCC Sixth Assessment Report from 2021) ===
The global warming potential (GWP) depends on both the efficiency of the molecule as a greenhouse gas and its atmospheric lifetime. GWP is measured relative to the same mass of and evaluated for a specific timescale. Thus, if a gas has a high (positive) radiative forcing but also a short lifetime, it will have a large GWP on a 20-year scale but a small one on a 100-year scale. Conversely, if a molecule has a longer atmospheric lifetime than its GWP will increase when the timescale is considered. Carbon dioxide is defined to have a GWP of 1 over all time periods.

Methane has an atmospheric lifetime of 12 ± 2 years. The 2021 IPCC report lists the GWP as 83 over a time scale of 20 years, 30 over 100 years and 10 over 500 years. The decrease in GWP at longer times is because methane decomposes to water and through chemical reactions in the atmosphere. Similarly the third most important GHG, nitrous oxide (N2O), is a common gas emitted through the denitrification part of the nitrogen cycle. It has a lifetime of 109 years and an even higher GWP level running at 273 over 20 and 100 years.

Examples of the atmospheric lifetime and GWP relative to for several greenhouse gases are given in the following table:

Estimates of GWP values over 20, 100 and 500 years are periodically compiled and revised in reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The most recent report is the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (Working Group I) from 2023.

The IPCC lists many other substances not shown here. Some have high GWP but only a low concentration in the atmosphere.

The values given in the table assume the same mass of compound is analyzed; different ratios will result from the conversion of one substance to another. For instance, burning methane to carbon dioxide would reduce the global warming impact, but by a smaller factor than 25:1 because the mass of methane burned is less than the mass of carbon dioxide released (ratio 1:2.74). For a starting amount of 1 tonne of methane, which has a GWP of 25, after combustion there would be 2.74 tonnes of , each tonne of which has a GWP of 1. This is a net reduction of 22.26 tonnes of GWP, reducing the global warming effect by a ratio of 25:2.74 (approximately 9 times).

=== Earlier values from 2007 ===
The values provided in the table below are from 2007 when they were published in the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report. These values are still used (as of 2020) for some comparisons.

=== Importance of time horizon ===
A substance&#x27;s GWP depends on the number of years (denoted by a subscript) over which the potential is calculated. A gas which is quickly removed from the atmosphere may initially have a large effect, but for longer time periods, as it has been removed, it becomes less important. Thus methane has a potential of 25 over 100 years (GWP100 = 25) but 86 over 20 years (GWP20 = 86); conversely sulfur hexafluoride has a GWP of 22,800 over 100 years but 16,300 over 20 years (IPCC Third Assessment Report). The GWP value depends on how the gas concentration decays over time in the atmosphere. This is often not precisely known and hence the values should not be considered exact. For this reason when quoting a GWP it is important to give a reference to the calculation.

The GWP for a mixture of gases can be obtained from the mass-fraction-weighted average of the GWPs of the individual gases.

Commonly, a time horizon of 100 years is used by regulators.

=== Water vapour ===

Water vapour does contribute to anthropogenic global warming, but as the GWP is defined, it is negligible for H2O: an estimate gives a 100-year GWP between -0.001 and 0.0005.

H2O can function as a greenhouse gas because it has a profound infrared absorption spectrum with more and broader absorption bands than . Its concentration in the atmosphere is limited by air temperature, so that radiative forcing by water vapour increases with global warming (positive feedback). But the GWP definition excludes indirect effects. GWP definition is also based on emissions, and anthropogenic emissions of water vapour (cooling towers, irrigation) are removed via precipitation within weeks, so its GWP is negligible.

== Calculation methods ==

When calculating the GWP of a greenhouse gas, the value depends on the following factors:
* the absorption of infrared radiation by the given gas
* the time horizon of interest (integration period)
* the atmospheric lifetime of the gas
A high GWP correlates with a large infrared absorption and a long atmospheric lifetime. The dependence of GWP on the wavelength of absorption is more complicated. Even if a gas absorbs radiation efficiently at a certain wavelength, this may not affect its GWP much, if the atmosphere already absorbs most radiation at that wavelength. A gas has the most effect if it absorbs in a &quot;window&quot; of wavelengths where the atmosphere is fairly transparent. The dependence of GWP as a function of wavelength has been found empirically and published as a graph.

Because the GWP of a greenhouse gas depends directly on its infrared spectrum, the use of infrared spectroscopy to study greenhouse gases is centrally important in the effort to understand the impact of human activities on global climate change.

Just as radiative forcing provides a simplified means of comparing the various factors that are believed to influence the climate system to one another, global warming potentials (GWPs) are one type of simplified index based upon radiative properties that can be used to estimate the potential future impacts of emissions of different gases upon the climate system in a relative sense. GWP is based on a number of factors, including the radiative efficiency (infrared-absorbing ability) of each gas relative to that of carbon dioxide, as well as the decay rate of each gas (the amount removed from the atmosphere over a given number of years) relative to that of carbon dioxide.

The radiative forcing capacity (RF) is the amount of energy per unit area, per unit time, absorbed by the greenhouse gas, that would otherwise be lost to space. It can be expressed by the formula:

formula_1
where the subscript &quot;i&quot; represents a wavenumber interval of 10 inverse centimeters. Absi represents the integrated infrared absorbance of the sample in that interval, and Fi represents the RF for that interval.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) provides the generally accepted values for GWP, which changed slightly between 1996 and 2001, except for methane, which had its GWP almost doubled. An exact definition of how GWP is calculated is to be found in the IPCC&#x27;s 2001 Third Assessment Report. The GWP is defined as the ratio of the time-integrated radiative forcing from the instantaneous release of 1 kg of a trace substance relative to that of 1 kg of a reference gas:

formula_2
where TH is the time horizon over which the calculation is considered; ax is the radiative efficiency due to a unit increase in atmospheric abundance of the substance (i.e., Wm−2 kg−1) and [x](t) is the time-dependent decay in abundance of the substance following an instantaneous release of it at time t=0. The denominator contains the corresponding quantities for the reference gas (i.e. ). The radiative efficiencies ax and ar are not necessarily constant over time. While the absorption of infrared radiation by many greenhouse gases varies linearly with their abundance, a few important ones display non-linear behaviour for current and likely future abundances (e.g., , CH4, and N2O). For those gases, the relative radiative forcing will depend upon abundance and hence upon the future scenario adopted.

Since all GWP calculations are a comparison to which is non-linear, all GWP values are affected. Assuming otherwise as is done above will lead to lower GWPs for other gases than a more detailed approach would. Clarifying this, while increasing has less and less effect on radiative absorption as ppm concentrations rise, more powerful greenhouse gases like methane and nitrous oxide have different thermal absorption frequencies to that are not filled up (saturated) as much as , so rising ppms of these gases are far more significant.

== Applications ==

=== Carbon dioxide equivalent ===
Carbon dioxide equivalent (e or eq or -e) of a quantity of gas is calculated from its GWP. For any gas, it is the mass of which would warm the earth as much as the mass of that gas. Thus it provides a common scale for measuring the climate effects of different gases. It is calculated as GWP multiplied by mass of the other gas. For example, if a gas has GWP of 100, two tonnes of the gas have e of 200 tonnes, and 9 tonnes of the gas has e of 900 tonnes.

On a global scale, the warming effects of one or more greenhouse gases in the atmosphere can also be expressed as an equivalent atmospheric concentration of . e can then be the atmospheric concentration of which would warm the earth as much as a particular concentration of some other gas or of all gases and aerosols in the atmosphere. For example, e of 500 parts per million would reflect a mix of atmospheric gases which warm the earth as much as 500 parts per million of would warm it. Calculation of the equivalent atmospheric concentration of of an atmospheric greenhouse gas or aerosol is more complex and involves the atmospheric concentrations of those gases, their GWPs, and the ratios of their molar masses to the molar mass of .

e calculations depend on the time-scale chosen, typically 100 years or 20 years, since gases decay in the atmosphere or are absorbed naturally, at different rates.

The following units are commonly used:
* By the UN climate change panel (IPCC): billion metric tonnes = n×109 tonnes of equivalent (Gteq)
* In industry: million metric tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents (MMTCDE) and MMT eq.
* For vehicles: grams of carbon dioxide equivalent per mile (ge/mile) or per kilometer (ge/km)

For example, the table above shows GWP for methane over 20 years at 86 and nitrous oxide at 289, so emissions of 1 million tonnes of methane or nitrous oxide are equivalent to emissions of 86 or 289 million tonnes of carbon dioxide, respectively.

=== Use in Kyoto Protocol and for reporting to UNFCCC ===
Under the Kyoto Protocol, in 1997 the Conference of the Parties standardized international reporting, by deciding (see decision number 2/CP.3) that the values of GWP calculated for the IPCC Second Assessment Report were to be used for converting the various greenhouse gas emissions into comparable equivalents.

After some intermediate updates, in 2013 this standard was updated by the Warsaw meeting of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, decision number 24/CP.19) to require using a new set of 100-year GWP values. They published these values in Annex III, and they took them from the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report, which had been published in 2007. Those 2007 estimates are still used for international comparisons through 2020, although the latest research on warming effects has found other values, as shown in the tables above.

Though recent reports reflect more scientific accuracy, countries and companies continue to use the IPCC Second Assessment Report (SAR) and IPCC Fourth Assessment Report values for reasons of comparison in their emission reports. The IPCC Fifth Assessment Report has skipped the 500-year values but introduced GWP estimations including the climate-carbon feedback (f) with a large amount of uncertainty.

== Other metrics to compare greenhouse gases ==

The &quot;Global Temperature change Potential&quot; (GTP) is another way to compare gases. While GWP estimates infrared thermal radiation absorbed, GTP estimates the resulting rise in average surface temperature of the world, over the next 20, 50 or 100 years, caused by a greenhouse gas, relative to the temperature rise which the same mass of would cause. Calculation of GTP requires modelling how the world, especially the oceans, will absorb heat. GTP is published in the same IPCC tables with GWP.

Another metric called GWP* (pronounced &quot;GWP star&quot;) has been proposed to take better account of short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs) such as methane. A permanent increase in the rate of emission of an SLCP has a similar effect to that of a one-time emission of an amount of carbon dioxide, because both raise the radiative forcing permanently or (in the case of carbon dioxide) practically permanently (since the stays in the air for a long time). GWP* therefore assigns an &quot;increase&quot; in emission rate of an SLCP a supposedly equivalent amount (tonnes) of . However GWP* has been criticised both for its suitability as a metric and for inherent design features which can perpetuate injustices and inequity. Developing countries whose emissions of SLCPs are increasing are &quot;penalized&quot;, while developed countries such as Australia or New Zealand which have steady emissions of SLCPs are not penalized in this way, though they may be penalized for their emissions of .

== See also ==

*Carbon accounting
*Carbon footprint
*Emission intensity

==References==
===Sources===




== External links ==
* List of Global Warming Potentials and Atmospheric Lifetimes from the U.S. EPA
* GWP and the different meanings of e explained</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q901028" start="0" end="30" title="Global warming potential" label="Global warming potential (GWP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="63" end="77" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="143" end="157" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="222" end="226" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="230" end="244" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="300" end="303" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672844" start="456" end="463" title="Methane emissions" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090720" start="521" end="525" title="Fugitive gas emissions" label="leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q901028" start="798" end="823" title="Global warming potential" label="carbon dioxide equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="1019" end="1034" title="Effects of climate change" label="climate effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463606" start="1204" end="1221" title="radiative forcing" label="radiative forcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292280" start="1684" end="1711" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s energy balance" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s energy balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377054" start="1748" end="1759" title="energy flux" label="energy flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="1788" end="1795" title="Climate variability and change" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1799" end="1812" title="Human impact on the environment#Impacts on climate" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1824" end="1838" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="1854" end="1858" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28499112" start="2087" end="2103" title="Kigali Amendment" label="Kigali Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="2111" end="2128" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031943" start="2159" end="2176" title="hydrofluorocarbon" label="hydrofluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589272" start="2509" end="2523" title="Government of New York (state)" label="New York state"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375113" start="2526" end="2573" title="Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act" label="Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q103843442" start="3415" end="3431" title="IPCC Sixth Assessment Report" label="2021 IPCC report"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3571" end="3578" title="Atmospheric methane#Removal processes" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="3689" end="3702" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q742637" start="3746" end="3761" title="denitrification" label="denitrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q82551" start="3774" end="3788" title="nitrogen cycle" label="nitrogen cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="4119" end="4160" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q103843442" start="4192" end="4220" title="IPCC Sixth Assessment Report" label="IPCC Sixth Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="4548" end="4555" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="4668" end="4675" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="4708" end="4722" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639963" start="5150" end="5179" title="IPCC Fourth Assessment Report" label="IPCC Fourth Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q279055" start="5675" end="5694" title="sulfur hexafluoride" label="sulfur hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="6262" end="6274" title="Water vapour" label="Water vapour"/>
<link wikidata="Q193886" start="6874" end="6887" title="cooling tower" label="cooling tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="6890" end="6900" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="6918" end="6931" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="7110" end="7128" title="infrared radiation" label="infrared radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="7204" end="7224" title="atmospheric lifetime" label="atmospheric lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q70906" start="7888" end="7909" title="infrared spectroscopy" label="infrared spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="8028" end="8042" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463606" start="8053" end="8070" title="radiative forcing" label="radiative forcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="8980" end="8990" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028259" start="9006" end="9024" title="inverse centimeter" label="inverse centimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="9159" end="9200" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="12434" end="12439" title="Units of measurement" label="units"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="12493" end="12497" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="IPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="12530" end="12535" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="13058" end="13072" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q233691" start="13233" end="13262" title="IPCC Second Assessment Report" label="IPCC Second Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="13457" end="13498" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="UN Framework Convention on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639963" start="13655" end="13684" title="IPCC Fourth Assessment Report" label="IPCC Fourth Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q233691" start="14003" end="14032" title="IPCC Second Assessment Report" label="IPCC Second Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429705" start="14137" end="14165" title="IPCC Fifth Assessment Report" label="IPCC Fifth Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q140182" start="15876" end="15893" title="Carbon accounting" label="Carbon accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q310667" start="15895" end="15911" title="Carbon footprint" label="Carbon footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337914" start="15913" end="15931" title="Emission intensity" label="Emission intensity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12910" wikidata="Q1062242" url="?curid=12910" title="Grothendieck topology">
<text>In category theory, a branch of mathematics, a Grothendieck topology is a structure on a category &quot;C&quot; that makes the objects of &quot;C&quot; act like the open sets of a topological space. A category together with a choice of Grothendieck topology is called a site.

Grothendieck topologies axiomatize the notion of an open cover. Using the notion of covering provided by a Grothendieck topology, it becomes possible to define sheaves on a category and their cohomology. This was first done in algebraic geometry and algebraic number theory by Alexander Grothendieck to define the étale cohomology of a scheme. It has been used to define other cohomology theories since then, such as ℓ-adic cohomology, flat cohomology, and crystalline cohomology. While Grothendieck topologies are most often used to define cohomology theories, they have found other applications as well, such as to John Tate&#x27;s theory of rigid analytic geometry.

There is a natural way to associate a site to an ordinary topological space, and Grothendieck&#x27;s theory is loosely regarded as a generalization of classical topology. Under meager point-set hypotheses, namely sobriety, this is completely accurate—it is possible to recover a sober space from its associated site. However simple examples such as the indiscrete topological space show that not all topological spaces can be expressed using Grothendieck topologies. Conversely, there are Grothendieck topologies that do not come from topological spaces.

The term &quot;Grothendieck topology&quot; has changed in meaning. In it meant what is now called a Grothendieck pretopology, and some authors still use this old meaning. modified the definition to use sieves rather than covers. Much of the time this does not make much difference, as each Grothendieck pretopology determines a unique Grothendieck topology, though quite different pretopologies can give the same topology.

== Overview ==

André Weil&#x27;s famous Weil conjectures proposed that certain properties of equations with integral coefficients should be understood as geometric properties of the algebraic variety that they define. His conjectures postulated that there should be a cohomology theory of algebraic varieties that gives number-theoretic information about their defining equations. This cohomology theory was known as the &quot;Weil cohomology&quot;, but using the tools he had available, Weil was unable to construct it.

In the early 1960s, Alexander Grothendieck introduced étale maps into algebraic geometry as algebraic analogues of local analytic isomorphisms in analytic geometry. He used étale coverings to define an algebraic analogue of the fundamental group of a topological space. Soon Jean-Pierre Serre noticed that some properties of étale coverings mimicked those of open immersions, and that consequently it was possible to make constructions that imitated the cohomology functor formula_1. Grothendieck saw that it would be possible to use Serre&#x27;s idea to define a cohomology theory that he suspected would be the Weil cohomology. To define this cohomology theory, Grothendieck needed to replace the usual, topological notion of an open covering with one that would use étale coverings instead. Grothendieck also saw how to phrase the definition of covering abstractly; this is where the definition of a Grothendieck topology comes from.

== Definition ==

=== Motivation ===
The classical definition of a sheaf begins with a topological space formula_2. A sheaf associates information to the open sets of formula_2. This information can be phrased abstractly by letting formula_4 be the category whose objects are the open subsets formula_5 of formula_2 and whose morphisms are the inclusion maps formula_7 of open sets formula_5 and formula_9 of formula_2. We will call such maps &quot;open immersions&quot;, just as in the context of schemes. Then a presheaf on formula_2 is a contravariant functor from formula_4 to the category of sets, and a sheaf is a presheaf that satisfies the gluing axiom (here including the separation axiom). The gluing axiom is phrased in terms of pointwise covering, i.e., formula_13 covers formula_5 if and only if formula_15. In this definition, formula_16 is an open subset of formula_2. Grothendieck topologies replace each formula_16 with an entire family of open subsets; in this example, formula_16 is replaced by the family of all open immersions formula_20. Such a collection is called a &quot;sieve&quot;. Pointwise covering is replaced by the notion of a &quot;covering family&quot;; in the above example, the set of all formula_21 as formula_22 varies is a covering family of formula_5. Sieves and covering families can be axiomatized, and once this is done open sets and pointwise covering can be replaced by other notions that describe other properties of the space formula_2.

=== Sieves ===
In a Grothendieck topology, the notion of a collection of open subsets of &quot;U&quot; stable under inclusion is replaced by the notion of a sieve. If &quot;c&quot; is any given object in &quot;C&quot;, a sieve on &quot;c&quot; is a subfunctor of the functor Hom(−, &quot;c&quot;); (this is the Yoneda embedding applied to &quot;c&quot;). In the case of &quot;O&quot;(&quot;X&quot;), a sieve &quot;S&quot; on an open set &quot;U&quot; selects a collection of open subsets of &quot;U&quot; that is stable under inclusion. More precisely, consider that for any open subset &quot;V&quot; of &quot;U&quot;, &quot;S&quot;(&quot;V&quot;) will be a subset of Hom(&quot;V&quot;, &quot;U&quot;), which has only one element, the open immersion &quot;V&quot; → &quot;U&quot;. Then &quot;V&quot; will be considered &quot;selected&quot; by &quot;S&quot; if and only if &quot;S&quot;(&quot;V&quot;) is nonempty. If &quot;W&quot; is a subset of &quot;V&quot;, then there is a morphism &quot;S&quot;(&quot;V&quot;) → &quot;S&quot;(&quot;W&quot;) given by composition with the inclusion &quot;W&quot; → &quot;V&quot;. If &quot;S&quot;(&quot;V&quot;) is non-empty, it follows that &quot;S&quot;(&quot;W&quot;) is also non-empty.

If &quot;S&quot; is a sieve on &quot;X&quot;, and &quot;f&quot;: &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot; is a morphism, then left composition by &quot;f&quot; gives a sieve on &quot;Y&quot; called the pullback of &quot;S&quot; along &quot;f&quot;, denoted by &quot;f&quot;formula_25&quot;S&quot;. It is defined as the fibered product &quot;S&quot; ×Hom(−, &quot;X&quot;) Hom(−, &quot;Y&quot;) together with its natural embedding in Hom(−, &quot;Y&quot;). More concretely, for each object &quot;Z&quot; of &quot;C&quot;, &quot;f&quot;formula_25&quot;S&quot;(&quot;Z&quot;) = { &quot;g&quot;: &quot;Z&quot; → &quot;Y&quot; | &quot;fg&quot; formula_27&quot;S&quot;(&quot;Z&quot;) }, and &quot;f&quot;formula_25&quot;S&quot; inherits its action on morphisms by being a subfunctor of Hom(−, &quot;Y&quot;). In the classical example, the pullback of a collection {&quot;V&quot;i} of subsets of &quot;U&quot; along an inclusion &quot;W&quot; → &quot;U&quot; is the collection {&quot;V&quot;i∩W}.

=== Grothendieck topology ===
A Grothendieck topology &quot;J&quot; on a category &quot;C&quot; is a collection, &quot;for each object c of C&quot;, of distinguished sieves on &quot;c&quot;, denoted by &quot;J&quot;(&quot;c&quot;) and called covering sieves of &quot;c&quot;. This selection will be subject to certain axioms, stated below. Continuing the previous example, a sieve &quot;S&quot; on an open set &quot;U&quot; in &quot;O&quot;(&quot;X&quot;) will be a covering sieve if and only if the union of all the open sets &quot;V&quot; for which &quot;S&quot;(&quot;V&quot;) is nonempty equals &quot;U&quot;; in other words, if and only if &quot;S&quot; gives us a collection of open sets that cover &quot;U&quot; in the classical sense.

==== Axioms ====
The conditions we impose on a Grothendieck topology are:

* (T 1) (Base change) If &quot;S&quot; is a covering sieve on &quot;X&quot;, and &quot;f&quot;: &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot; is a morphism, then the pullback &quot;f&quot;formula_29&quot;S&quot; is a covering sieve on &quot;Y&quot;.
* (T 2) (Local character) Let &quot;S&quot; be a covering sieve on &quot;X&quot;, and let &quot;T&quot; be any sieve on &quot;X&quot;. Suppose that for each object &quot;Y&quot; of &quot;C&quot; and each arrow &quot;f&quot;: &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot; in &quot;S&quot;(&quot;X&quot;), the pullback sieve &quot;f&quot;formula_29&quot;T&quot; is a covering sieve on &quot;Y&quot;. Then &quot;T&quot; is a covering sieve on &quot;X&quot;.
* (T 3) (Identity) Hom(−, &quot;X&quot;) is a covering sieve on &quot;X&quot; for any object &quot;X&quot; in &quot;C&quot;.

The base change axiom corresponds to the idea that if {&quot;Ui&quot;} covers &quot;U&quot;, then {&quot;Ui&quot; ∩ &quot;V&quot;} should cover &quot;U&quot; ∩ &quot;V&quot;. The local character axiom corresponds to the idea that if {&quot;Ui&quot;} covers &quot;U&quot; and {&quot;Vij&quot;}&quot;j formula_27Ji&quot; covers &quot;Ui&quot; for each &quot;i&quot;, then the collection {&quot;Vij&quot;} for all &quot;i&quot; and &quot;j&quot; should cover &quot;U&quot;. Lastly, the identity axiom corresponds to the idea that any set is covered by itself via the identity map.

==== Grothendieck pretopologies ====
In fact, it is possible to put these axioms in another form where their geometric character is more apparent, assuming that the underlying category &quot;C&quot; contains certain fibered products. In this case, instead of specifying sieves, we can specify that certain collections of maps with a common codomain should cover their codomain. These collections are called covering families. If the collection of all covering families satisfies certain axioms, then we say that they form a Grothendieck pretopology. These axioms are:

* (PT 0) (Existence of fibered products) For all objects &quot;X&quot; of &quot;C&quot;, and for all morphisms &quot;X&quot;0 → &quot;X&quot; that appear in some covering family of &quot;X&quot;, and for all morphisms &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot;, the fibered product &quot;X&quot;0 ×&quot;X&quot; &quot;Y&quot; exists.
* (PT 1) (Stability under base change) For all objects &quot;X&quot; of &quot;C&quot;, all morphisms &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot;, and all covering families {&quot;X&quot;&quot;α&quot; → &quot;X&quot;}, the family {&quot;X&quot;&quot;α&quot; ×&quot;X&quot; &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;Y&quot;} is a covering family.
* (PT 2) (Local character) If {&quot;X&quot;&quot;α&quot; → &quot;X&quot;} is a covering family, and if for all α, {&quot;X&quot;&quot;βα&quot; → &quot;X&quot;&quot;α&quot;} is a covering family, then the family of composites {&quot;X&quot;&quot;βα&quot; → &quot;X&quot;&quot;α&quot; → &quot;X&quot;} is a covering family.
* (PT 3) (Isomorphisms) If &quot;f&quot;: &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot; is an isomorphism, then {&quot;f&quot;} is a covering family.

For any pretopology, the collection of all sieves that contain a covering family from the pretopology is always a Grothendieck topology.

For categories with fibered products, there is a converse. Given a collection of arrows {&quot;X&quot;&quot;α&quot; → &quot;X&quot;}, we construct a sieve &quot;S&quot; by letting &quot;S&quot;(&quot;Y&quot;) be the set of all morphisms &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot; that factor through some arrow &quot;X&quot;&quot;α&quot; → &quot;X&quot;. This is called the sieve generated by {&quot;X&quot;&quot;α&quot; → &quot;X&quot;}. Now choose a topology. Say that {&quot;X&quot;&quot;α&quot; → &quot;X&quot;} is a covering family if and only if the sieve that it generates is a covering sieve for the given topology. It is easy to check that this defines a pretopology.

(PT 3) is sometimes replaced by a weaker axiom:

* (PT 3&#x27;) (Identity) If 1&quot;X&quot; : &quot;X&quot; → &quot;X&quot; is the identity arrow, then {1&quot;X&quot;} is a covering family.

(PT 3) implies (PT 3&#x27;), but not conversely. However, suppose that we have a collection of covering families that satisfies (PT 0) through (PT 2) and (PT 3&#x27;), but not (PT 3). These families generate a pretopology. The topology generated by the original collection of covering families is then the same as the topology generated by the pretopology, because the sieve generated by an isomorphism &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot; is Hom(−, &quot;X&quot;). Consequently, if we restrict our attention to topologies, (PT 3) and (PT 3&#x27;) are equivalent.

== Sites and sheaves ==
Let &quot;C&quot; be a category and let &quot;J&quot; be a Grothendieck topology on &quot;C&quot;. The pair (&quot;C&quot;, &quot;J&quot;) is called a site.

A presheaf on a category is a contravariant functor from &quot;C&quot; to the category of all sets. Note that for this definition &quot;C&quot; is not required to have a topology. A sheaf on a site, however, should allow gluing, just like sheaves in classical topology. Consequently, we define a sheaf on a site to be a presheaf &quot;F&quot; such that for all objects &quot;X&quot; and all covering sieves &quot;S&quot; on &quot;X&quot;, the natural map Hom(Hom(−, &quot;X&quot;), &quot;F&quot;) → Hom(&quot;S&quot;, &quot;F&quot;), induced by the inclusion of &quot;S&quot; into Hom(−, &quot;X&quot;), is a bijection. Halfway in between a presheaf and a sheaf is the notion of a separated presheaf, where the natural map above is required to be only an injection, not a bijection, for all sieves &quot;S&quot;. A morphism of presheaves or of sheaves is a natural transformation of functors. The category of all sheaves on &quot;C&quot; is the topos defined by the site (&quot;C&quot;, &quot;J&quot;).

Using the Yoneda lemma, it is possible to show that a presheaf on the category &quot;O&quot;(&quot;X&quot;) is a sheaf on the topology defined above if and only if it is a sheaf in the classical sense.

Sheaves on a pretopology have a particularly simple description: For each covering family {&quot;X&quot;&quot;α&quot; → &quot;X&quot;}, the diagram

:formula_32

must be an equalizer. For a separated presheaf, the first arrow need only be injective.

Similarly, one can define presheaves and sheaves of abelian groups, rings, modules, and so on. One can require either that a presheaf &quot;F&quot; is a contravariant functor to the category of abelian groups (or rings, or modules, etc.), or that &quot;F&quot; be an abelian group (ring, module, etc.) object in the category of all contravariant functors from &quot;C&quot; to the category of sets. These two definitions are equivalent.

== Examples of sites ==

=== The discrete and indiscrete topologies ===

Let C be any category. To define the discrete topology, we declare all sieves to be covering sieves. If C has all fibered products, this is equivalent to declaring all families to be covering families. To define the indiscrete topology, also known as the coarse or chaotic topology, we declare only the sieves of the form Hom(−, &quot;X&quot;) to be covering sieves. The indiscrete topology is generated by the pretopology that has only isomorphisms for covering families. A sheaf on the indiscrete site is the same thing as a presheaf.

=== The canonical topology ===

Let C be any category. The Yoneda embedding gives a functor Hom(−, &quot;X&quot;) for each object &quot;X&quot; of C. The canonical topology is the biggest (finest) topology such that every representable presheaf, i.e. presheaf of the form Hom(−, &quot;X&quot;), is a sheaf. A covering sieve or covering family for this site is said to be &quot;strictly universally epimorphic&quot; because it consists of the legs of a colimit cone (under the full diagram on the domains of its constituent morphisms) and these colimits are stable under pullbacks along morphisms in C. A topology that is less fine than the canonical topology, that is, for which every covering sieve is strictly universally epimorphic, is called subcanonical. Subcanonical sites are exactly the sites for which every presheaf of the form Hom(−, &quot;X&quot;) is a sheaf. Most sites encountered in practice are subcanonical.

=== Small site associated to a topological space ===

We repeat the example that we began with above. Let &quot;X&quot; be a topological space. We defined &quot;O&quot;(&quot;X&quot;) to be the category whose objects are the open sets of &quot;X&quot; and whose morphisms are inclusions of open sets. Note that for an open set &quot;U&quot; and a sieve &quot;S&quot; on &quot;U&quot;, the set &quot;S&quot;(&quot;V&quot;) contains either zero or one element for every open set &quot;V&quot;. The covering sieves on an object &quot;U&quot; of &quot;O&quot;(&quot;X&quot;) are those sieves &quot;S&quot; satisfying the following condition:
*If &quot;W&quot; is the union of all the sets &quot;V&quot; such that &quot;S&quot;(&quot;V&quot;) is non-empty, then &quot;W&quot; = &quot;U&quot;.
This notion of cover matches the usual notion in point-set topology.

This topology can also naturally be expressed as a pretopology. We say that a family of inclusions {&quot;V&quot;&quot;α&quot; formula_33 &quot;U&quot;} is a covering family if and only if the union formula_34&quot;V&quot;&quot;α&quot; equals &quot;U&quot;. This site is called the small site associated to a topological space &quot;X&quot;.

=== Big site associated to a topological space ===

Let &quot;Spc&quot; be the category of all topological spaces. Given any family of functions {&quot;u&quot;&quot;α&quot; : &quot;V&quot;&quot;α&quot; → &quot;X&quot;}, we say that it is a surjective family or that the morphisms &quot;u&quot;&quot;α&quot; are jointly surjective if formula_34 &quot;u&quot;&quot;α&quot;(&quot;V&quot;&quot;α&quot;) equals &quot;X&quot;. We define a pretopology on &quot;Spc&quot; by taking the covering families to be surjective families all of whose members are open immersions. Let &quot;S&quot; be a sieve on &quot;Spc&quot;. &quot;S&quot; is a covering sieve for this topology if and only if:
*For all &quot;Y&quot; and every morphism &quot;f&quot; : &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot; in &quot;S&quot;(&quot;Y&quot;), there exists a &quot;V&quot; and a &quot;g&quot; : &quot;V&quot; → &quot;X&quot; such that &quot;g&quot; is an open immersion, &quot;g&quot; is in &quot;S&quot;(&quot;V&quot;), and &quot;f&quot; factors through &quot;g&quot;.
*If &quot;W&quot; is the union of all the sets &quot;f&quot;(&quot;Y&quot;), where &quot;f&quot; : &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot; is in &quot;S&quot;(&quot;Y&quot;), then &quot;W&quot; = &quot;X&quot;.

Fix a topological space &quot;X&quot;. Consider the comma category &quot;Spc/X&quot; of topological spaces with a fixed continuous map to &quot;X&quot;. The topology on &quot;Spc&quot; induces a topology on &quot;Spc/X&quot;. The covering sieves and covering families are almost exactly the same; the only difference is that now all the maps involved commute with the fixed maps to &quot;X&quot;. This is the big site associated to a topological space &quot;X&quot;. Notice that &quot;Spc&quot; is the big site associated to the one point space. This site was first considered by Jean Giraud.

=== The big and small sites of a manifold ===

Let &quot;M&quot; be a manifold. &quot;M&quot; has a category of open sets &quot;O&quot;(&quot;M&quot;) because it is a topological space, and it gets a topology as in the above example. For two open sets &quot;U&quot; and &quot;V&quot; of &quot;M&quot;, the fiber product &quot;U&quot; ×&quot;M&quot; &quot;V&quot; is the open set &quot;U&quot; ∩ &quot;V&quot;, which is still in &quot;O&quot;(&quot;M&quot;). This means that the topology on &quot;O&quot;(&quot;M&quot;) is defined by a pretopology, the same pretopology as before.

Let &quot;Mfd&quot; be the category of all manifolds and continuous maps. (Or smooth manifolds and smooth maps, or real analytic manifolds and analytic maps, etc.) &quot;Mfd&quot; is a subcategory of &quot;Spc&quot;, and open immersions are continuous (or smooth, or analytic, etc.), so &quot;Mfd&quot; inherits a topology from &quot;Spc&quot;. This lets us construct the big site of the manifold &quot;M&quot; as the site &quot;Mfd/M&quot;. We can also define this topology using the same pretopology we used above. Notice that to satisfy (PT 0), we need to check that for any continuous map of manifolds &quot;X&quot; → &quot;Y&quot; and any open subset &quot;U&quot; of &quot;Y&quot;, the fibered product &quot;U&quot; ×&quot;Y&quot; &quot;X&quot; is in &quot;Mfd/M&quot;. This is just the statement that the preimage of an open set is open. Notice, however, that not all fibered products exist in &quot;Mfd&quot; because the preimage of a smooth map at a critical value need not be a manifold.

=== Topologies on the category of schemes ===

The category of schemes, denoted &quot;Sch&quot;, has a tremendous number of useful topologies. A complete understanding of some questions may require examining a scheme using several different topologies. All of these topologies have associated small and big sites. The big site is formed by taking the entire category of schemes and their morphisms, together with the covering sieves specified by the topology. The small site over a given scheme is formed by only taking the objects and morphisms that are part of a cover of the given scheme.

The most elementary of these is the Zariski topology. Let &quot;X&quot; be a scheme. &quot;X&quot; has an underlying topological space, and this topological space determines a Grothendieck topology. The Zariski topology on &quot;Sch&quot; is generated by the pretopology whose covering families are jointly surjective families of scheme-theoretic open immersions. The covering sieves &quot;S&quot; for &quot;Zar&quot; are characterized by the following two properties:
*For all &quot;Y&quot; and every morphism &quot;f&quot; : &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot; in &quot;S&quot;(&quot;Y&quot;), there exists a &quot;V&quot; and a &quot;g&quot; : &quot;V&quot; → &quot;X&quot; such that &quot;g&quot; is an open immersion, &quot;g&quot; is in &quot;S&quot;(&quot;V&quot;), and &quot;f&quot; factors through &quot;g&quot;.
*If &quot;W&quot; is the union of all the sets &quot;f&quot;(&quot;Y&quot;), where &quot;f&quot; : &quot;Y&quot; → &quot;X&quot; is in &quot;S&quot;(&quot;Y&quot;), then &quot;W&quot; = &quot;X&quot;.
Despite their outward similarities, the topology on &quot;Zar&quot; is &quot;not&quot; the restriction of the topology on &quot;Spc&quot;! This is because there are morphisms of schemes that are topologically open immersions but that are not scheme-theoretic open immersions. For example, let &quot;A&quot; be a non-reduced ring and let &quot;N&quot; be its ideal of nilpotents. The quotient map &quot;A&quot; → &quot;A/N&quot; induces a map Spec &quot;A/N&quot; → Spec &quot;A&quot;, which is the identity on underlying topological spaces. To be a scheme-theoretic open immersion it must also induce an isomorphism on structure sheaves, which this map does not do. In fact, this map is a closed immersion.

The étale topology is finer than the Zariski topology. It was the first Grothendieck topology to be closely studied. Its covering families are jointly surjective families of étale morphisms. It is finer than the Nisnevich topology, but neither finer nor coarser than the &quot;cdh&quot; and l′ topologies.

There are two flat topologies, the &quot;fppf&quot; topology and the &quot;fpqc&quot; topology. &quot;fppf&quot; stands for &#x27;, and in this topology, a morphism of affine schemes is a covering morphism if it is faithfully flat, of finite presentation, and is quasi-finite. &quot;fpqc&quot; stands for &#x27;, and in this topology, a morphism of affine schemes is a covering morphism if it is faithfully flat. In both categories, a covering family is defined to be a family that is a cover on Zariski open subsets. In the fpqc topology, any faithfully flat and quasi-compact morphism is a cover. These topologies are closely related to descent. The &quot;fpqc&quot; topology is finer than all the topologies mentioned above, and it is very close to the canonical topology.

Grothendieck introduced crystalline cohomology to study the &quot;p&quot;-torsion part of the cohomology of characteristic &quot;p&quot; varieties. In the &quot;crystalline topology&quot;, which is the basis of this theory, the underlying category has objects given by infinitesimal thickenings together with divided power structures. Crystalline sites are examples of sites with no final object.

== Continuous and cocontinuous functors ==
There are two natural types of functors between sites. They are given by functors that are compatible with the topology in a certain sense.

=== Continuous functors ===
If (&quot;C&quot;, &quot;J&quot;) and (&quot;D&quot;, &quot;K&quot;) are sites and &quot;u&quot; : &quot;C&quot; → &quot;D&quot; is a functor, then &quot;u&quot; is continuous if for every sheaf &quot;F&quot; on &quot;D&quot; with respect to the topology &quot;K&quot;, the presheaf &quot;Fu&quot; is a sheaf with respect to the topology &quot;J&quot;. Continuous functors induce functors between the corresponding topoi by sending a sheaf &quot;F&quot; to &quot;Fu&quot;. These functors are called pushforwards. If formula_36 and formula_37 denote the topoi associated to &quot;C&quot; and &quot;D&quot;, then the pushforward functor is formula_38.

&quot;u&quot;&quot;s&quot; admits a left adjoint &quot;u&quot;&quot;s&quot; called the pullback. &quot;u&quot;&quot;s&quot; need not preserve limits, even finite limits.

In the same way, &quot;u&quot; sends a sieve on an object &quot;X&quot; of &quot;C&quot; to a sieve on the object &quot;uX&quot; of &quot;D&quot;. A continuous functor sends covering sieves to covering sieves. If &quot;J&quot; is the topology defined by a pretopology, and if &quot;u&quot; commutes with fibered products, then &quot;u&quot; is continuous if and only if it sends covering sieves to covering sieves and if and only if it sends covering families to covering families. In general, it is &quot;not&quot; sufficient for &quot;u&quot; to send covering sieves to covering sieves (see SGA IV 3, 1.9.3).

=== Cocontinuous functors ===
Again, let (&quot;C&quot;, &quot;J&quot;) and (&quot;D&quot;, &quot;K&quot;) be sites and &quot;v&quot; : &quot;C&quot; → &quot;D&quot; be a functor. If &quot;X&quot; is an object of &quot;C&quot; and &quot;R&quot; is a sieve on &quot;vX&quot;, then &quot;R&quot; can be pulled back to a sieve &quot;S&quot; as follows: A morphism &quot;f&quot; : &quot;Z&quot; → &quot;X&quot; is in &quot;S&quot; if and only if &quot;v&quot;(&quot;f&quot;) : &quot;vZ&quot; → &quot;vX&quot; is in &quot;R&quot;. This defines a sieve. &quot;v&quot; is cocontinuous if and only if for every object &quot;X&quot; of &quot;C&quot; and every covering sieve &quot;R&quot; of &quot;vX&quot;, the pullback &quot;S&quot; of &quot;R&quot; is a covering sieve on &quot;X&quot;.

Composition with &quot;v&quot; sends a presheaf &quot;F&quot; on &quot;D&quot; to a presheaf &quot;Fv&quot; on &quot;C&quot;, but if &quot;v&quot; is cocontinuous, this need not send sheaves to sheaves. However, this functor on presheaf categories, usually denoted formula_39, admits a right adjoint formula_40. Then &quot;v&quot; is cocontinuous if and only if formula_40 sends sheaves to sheaves, that is, if and only if it restricts to a functor formula_42. In this case, the composite of formula_39 with the associated sheaf functor is a left adjoint of &quot;v&quot;* denoted &quot;v&quot;*. Furthermore, &quot;v&quot;* preserves finite limits, so the adjoint functors &quot;v&quot;* and &quot;v&quot;* determine a geometric morphism of topoi formula_44.

=== Morphisms of sites ===
A continuous functor &quot;u&quot; : &quot;C&quot; → &quot;D&quot; is a morphism of sites &quot;D&quot; → &quot;C&quot; (&quot;not&quot; &quot;C&quot; → &quot;D&quot;) if &quot;u&quot;&quot;s&quot; preserves finite limits. In this case, &quot;u&quot;&quot;s&quot; and &quot;u&quot;&quot;s&quot; determine a geometric morphism of topoi formula_44. The reasoning behind the convention that a continuous functor &quot;C&quot; → &quot;D&quot; is said to determine a morphism of sites in the opposite direction is that this agrees with the intuition coming from the case of topological spaces. A continuous map of topological spaces &quot;X&quot; → &quot;Y&quot; determines a continuous functor &quot;O&quot;(&quot;Y&quot;) → &quot;O&quot;(&quot;X&quot;). Since the original map on topological spaces is said to send &quot;X&quot; to &quot;Y&quot;, the morphism of sites is said to as well.

A particular case of this happens when a continuous functor admits a left adjoint. Suppose that &quot;u&quot; : &quot;C&quot; → &quot;D&quot; and &quot;v&quot; : &quot;D&quot; → &quot;C&quot; are functors with &quot;u&quot; right adjoint to &quot;v&quot;. Then &quot;u&quot; is continuous if and only if &quot;v&quot; is cocontinuous, and when this happens, &quot;u&quot;&quot;s&quot; is naturally isomorphic to &quot;v&quot;* and &quot;u&quot;&quot;s&quot; is naturally isomorphic to &quot;v&quot;*. In particular, &quot;u&quot; is a morphism of sites.

== See also ==
*Fibered category
*Lawvere–Tierney topology

==Notes==
== References ==
*
*
* 

== External links ==
* The birthday of Grothendieck topologies
* The birthday of Grothendieck topologies (non-archived version)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="3" end="18" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="32" end="43" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062242" start="47" end="68" title="Grothendieck topology" label="Grothendieck topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="165" end="173" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="180" end="197" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062242" start="270" end="274" title="Grothendieck topology" label="site"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="329" end="339" title="open cover" label="open cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q595298" start="437" end="444" title="Sheaf (mathematics)" label="sheaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198376" start="469" end="479" title="cohomology" label="cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="504" end="522" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q613048" start="527" end="550" title="algebraic number theory" label="algebraic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q77141" start="554" end="576" title="Alexander Grothendieck" label="Alexander Grothendieck"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078429" start="591" end="607" title="étale cohomology" label="étale cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155772" start="613" end="619" title="scheme (mathematics)" label="scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078429" start="694" end="711" title="ℓ-adic cohomology" label="ℓ-adic cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457855" start="713" end="728" title="flat cohomology" label="flat cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191431" start="734" end="756" title="crystalline cohomology" label="crystalline cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q351822" start="894" end="903" title="John Tate (mathematician)" label="John Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333799" start="921" end="944" title="rigid analytic geometry" label="rigid analytic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="1005" end="1022" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778429" start="1160" end="1168" title="sober space" label="sobriety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418327" start="1300" end="1328" title="indiscrete topology" label="indiscrete topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7511782" start="1705" end="1710" title="sieve (category theory)" label="sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q323232" start="1943" end="1953" title="André Weil" label="André Weil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479613" start="1968" end="1984" title="Weil conjectures" label="Weil conjectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q50698" start="2021" end="2029" title="polynomial equation" label="equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="2036" end="2044" title="integer" label="integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q648995" start="2110" end="2127" title="algebraic variety" label="algebraic variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198376" start="2196" end="2206" title="cohomology" label="cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078428" start="2504" end="2513" title="étale map" label="étale map"/>
<link wikidata="Q134787" start="2596" end="2613" title="analytic geometry" label="analytic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q662830" start="2678" end="2695" title="fundamental group" label="fundamental group"/>
<link wikidata="Q212063" start="2725" end="2742" title="Jean-Pierre Serre" label="Jean-Pierre Serre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16783922" start="2809" end="2823" title="open immersion" label="open immersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198376" start="2904" end="2922" title="cohomology" label="cohomology functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155772" start="3886" end="3892" title="scheme (mathematics)" label="scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q864475" start="3929" end="3950" title="contravariant functor" label="contravariant functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572389" start="4036" end="4048" title="gluing axiom" label="gluing axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="4128" end="4146" title="Cover (topology)" label="pointwise covering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7511782" start="5030" end="5035" title="sieve (category theory)" label="sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631142" start="5122" end="5132" title="subfunctor" label="subfunctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q320577" start="5184" end="5200" title="Yoneda embedding" label="Yoneda embedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259417" start="6292" end="6300" title="pullback" label="pullback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397439" start="6409" end="6424" title="fibered product" label="fibered product"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="7780" end="7785" title="Cover (topology)" label="cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241077" start="12675" end="12683" title="presheaf (category theory)" label="presheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q320577" start="13687" end="13699" title="Yoneda lemma" label="Yoneda lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224487" start="14053" end="14062" title="equalizer (mathematics)" label="equalizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="14183" end="14196" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="14199" end="14203" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="14206" end="14212" title="module (mathematics)" label="module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780005" start="18589" end="18603" title="comma category" label="comma category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414851" start="19117" end="19128" title="Jean Giraud (mathematician)" label="Jean Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="19201" end="19209" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155772" start="20774" end="20780" title="scheme (mathematics)" label="scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q147978" start="21340" end="21356" title="Zariski topology" label="Zariski topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423024" start="22637" end="22644" title="reduced (ring theory)" label="reduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078427" start="23033" end="23047" title="étale topology" label="étale topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040867" start="23241" end="23259" title="Nisnevich topology" label="Nisnevich topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q356459" start="23300" end="23315" title="cdh topology" label="&amp;quot;cdh&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457855" start="23350" end="23365" title="flat topology" label="flat topologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263725" start="23975" end="23982" title="descent (category theory)" label="descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191431" start="24137" end="24159" title="crystalline cohomology" label="crystalline cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284037" start="24422" end="24445" title="divided power structure" label="divided power structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q529752" start="24496" end="24508" title="final object" label="final object"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143621" start="27659" end="27677" title="geometric morphism" label="geometric morphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446431" start="29185" end="29201" title="Fibered category" label="Fibered category"/>
<link wikidata="Q30704544" start="29203" end="29227" title="Lawvere–Tierney topology" label="Lawvere–Tierney topology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12913" wikidata="Q234278" url="?curid=12913" title="Greens">
<text>Greens may refer to:
*Leaf vegetables such as collard greens, mustard greens, spring greens, winter greens, spinach, etc.
==Politics==
===Supranational===
* Green politics
* Green party, political parties adhering to Green politics
* Global Greens
* European Green Party

===Established parties===
* Green Party (disambiguation)
* The Greens (disambiguation)

===Other===
* Green Party of the United States
* Australian Greens
* Green armies, peasant-based groups participating in the Russian Civil War of 1917–23
* Green Movement (disambiguation)
* The Greens, an early 20th-century nationalist and separatist political and military movement in Montenegro
* Greens, a political faction and associated chariot-racing team in the Byzantine empire; involved in the deadly Nika riots of 532

==Places==
* Greens Farms, Connecticut, United States
* Greens Ledge Light on Long Island Sound, United States
* Greens Norton village in Northamptonshire, England
* Greens Pool beach on the south coast of Western Australia
* Greens Restaurant in San Francisco, California, United States
* Millennium Greens and Doorstep Greens, locally owned and managed public spaces in England
* Breckenridge Greens (Edmonton), Potter Greens, Suder Greens - neighbourhoods in Alberta, Canada

==In sport==
* Ashland Greens basketball team in Pennsylvania, United States
* Bentleigh Greens soccer team in a suburb of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
* Baywood Greens public golf club in Long Neck, Delaware, United States
* Greens Worldwide sports management company
* Greens (golf), the very closely mown areas of a golf course around the holes, maintained by a Greenskeeper

==Manufacturing==
* A British brand of railway locomotives, road rollers and other products; see Thomas Green &amp; Son

==See also==
* Green (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234278" start="0" end="6" title="Greens" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20134" start="22" end="36" title="Leaf vegetable" label="Leaf vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="157" end="171" title="Green politics" label="Green politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778417" start="174" end="185" title="Green party" label="Green party"/>
<link wikidata="Q384069" start="234" end="247" title="Global Greens" label="Global Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q950179" start="250" end="270" title="European Green Party" label="European Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q417389" start="300" end="328" title="Green Party (disambiguation)" label="Green Party (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q341296" start="331" end="358" title="The Greens (disambiguation)" label="The Greens (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="374" end="406" title="Green Party of the United States" label="Green Party of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q781486" start="409" end="426" title="Australian Greens" label="Australian Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q518661" start="429" end="441" title="Green armies" label="Green armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602913" start="516" end="547" title="Green Movement (disambiguation)" label="Green Movement (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443091" start="554" end="560" title="Greens (Montenegrin separatists)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905183" start="584" end="595" title="Montenegrin nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="702" end="745" title="Chariot racing#Byzantine era" label="chariot-racing team in the Byzantine empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q162665" start="770" end="780" title="Nika riots" label="Nika riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604420" start="802" end="827" title="Greens Farms, Connecticut" label="Greens Farms, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604423" start="845" end="863" title="Greens Ledge Light" label="Greens Ledge Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q732508" start="902" end="915" title="Greens Norton" label="Greens Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604427" start="955" end="966" title="Greens Pool" label="Greens Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364825" start="1015" end="1032" title="Greens Restaurant" label="Greens Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858851" start="1079" end="1095" title="Millennium Green" label="Millennium Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297253" start="1101" end="1116" title="Doorstep Greens" label="Doorstep Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960035" start="1171" end="1201" title="Breckenridge Greens (Edmonton)" label="Breckenridge Greens (Edmonton)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890444" start="1347" end="1363" title="Bentleigh Greens" label="Bentleigh Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875038" start="1424" end="1438" title="Baywood Greens" label="Baywood Greens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1496" end="1512" title="Greens Worldwide" label="Greens Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="1541" end="1554" title="Greens (golf)" label="Greens (golf)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790167" start="1746" end="1768" title="Thomas Green &amp;amp; Son" label="Thomas Green &amp;amp; Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q223932" start="1785" end="1807" title="Green (disambiguation)" label="Green (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12914" wikidata="Q92580" url="?curid=12914" title="Ghost in the Shell">
<text>Ghost in the Shell is a Japanese cyberpunk media franchise based on the manga series of the same name written and illustrated by Masamune Shirow. The manga, first serialized between 1989 and 1991, is set in mid-21st century Japan and tells the story of the fictional counter-cyberterrorist organization Public Security Section 9, led by protagonist Major Motoko Kusanagi.

Animation studio Production I.G has produced several anime adaptations of the series. These include the 1995 film of the same name and its 2004 sequel, &quot;Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence&quot;; the 2002 television series &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex&quot; and its 2020 follow-up, &quot;Ghost in the Shell: SAC_2045&quot;; and the &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Arise&quot; original video animation series. In addition, an American-produced live-action film was released on March 2017. 
==Overview==
===Title===
The original editor Koichi Yuri says: At first, &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; came from Shirow, but when Yuri asked &quot;something more flashy&quot;, Shirow came up with &quot;攻殻機動隊 &quot;Koukaku Kidou Tai (Shell Squad)&quot;&quot; for Yuri. But Shirow was attached to including &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; as well even if in smaller type.

===Setting===
Primarily set in the mid-twenty-first century in the fictional Japanese city of , otherwise known as , the manga and the many anime adaptations follow the members of Public Security Section 9, a task-force consisting of various professionals skilled at solving and preventing crime, mostly with some sort of police background. Political intrigue and counter-terrorism operations are standard fare for Section 9, but the various actions of corrupt officials, companies, and cyber-criminals in each scenario are unique and require the diverse skills of Section 9&#x27;s staff to prevent a series of incidents from escalating.
In this post-cyberpunk iteration of a possible future, computer technology has advanced to the point that many members of the public possess cyberbrains, technology that allows them to interface their biological brain with various networks. The level of cyberization varies from simple minimal interfaces to almost complete replacement of the brain with cybernetic parts, in cases of severe trauma. This can also be combined with various levels of prostheses, with a fully prosthetic body enabling a person to become a cyborg. The main character of &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;, Major Motoko Kusanagi, is such a cyborg, having had a terrible accident befall her as a child that ultimately required her to use a full-body prosthesis to house her cyberbrain. This high level of cyberization, however, opens the brain up to attacks from highly skilled hackers, with the most dangerous being those who will hack a person to bend to their whims.

==Media==
===Literature===
====Original manga====
The original &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; manga ran in Japan from April 1989 to November 1990 in Kodansha&#x27;s manga anthology &quot;Young Magazine&quot;, and was released in a &quot;tankōbon&quot; volume on October 2, 1991. &quot;Ghost in the Shell 2: Man-Machine Interface&quot; followed in 1997 for 9 issues in &quot;Young Magazine&quot;, and was collected in the &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Solid Box&quot; on December 1, 2000. Then a standard version with modifications and new pages was published on June 26, 2001. Four stories from &quot;Man-Machine Interface&quot; that were not released in tankobon format from previous releases were later collected in &quot;Ghost in the Shell 1.5: Human-Error Processor&quot;, and published by Kodansha on July 17, 2003. Several art books have also been published for the manga.

===Films===
====Animated films====
Two animated films based on the original manga have been released, both directed by Mamoru Oshii and animated by Production I.G. &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; was released in 1995 and follows the &quot;Puppet Master&quot; storyline from the manga. It was re-released in 2008 as &quot;Ghost in the Shell 2.0&quot; with new audio and updated 3D computer graphics in certain scenes. &quot;Innocence&quot;, otherwise known as &quot;Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence&quot;, was released in 2004, with its story based on a chapter from the first manga.

====Live-action film====
In 2008, DreamWorks and producer Steven Spielberg acquired the rights to a live-action film adaptation of the original &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; manga. On January 24, 2014, Rupert Sanders was announced as director, with a screenplay by William Wheeler. In April 2016, the full cast was announced, which included Juliette Binoche, Chin Han, Lasarus Ratuere and Kaori Momoi, and Scarlett Johansson in the lead role; the casting of Johansson drew accusations of whitewashing. Principal photography on the film began on location in Wellington, New Zealand, on February 1, 2016. Filming wrapped in June 2016. &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; premiered in Tokyo on March 16, 2017, and was released in the United States on March 31, 2017, in 2D, 3D and IMAX 3D. It received mixed reviews, with praise for its visuals and Johansson&#x27;s performance but criticism for its script.

===Television===
====&quot;Stand Alone Complex&quot; TV series, film and ONA====
In 2002, &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex&quot; premiered on Animax, presenting a new telling of &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; independent from the original manga, focusing on Section 9&#x27;s investigation of the Laughing Man hacker. It was followed in 2004 by a second season titled &quot;Ghost in the Shell: S.A.C. 2nd GIG&quot;, which focused on the Individual Eleven terrorist group. The primary storylines of both seasons were compressed into OVAs broadcast as &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex The Laughing Man&quot; in 2005 and &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex Individual Eleven&quot; in 2006. Also in 2006, &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - Solid State Society&quot;, featuring Section 9&#x27;s confrontation with a hacker known as the Puppeteer, was broadcast, serving as a finale to the anime series. The extensive score for the series and its films was composed by Yoko Kanno.

On April 7, 2017, Kodansha and Production I.G announced that Kenji Kamiyama and Shinji Aramaki would be co-directing a new &quot;Kōkaku Kidōtai&quot; anime production. On December 7, 2018, it was reported by Netflix that they had acquired the worldwide streaming rights to the original net animation (ONA) anime series, titled &quot;Ghost in the Shell: SAC_2045&quot;, and that it would premiere on April 23, 2020. The series is in 3DCG and Sola Digital Arts collaborated with Production I.G on the project. Ilya Kuvshinov handled character designs. The series had two seasons of 12 episodes each.

In addition to the anime, a series of published books, two separate manga adaptations, and several video games for consoles and mobile phones have been released for &quot;Stand Alone Complex&quot;.

====&quot;Arise&quot; OVA, TV series and film====
In 2013, a new iteration of the series titled &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Arise&quot; premiered, taking an original look at the &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; world, set before the original manga. It was released as a series of four original video animation (OVA) episodes (with limited theatrical releases) from 2013 to 2014, then recompiled as a 10-episode television series under the title of &quot;Kōkaku Kidōtai: Arise - Alternative Architecture&quot;. An additional fifth OVA titled &quot;Pyrophoric Cult&quot;, originally premiering in the &quot;Alternative Architecture&quot; broadcast as two original episodes, was released on August 26, 2015. Kazuchika Kise served as the chief director of the series, with Tow Ubukata as head writer. Cornelius was brought onto the project to compose the score for the series, with the Major&#x27;s new voice actress Maaya Sakamoto also providing vocals for certain tracks.

&quot;Ghost in the Shell: The New Movie&quot;, also known as &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Arise − The Movie&quot; or &quot;New Ghost in the Shell&quot;, is a 2015 film directed by Kazuya Nomura that serves as a finale to the &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Arise&quot; story arc. The film is a continuation to the plot of the &quot;Pyrophoric Cult&quot; episode of &quot;Arise&quot;, and ties up loose ends from that arc.

A manga adaptation was serialized in Kodansha&#x27;s &quot;Young Magazine&quot;, which started on March 13 and ended on August 26, 2013.

===2026 anime===
On May 25, 2024, it was announced that a new anime television series adaptation will be produced by Science Saru for a 2026 premiere. Saru will be in a production committee with Bandai Namco Filmworks, Kodansha and Production I.G.

===Video games===
&quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; was developed by Exact and released for the PlayStation on July 17, 1997, in Japan by Sony Computer Entertainment. It is a third-person shooter featuring an original storyline where the character plays a rookie member of Section 9. The video game&#x27;s soundtrack &quot;Megatech Body&quot; features various techno artists, such as Takkyu Ishino, Scan X and Mijk Van Dijk.

Several video games were also developed to tie into the &quot;Stand Alone Complex&quot; television series, in addition to a first-person shooter by Nexon and Neople titled &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - First Assault Online&quot;, released in 2016.

A virtual reality game entitled &quot;Ghost in the Shell Arise: Stealth Hounds&quot;, was made available at Bandai Namco&#x27;s arcade VR Zone Shinjuku in 2017. 
==Legacy==
&quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; influenced some prominent filmmakers. The Wachowskis, creators of &quot;The Matrix&quot; and its sequels, showed it to producer Joel Silver, saying, &quot;We wanna do that for real.&quot; &quot;The Matrix&quot; series took several concepts from the film, including the Matrix digital rain, which was inspired by the opening credits of &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;, and the way characters access the Matrix through holes in the back of their necks. Other parallels have been drawn to James Cameron&#x27;s &quot;Avatar&quot;, Steven Spielberg&#x27;s &quot;A.I. Artificial Intelligence&quot; and Jonathan Mostow&#x27;s &quot;Surrogates&quot;. James Cameron cited &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; as a source of inspiration, citing it as an influence on &quot;Avatar&quot;.

Bungie&#x27;s 2001 third-person action game &quot;Oni&quot; draws substantial inspiration from &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; setting and characters. &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; also influenced video games such as the &quot;Metal Gear Solid&quot; series, &quot;Deus Ex&quot;, and &quot;Cyberpunk 2077&quot;.

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Madman Entertainment&#x27;s Australian distribution release site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4538441" start="24" end="42" title="Japanese cyberpunk" label="Japanese cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="43" end="58" title="media franchise" label="media franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="72" end="77" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q92582" start="85" end="101" title="Ghost in the Shell (manga)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q442602" start="129" end="144" title="Masamune Shirow" label="Masamune Shirow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257599" start="303" end="328" title="Public Security Section 9" label="Public Security Section 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918065" start="355" end="370" title="Motoko Kusanagi" label="Motoko Kusanagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q735670" start="390" end="404" title="Production I.G" label="Production I.G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066948" start="487" end="503" title="Ghost in the Shell (1995 film)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="" start="531" end="562" title="Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence" label="Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="" start="603" end="642" title="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex" label="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex"/>
<link wikidata="" start="679" end="707" title="Ghost in the Shell: SAC_2045" label="Ghost in the Shell: SAC_2045"/>
<link wikidata="" start="729" end="754" title="Ghost in the Shell: Arise" label="Ghost in the Shell: Arise"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="761" end="785" title="original video animation" label="original video animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22575835" start="828" end="844" title="Ghost in the Shell (2017 film)" label="live-action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257599" start="1425" end="1450" title="Public Security Section 9" label="Public Security Section 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484828" start="1891" end="1905" title="post-cyberpunk" label="post-cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="2331" end="2341" title="prostheses" label="prostheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="2402" end="2408" title="cyborg" label="cyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918065" start="2470" end="2485" title="Motoko Kusanagi" label="Motoko Kusanagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q726081" start="2976" end="2984" title="Kodansha" label="Kodansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329653" start="3014" end="3028" title="Young Magazine" label="Young Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q241996" start="3064" end="3072" title="tankōbon" label="tankōbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q285084" start="3822" end="3834" title="Mamoru Oshii" label="Mamoru Oshii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066948" start="3873" end="3891" title="Ghost in the Shell (1995 film)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4167" end="4198" title="Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence" label="Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q192557" start="4319" end="4329" title="DreamWorks Pictures" label="DreamWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="4343" end="4359" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="4385" end="4396" title="live-action" label="live-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q175062" start="4488" end="4502" title="Rupert Sanders" label="Rupert Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q106275" start="4627" end="4643" title="Juliette Binoche" label="Juliette Binoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q938855" start="4645" end="4653" title="Ng Chin Han" label="Chin Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338400" start="4655" end="4670" title="Lasarus Ratuere" label="Lasarus Ratuere"/>
<link wikidata="Q442924" start="4675" end="4686" title="Kaori Momoi" label="Kaori Momoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34436" start="4692" end="4710" title="Scarlett Johansson" label="Scarlett Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068602" start="4774" end="4786" title="Whitewashing in film" label="whitewashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="4788" end="4809" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="4843" end="4853" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="4855" end="4866" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="5052" end="5054" title="3D film" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q188575" start="5059" end="5066" title="IMAX" label="IMAX 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q161405" start="5342" end="5348" title="Animax" label="Animax"/>
<link wikidata="Q348799" start="5496" end="5508" title="Laughing Man (Ghost in the Shell)" label="Laughing Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776982" start="5636" end="5653" title="Individual Eleven" label="Individual Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5929" end="5990" title="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - Solid State Society" label="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - Solid State Society"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6133" end="6152" title="Music of Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex" label="The extensive score"/>
<link wikidata="Q224981" start="6198" end="6208" title="Yoko Kanno" label="Yoko Kanno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518786" start="6272" end="6286" title="Kenji Kamiyama" label="Kenji Kamiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482244" start="6291" end="6305" title="Shinji Aramaki" label="Shinji Aramaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="6419" end="6426" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047299" start="6488" end="6510" title="original net animation" label="original net animation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6544" end="6572" title="Ghost in the Shell: SAC_2045" label="Ghost in the Shell: SAC_2045"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302818" start="6719" end="6733" title="Ilya Kuvshinov" label="Ilya Kuvshinov"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7111" end="7136" title="Ghost in the Shell: Arise" label="Ghost in the Shell: Arise"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="7290" end="7314" title="original video animation" label="original video animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q727725" start="7774" end="7785" title="Tow Ubukata" label="Tow Ubukata"/>
<link wikidata="Q778539" start="7802" end="7811" title="Cornelius (musician)" label="Cornelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q235216" start="7918" end="7932" title="Maaya Sakamoto" label="Maaya Sakamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q28691323" start="8645" end="8657" title="Science Saru" label="Science Saru"/>
<link wikidata="Q259804" start="8801" end="8819" title="Ghost in the Shell (video game)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="8870" end="8881" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18594" start="8912" end="8939" title="Sony Interactive Entertainment" label="Sony Computer Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q380266" start="8949" end="8969" title="third-person shooter" label="third-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="9324" end="9344" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q562078" start="9348" end="9353" title="Nexon" label="Nexon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9378" end="9440" title="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - First Assault Online" label="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - First Assault Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="9469" end="9484" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q806259" start="9575" end="9587" title="Bandai Namco" label="Bandai Namco"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="9709" end="9723" title="The Wachowskis" label="The Wachowskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="9743" end="9753" title="The Matrix" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q539718" start="9799" end="9810" title="Joel Silver" label="Joel Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392614" start="9940" end="9959" title="Matrix digital rain" label="Matrix digital rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="10156" end="10169" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q24871" start="10183" end="10189" title="Avatar (2009 film)" label="Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="10197" end="10213" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q221113" start="10227" end="10255" title="A.I. Artificial Intelligence" label="A.I. Artificial Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q707494" start="10266" end="10281" title="Jonathan Mostow" label="Jonathan Mostow"/>
<link wikidata="Q577475" start="10295" end="10305" title="Surrogates" label="Surrogates"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="10442" end="10448" title="Bungie" label="Bungie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9086092" start="10461" end="10473" title="Third-person view" label="third-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573435" start="10492" end="10495" title="Oni (video game)" label="Oni"/>
<link wikidata="Q216655" start="10669" end="10685" title="Metal Gear" label="Metal Gear Solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q746459" start="10706" end="10713" title="Deus Ex" label="Deus Ex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182559" start="10731" end="10745" title="Cyberpunk 2077" label="Cyberpunk 2077"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12916" wikidata="Q2448949" url="?curid=12916" title="Gauss–Legendre algorithm">
<text>The Gauss–Legendre algorithm is an algorithm to compute the digits of . It is notable for being rapidly convergent, with only 25 iterations producing 45 million correct digits of . However, it has some drawbacks (for example, it is computer memory-intensive) and therefore all record-breaking calculations for many years have used other methods, almost always the Chudnovsky algorithm. For details, see Chronology of computation of.

The method is based on the individual work of Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) and Adrien-Marie Legendre (1752–1833) combined with modern algorithms for multiplication and square roots. It repeatedly replaces two numbers by their arithmetic and geometric mean, in order to approximate their arithmetic-geometric mean.

The version presented below is also known as the Gauss–Euler, Brent–Salamin (or Salamin–Brent) algorithm; it was independently discovered in 1975 by Richard Brent and Eugene Salamin. It was used to compute the first 206,158,430,000 decimal digits of on September 18 to 20, 1999, and the results were checked with Borwein&#x27;s algorithm.

== Algorithm ==
# Initial value setting: formula_1
# Repeat the following instructions until the difference between formula_2 and formula_3 is within the desired accuracy: formula_4
# is then approximated as: formula_5

The first three iterations give (approximations given up to and including the first incorrect digit):

:formula_6
:formula_7
:formula_8
:formula_9
:formula_10
The algorithm has quadratic convergence, which essentially means that the number of correct digits doubles with each iteration of the algorithm.

== Mathematical background ==

=== Limits of the arithmetic–geometric mean ===

The arithmetic–geometric mean of two numbers, a0 and b0, is found by calculating the limit of the sequences

:formula_11

which both converge to the same limit.
If formula_12 and formula_13 then the limit is formula_14 where formula_15 is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind

:formula_16

If formula_17, formula_18, then

:formula_19

where formula_20 is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind:

:formula_21 

Gauss knew of these two results.

=== Legendre’s identity ===
Legendre proved the following identity: 
:formula_22
for all formula_23.

=== Elementary proof with integral calculus ===

The Gauss-Legendre algorithm can be proven to give results converging to π using only integral calculus. This is done here and here.

== See also ==
* Numerical approximations of

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2448949" start="4" end="28" title="Gauss–Legendre algorithm" label="Gauss–Legendre algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="35" end="44" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="70" end="70" title="Pi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="232" end="247" title="Random-access_memory" label="computer memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208385" start="364" end="384" title="Chudnovsky algorithm" label="Chudnovsky algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897101" start="403" end="431" title="chronology of computation of π" label="Chronology of computation of"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="480" end="500" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q191021" start="517" end="538" title="Adrien-Marie Legendre" label="Adrien-Marie Legendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="606" end="617" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="664" end="674" title="arithmetic mean" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185049" start="679" end="693" title="geometric mean" label="geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q476167" start="725" end="750" title="arithmetic-geometric mean" label="arithmetic-geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448949" start="802" end="813" title="Gauss–Legendre algorithm" label="Gauss–Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448949" start="815" end="828" title="Gauss–Legendre algorithm" label="Brent–Salamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448949" start="833" end="846" title="Gauss–Legendre algorithm" label="Salamin–Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448949" start="848" end="857" title="Gauss–Legendre algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q93042" start="902" end="915" title="Richard Brent (scientist)" label="Richard Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407723" start="920" end="934" title="Eugene Salamin (mathematician)" label="Eugene Salamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751018" start="1066" end="1090" title="Borwein&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Borwein&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783502" start="1490" end="1511" title="quadratic convergence" label="quadratic convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q651022" start="1589" end="1598" title="iteration" label="iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q476167" start="1702" end="1727" title="arithmetic–geometric mean" label="arithmetic–geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1941" end="1985" title="Elliptic integral#Complete elliptic integral of the first kind" label="complete elliptic integral of the first kind"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2070" end="2115" title="Elliptic integral#Complete elliptic integral of the second kind" label="complete elliptic integral of the second kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130396" start="2468" end="2495" title="Numerical approximations of π" label="Numerical approximations of"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12917" wikidata="Q585175" url="?curid=12917" title="Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search">
<text>The Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search (GIMPS) is a collaborative project of volunteers who use freely available software to search for Mersenne prime numbers.

GIMPS was founded in 1996 by George Woltman, who also wrote the Prime95 client and its Linux port MPrime. Scott Kurowski wrote the back end PrimeNet server to demonstrate volunteer computing software by Entropia, a company he founded in 1997. GIMPS is registered as Mersenne Research, Inc. with Kurowski as Executive Vice President and board director. GIMPS is said to be one of the first large scale volunteer computing projects over the Internet for research purposes.

, the project has found a total of eighteen Mersenne primes, sixteen of which were the largest known prime number at their respective times of discovery. The largest known prime is 2136,279,841 − 1 (or M136,279,841 for short) and was discovered on October 12, 2024, by Luke Durant. On December 4, 2020, the project passed a major milestone after all exponents below 100 million were checked at least once.

From its inception until 2018, the project relied primarily on the Lucas–Lehmer primality test as it is an algorithm that is both specialized for testing Mersenne primes and particularly efficient on binary computer architectures. Before applying it to a given Mersenne number, there was a trial division phase, used to rapidly eliminate many Mersenne numbers with small factors. Pollard&#x27;s &quot;p&quot; − 1 algorithm is also used to search for smooth factors.

In 2018, GIMPS adopted a Fermat primality test with basis a=3as an alternative option for primality testing, while keeping the Lucas-Lehmer test as a double-check for Mersenne numbers detected as probable primes by the Fermat test. (While the Lucas-Lehmer test is deterministic and the Fermat test is only probabilistic, the probability of the Fermat test finding a Fermat pseudoprime that is not prime is vastly lower than the error rate of the Lucas-Lehmer test due to computer hardware errors.)

In September 2020, GIMPS began to support primality proofs based on verifiable delay functions. The proof files are generated while the Fermat primality test is in progress. These proofs, together with an error-checking algorithm devised by Robert Gerbicz, provide a complete confidence in the correctness of the test result and eliminate the need for double checks. First-time Lucas-Lehmer tests were deprecated in April 2021.

GIMPS also has sub-projects to factor known composite Mersenne and Fermat numbers.

==History==
The project began in early January 1996, with a program that ran on i386 computers.
The name for the project was coined by Luke Welsh, one of its earlier searchers and the co-discoverer of the 29th Mersenne prime.
Within a few months, several dozen people had joined, and over a thousand by the end of the first year.
Joel Armengaud, a participant, discovered the primality of M1,398,269 on November 13, 1996.
Since then, GIMPS has discovered a new Mersenne prime every 1 to 2 years on average. However, the most recent largest prime found in October 2024 took nearly six years to find.

==Status==
, GIMPS has a sustained average aggregate throughput of approximately 4.71 PetaFLOPS (or PFLOPS). In November 2012, GIMPS maintained 95 TFLOPS, theoretically earning the GIMPS virtual computer a rank of 330 among the TOP500 most powerful known computer systems in the world. The preceding place was then held by an &#x27;HP Cluster Platform 3000 BL460c G7&#x27; of Hewlett-Packard. As of July 2021 TOP500 results, the current GIMPS numbers would no longer make the list.

Previously, this was approximately 50 TFLOPS in early 2010, 30 TFLOPS in mid-2008, 20 TFLOPS in mid-2006, and 14 TFLOPS in early 2004.

==Software license==
Although the GIMPS software&#x27;s source code is publicly available, technically it is not free software, since it has a restriction that users must abide by the project&#x27;s distribution terms.
Specifically, if the software is used to discover a prime number with at least 100,000,000 decimal digits, the user will only win $50,000 of the $150,000 prize offered by the Electronic Frontier Foundation. On the other hand, they will win $3,000 when discovering a smaller prime not qualifying for the prize.

Third-party programs for testing Mersenne numbers, such as Mlucas and Glucas (for non-x86 systems), do not have this restriction.

GIMPS also &quot;reserves the right to change this EULA without notice and with reasonable retroactive effect&quot;.&quot;&quot;

==Primes found==
All Mersenne primes are of the form , where &quot;p&quot; is a prime number itself. The smallest Mersenne prime in this table is 

The first column is the rank of the Mersenne prime in the (ordered) sequence of all Mersenne primes; GIMPS has found all known Mersenne primes beginning with the 35th.
 , 65,723,341 is the largest exponent below which all other prime exponents have been checked twice, so it is not verified whether any undiscovered Mersenne primes exist between the 48th (M57885161) and the 51st (M82589933) on this chart; the ranking is therefore provisional. Furthermore, 114,055,847 is the largest exponent below which all other prime exponents have been tested at least once, so all Mersenne numbers below the 51st (M82589933) have been tested.

 The number M136279841 has 41,024,320 decimal digits. To help visualize the size of this number, if it were to be saved to disk, the resulting text file would be nearly 42 megabytes long (most books in plain text format are under two megabytes). A standard word processor layout (50 lines per page, 75 digits per line) would require 10,940 pages to display it. If one were to print it out using standard printer paper, single-sided, it would require approximately 22 reams (22 × 500 = 11000 sheets) of paper.

Whenever a possible prime is reported to the server, it is verified first (by one or more independent tests on different machines) before being announced. The importance of this was illustrated in 2003, when a false positive was reported to the server as being a Mersenne prime but verification failed.

The official &quot;discovery date&quot; of a prime is the date that a human first noticed the result for the prime, which may differ from the date that the result was first reported to the server. For example, M74207281 was reported to the server on September 17, 2015, but the report was overlooked until January 7, 2016.

==See also==
* Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing
* List of volunteer computing projects
* PrimeGrid

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q585175" start="4" end="40" title="Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search" label="Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q585175" start="42" end="47" title="Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search" label="GIMPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="115" end="123" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q186875" start="138" end="152" title="Mersenne prime" label="Mersenne prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q983301" start="192" end="206" title="George Woltman" label="George Woltman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313004" start="227" end="234" title="Prime95" label="Prime95"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="312" end="318" title="server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367171" start="564" end="583" title="volunteer computing" label="volunteer computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240929" start="722" end="748" title="largest known prime number" label="largest known prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="807" end="812" title="prime number" label="prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138992" start="1109" end="1136" title="Lucas–Lehmer primality test" label="Lucas–Lehmer primality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="1149" end="1158" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="1242" end="1248" title="Binary numeral system" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q173212" start="1249" end="1270" title="computer architecture" label="computer architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333681" start="1332" end="1346" title="trial division" label="trial division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937853" start="1422" end="1464" title="Pollard&amp;#x27;s p − 1 algorithm" label="Pollard&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;p&amp;quot; − 1 algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529876" start="1492" end="1498" title="smooth number" label="smooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q737492" start="1534" end="1555" title="Fermat primality test" label="Fermat primality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654835" start="1705" end="1719" title="probable prime" label="probable prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406394" start="1875" end="1893" title="Fermat pseudoprime" label="Fermat pseudoprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658917" start="1980" end="2004" title="Soft error" label="computer hardware errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243047" start="2050" end="2066" title="primality certificate" label="primality proofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207264" start="2504" end="2517" title="Fermat number" label="Fermat number"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="2601" end="2605" title="Intel 80386" label="i386"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383412" start="3174" end="3184" title="throughput" label="throughput"/>
<link wikidata="Q188768" start="3207" end="3228" title="FLOPS" label="PetaFLOPS (or PFLOPS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="3308" end="3324" title="virtual machine" label="virtual computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q633765" start="3349" end="3355" title="TOP500" label="TOP500"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="3497" end="3512" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="3796" end="3807" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="3853" end="3866" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="4134" end="4164" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q725920" start="4452" end="4456" title="End-user license agreement" label="EULA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297602" start="4747" end="4755" title="integer sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="5570" end="5584" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q927068" start="5780" end="5785" title="Paper ream" label="reams"/>
<link wikidata="Q209563" start="6466" end="6516" title="Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing" label="Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195511" start="6519" end="6555" title="List of volunteer computing projects" label="List of volunteer computing projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146690" start="6558" end="6567" title="PrimeGrid" label="PrimeGrid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12919" wikidata="Q2498396" url="?curid=12919" title="Game.com">
<text>The Game.com is a fifth-generation handheld game console released by Tiger Electronics on September 12, 1997. A smaller version, the Game.com Pocket Pro, was released in mid-1999. The first version of the Game.com can be connected to a 14.4 kbit/s modem for Internet connectivity, hence its name referencing the top level domain .com. It was the first video game console to include a touchscreen and the first handheld console to include Internet connectivity.

==History==
Tiger Electronics had previously introduced its R-Zone game console in 1995 – as a competitor to Nintendo&#x27;s Virtual Boy – but the system was a failure. Prior to the R-Zone, Tiger had also manufactured handheld games consisting of LCD screens with imprinted graphics.

===Original version===

By February 1997, Tiger was planning to release a new game console as a direct competitor to Nintendo&#x27;s Game Boy. Prior to its release, Tiger Electronics stated that the Game.com would &quot;change the gaming world as we know it,&quot; while a spokesperson stated that it would be &quot;one of this summer&#x27;s hits.&quot; The Game.com, the only new game console of the year, was on display at the Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3) in May 1997, with sales expected to begin in July. Dennis Lynch of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; considered the Game.com to be the &quot;most interesting hand-held device&quot; on display at E3, describing it as a &quot;sort of Game Boy for adults&quot;.

The Game.com was released in the United States on September 12, 1997, with a retail price of $69.95, while an Internet-access cartridge was scheduled for release in October. &quot;Lights Out&quot; was included with the console as a pack-in game and Solitaire was built into the handheld itself. The console&#x27;s release marked Tiger&#x27;s largest product launch ever. Tiger also launched a website for the system at the domain &quot;game.com&quot;. The Game.com was marketed with a television commercial in which a spokesperson insults gamers who ask questions about the console, while stating that it &quot;plays more games than you idiots have brain cells&quot;; GamesRadar stated that the advertisement &quot;probably didn&#x27;t help matters much&quot;. By the end of 1997, the console had been released in the United Kingdom, at a retail price of £79.99.

The Game.com came in a black-and-white color, and featured a design similar to Sega&#x27;s Game Gear console. The screen is larger than the Game Boy&#x27;s and has higher resolution. The Game.com included a phone directory, a calculator, and a calendar, and had an older target audience with its PDA features. Tiger designed the console&#x27;s features to be simple and cheap. The device was powered by four AA batteries, and an optional AC adapter was also available. One of the major peripherals that Tiger produced for the system was the compete.com serial cable, allowing players to connect their consoles to play multiplayer games. The console includes two game cartridge slots. In addition to reducing the need to swap out cartridges, this enabled Game.com games to include online elements, since both a game cartridge and the modem cartridge could be inserted at the same time.

The Game.com was the first video game console to feature a touchscreen and also the first handheld video game console to have Internet connectivity. The Game.com&#x27;s black-and-white monochrome touchscreen measures approximately one and a half inches by two inches, and is divided into square zones that are imprinted onto the screen itself, to aid players in determining where to apply the stylus. The touchscreen lacks a backlight. The Game.com was also the first handheld gaming console to have internal memory, which is used to save information such as high scores and contact information.

As 1998 opened, the Game.com was considered the only remaining viable competitor for the Game Boy, and Tiger planned to emphasize the Game.com&#x27;s internet capabilities in marketing, as well as release new games based on major films and Giga Pets.

===Game.com Pocket Pro===
Because of poor sales with the original Game.com, Tiger developed an updated version known as the Game.com Pocket Pro. The console was shown at the American International Toy Fair in February 1999, and was later shown along with several future games at E3 in May 1999. The Game.com Pocket Pro had been released by June 1999, with a retail price of $29.99. The new console was available in five different colors: green, orange, pink, purple, and teal.

Although it lacked color like its predecessor, the Pocket Pro was reduced in size to be equivalent to the Game Boy Pocket. The screen size was also reduced, and the new console featured only one cartridge slot. Unlike the original Game.com, the Pocket Pro required only two AA batteries. The Game.com Pocket Pro included a phone directory, a calendar and a calculator, but lacked Internet capabilities.

The Game.com Pocket Pro&#x27;s primary competitor was the Game Boy Color. Despite several games based on popular franchises, the Game.com console line failed to sell in large numbers, and was discontinued in 2000 because of poor sales. The Game.com was a commercial failure, with less than 300,000 units sold, although the idea of a touchscreen would later be used successfully in the Nintendo DS, released in 2004.

==Internet features==

Accessing the Internet required the use of an Internet cartridge and a dial-up modem, neither of which were included with the console. Email messages could be read and sent on the Game.com using the Internet cartridge, and the Game.com supported text-only web browsing through Internet service providers. Email messages could not be saved to the Game.com&#x27;s internal memory. In addition to a Game.com-branded 14.4 kbit/s modem, Tiger also offered an Internet service provider through Delphi that was made to work specifically with the Game.com.

Tiger subsequently released the Web Link cartridge, allowing players to connect their system to a desktop computer. Using the Web Link cartridge, players could upload their high scores to the Game.com website for a chance to be listed on a webpage featuring the top high scores. None of the console&#x27;s games made use of the Internet feature.

==Technical specifications==
==Games==

Several games were available for the Game.com at the time of its 1997 launch, in comparison to hundreds of games available for the Game Boy. Tiger planned to have a dozen games available by the end of 1997, and hoped to have as many as 50 games available in 1998, with all of them to be produced or adapted internally by Tiger. Some third parties expressed interest in developing for the system, but Tiger decided against signing any initially. Tiger secured licenses for several popular game series, including &quot;Duke Nukem&quot;, &quot;Resident Evil&quot;, and &quot;Mortal Kombat Trilogy&quot;. Game prices initially ranged between $19 and $29. Cartridge size was in the 16 megabit range.

At the time of the Pocket Pro&#x27;s 1999 release, the Game.com library consisted primarily of games intended for an older audience. Some games that were planned for release in 1999 would be exclusive to Game.com consoles. Game prices at that time ranged from $14 to $30. Twenty games were ultimately released for the Game.com, most of them developed internally by Tiger, in addition to the built-in game Solitaire.
===Cancelled games===
The following is a list of games that were announced in various forms or known to be in development for the console but were never released.
==Reception==
At the time of the Game.com&#x27;s launch in 1997, Chris Johnston of VideoGameSpot believed that the console would have difficulty competing against the Game Boy. Johnston also believed that text-based Internet and email would attract only limited appeal, stating that such features were outdated. Johnston concluded that the Game.com &quot;is a decent system, but Nintendo is just way too powerful in the industry.&quot; Chip and Jonathan Carter wrote that the console did not play action games as well as it did with other games, although they praised the console&#x27;s various options and wrote, &quot;Graphically, we&#x27;d have to say this has the potential to perform better than Game Boy. As for sound, Game.com delivers better than any other hand-held on the market.&quot; A team of four &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot; editors gave the Game.com scores of 5.5, 4.5, 5.0, and 4.0. They were impressed by the PDA features and touchscreen, but commented that the games library had thus far failed to deliver on the Game.com&#x27;s great potential. They elaborated that while the non-scrolling games, particularly &quot;Wheel of Fortune&quot;, were great fun and made good use of the touchscreen, the more conventional action games were disappointing and suffered from prominent screen blurring.

&quot;Wisconsin State Journal&quot; stated that the Game.com offered &quot;some serious&quot; advantages over the Game Boy, including its touchscreen. It was also stated that in comparison to the Game Boy, the Game.com&#x27;s 8-bit processor provided &quot;marginal improvements&quot; in the quality of speed and graphics. The newspaper noted that the Game.com had a &quot;tiny, somewhat blurry screen.&quot; &quot;The Philadelphia Inquirer&quot; wrote a negative review of the Game.com, particularly criticizing Internet connectivity issues. Also criticized was the system&#x27;s lack of a backlit screen, as the use of exterior lighting could cause difficulty in viewing the screen, which was highly reflective.

Steven L. Kent, writing for the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;, wrote that the console had an elegant design, as well as better sound and a higher-definition screen than the Game Boy: &quot;Elegant design, however, has not translated into ideal game play. Though Tiger has produced fighting, racing and shooting games for Game.com, the games have noticeably slow frame rates. The racing game looks like a flickering silent picture show.&quot; Cameron Davis of VideoGames.com wrote, &quot;Sure, this is no Game Boy Color-killer, but the Game.Com was never meant to be. To deride it by comparing it with more powerful and established formats would be a bit unfair&quot;. Davis also wrote, &quot;The touch screen is pretty sensitive, but it works well - you won&#x27;t need more than a few seconds to get used to it.&quot; However, he criticized the screen&#x27;s squared zones: &quot;more often than not it proves distracting when you are playing games that don&#x27;t require it.&quot;

&quot;GamePro&quot; criticized the Pocket Pro&#x27;s lack of screen color and its difficult controls, but considered its two best qualities to be its cheap price and a game library of titles exclusive to the console. &quot;The Philadelphia Inquirer&quot; also criticized the Pocket Pro&#x27;s lack of a color screen, as well as &quot;frustrating&quot; gameplay caused by the &quot;unresponsive&quot; controls, including the stylus. The newspaper stated that, &quot;Even at $29.99, the pocket.pro is no bargain.&quot;

===Legacy===
Brett Alan Weiss of the website AllGame wrote, &quot;The Game.com, the little system that (almost) could, constantly amazes me with the strength and scope of its sound effects. [...] It&#x27;s astounding what power comes out of such a tiny little speaker.&quot; In 2004, Kent included the modem and &quot;some PDA functionality&quot; as the console&#x27;s strengths, while listing its &quot;Slow processor&quot; and &quot;lackluster library of games&quot; as weaknesses. In 2006, &quot;Engadget&quot; stated that &quot;You can&#x27;t fault Tiger Electronics for their ambition,&quot; but wrote that the Game.com &quot;didn&#x27;t do any one thing particularly well&quot;, criticizing its text-only Internet access and stating that its &quot;disappointing games were made even worse&quot; by the &quot;outdated&quot; screen.

In 2009, &quot;PC World&quot; ranked the Game.com at number nine on its list of the 10 worst video game systems ever released, criticizing its Internet aspect, its game library, its low-resolution touchscreen, and its &quot;Silly name that attempted to capitalize on Internet mania.&quot; However, &quot;PC World&quot; positively noted its &quot;primitive&quot; PDA features and its solitaire game, considered by the magazine to be the system&#x27;s best game. In 2011, Mikel Reparaz of GamesRadar ranked the Game.com at number 3 on a list of 7 failed handheld consoles, writing that while the Game.com had several licensed games, it &quot;doesn&#x27;t actually mean much when they all look like cruddy, poorly animated Game Boy ports.&quot; Raparaz also stated that the Game.com &quot;looked dated even by Game Boy standards,&quot; noting that the Game Boy Pocket had a sharper display screen. Reparaz stated that the Game.com&#x27;s continuation into 2000 was a &quot;pretty significant achievement&quot; considering its competition from the Game Boy Color.

In 2013, Jeff Dunn of GamesRadar criticized the Game.com for its &quot;blurry&quot; and &quot;imprecise&quot; touchscreen, as well as its &quot;limited and unwieldy&quot; Internet and email interfaces. Dunn also criticized the &quot;painful&quot; Internet setup process, and stated that all of the console&#x27;s available games were &quot;ugly and horrible.&quot; Dunn noted, however, that the Game.com&#x27;s Internet aspect was a &quot;smart&quot; feature. In 2016, Motherboard stated that the Game.com was &quot;perhaps one of the worst consoles of all time,&quot; due largely to its low screen quality. In 2018, Nadia Oxford of USgamer noted the Game.com&#x27;s &quot;paper-thin&quot; library of games and stated that the console &quot;died in record time because it was poorly-made, to say the least.&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Game.com official website (archive)
*The end of the game.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2498396" start="4" end="12" title="Game.com" label="Game.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q129728" start="18" end="34" title="Fifth generation of video game consoles" label="fifth-generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="35" end="56" title="handheld game console" label="handheld game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q119267" start="69" end="86" title="Tiger Electronics" label="Tiger Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351621" start="241" end="247" title="kbit/s" label="kbit/s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="248" end="253" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q159371" start="329" end="333" title=".com" label=".com"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="384" end="395" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q119267" start="474" end="491" title="Tiger Electronics" label="Tiger Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273280" start="522" end="528" title="R-Zone" label="R-Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="571" end="579" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164651" start="587" end="598" title="Virtual Boy" label="Virtual Boy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="680" end="694" title="Tiger Electronics#Standalone handhelds" label="handheld games"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="709" end="712" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="880" end="888" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336168" start="1176" end="1205" title="Electronic Entertainment Expo" label="Electronic Entertainment Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="1288" end="1303" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765175" start="1649" end="1659" title="Lights Out (game)" label="Lights Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="1701" end="1713" title="pack-in game" label="pack-in game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056928" start="1718" end="1727" title="Patience (game)" label="Solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276395" start="2008" end="2013" title="gamer" label="gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q960011" start="2137" end="2147" title="GamesRadar" label="GamesRadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2287" end="2301" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="2424" end="2433" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="2629" end="2632" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195592" start="2741" end="2753" title="AA battery" label="AA batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140677" start="2886" end="2898" title="serial cable" label="serial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q633454" start="2995" end="3009" title="ROM cartridge" label="game cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="3278" end="3289" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133650" start="3404" end="3414" title="monochrome monitor" label="monochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227035" start="3612" end="3618" title="Stylus (computing)" label="stylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q574291" start="3644" end="3653" title="backlight" label="backlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560154" start="4056" end="4065" title="Giga Pets" label="Giga Pets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744198" start="4242" end="4273" title="American International Toy Fair" label="American International Toy Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="4652" end="4667" title="Game Boy Pocket" label="Game Boy Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q203992" start="5008" end="5022" title="Game Boy Color" label="Game Boy Color"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5032" end="5045" title="#Games" label="several games"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="5335" end="5346" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q192731" start="5461" end="5468" title="Dial-up Internet access" label="dial-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="5469" end="5474" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="5525" end="5530" title="Email" label="Email"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="5667" end="5692" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351621" start="5808" end="5814" title="kbit/s" label="kbit/s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254394" start="5878" end="5884" title="Delphi (online service)" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56155" start="6038" end="6054" title="desktop computer" label="desktop computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706058" start="6422" end="6439" title="List of Game Boy games" label="hundreds of games"/>
<link wikidata="Q820568" start="6844" end="6854" title="Duke Nukem" label="Duke Nukem"/>
<link wikidata="Q220260" start="6868" end="6881" title="Resident Evil" label="Resident Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300499" start="6899" end="6920" title="Mortal Kombat Trilogy" label="Mortal Kombat Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="7007" end="7014" title="megabit" label="megabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056928" start="7428" end="7437" title="Solitaire (game)" label="Solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="7685" end="7698" title="GameSpot" label="VideoGameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="8419" end="8444" title="Electronic Gaming Monthly" label="Electronic Gaming Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q852589" start="8906" end="8921" title="Motion blur" label="screen blurring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027325" start="8930" end="8953" title="Wisconsin State Journal" label="Wisconsin State Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q600111" start="9339" end="9364" title="The Philadelphia Inquirer" label="The Philadelphia Inquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="10096" end="10110" title="GameSpot" label="VideoGames.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118540" start="11185" end="11192" title="AllGame" label="AllGame"/>
<link wikidata="Q196105" start="11639" end="11647" title="Engadget" label="Engadget"/>
<link wikidata="Q707291" start="11993" end="12001" title="PC World" label="PC World"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="12707" end="12711" title="Porting of video games" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="13229" end="13238" title="User interface" label="interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q249838" start="13508" end="13519" title="Motherboard (website)" label="Motherboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089906" start="13672" end="13679" title="USgamer" label="USgamer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12920" wikidata="Q79708" url="?curid=12920" title="General Packet Radio Service">
<text>General Packet Radio Service (GPRS), also called 2.5G, is a mobile data standard on the 2G cellular communication network&#x27;s global system for mobile communications (GSM). Networks and mobile devices with GPRS started to roll out around the year 2001; it offered, for the first time on GSM networks, seamless data transmission using packet data for an &quot;always-on&quot; connection (eliminating the need to &quot;dial-up&quot;), so providing improved Internet access for web, email, WAP services, Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) and others.

Up until the rollout of GPRS, only circuit switched data was used in cellular networks, meaning that one or more radio channels were occupied for the entire duration of a data connection. On the other hand, on GPRS networks, data is broken into small packets and transmitted through available channels. This increased efficiency also gives it theoretical data rates of 56–114 kbit/s, significantly faster than the preceding Circuit Switched Data (CSD) technology. GPRS was succeeded by EDGE (&quot;2.75G&quot;) which provided improved performance and speeds on the 2G GSM system.

== Technical overview ==

The GPRS core network allows 2G, 3G and WCDMA mobile networks to transmit IP packets to external networks such as the Internet. The GPRS system is an integrated part of the GSM network switching subsystem.

GPRS is a best-effort service, implying variable throughput and latency that depend on the number of other users sharing the service concurrently, as opposed to circuit switching, where a certain quality of service (QoS) is guaranteed during the connection. It uses unused time-division multiple access (TDMA) channels in the GSM system for efficiency. Unlike older circuit switching data, GPRS was sold according to the total volume of data transferred instead of time spent online, which is now standard. 

=== Services offered ===

GPRS extends the GSM Packet circuit switched data capabilities and makes the following services possible:
* SMS messaging and broadcasting
* &quot;Always on&quot; internet access
* Multimedia messaging service (MMS)
* Push-to-talk over cellular (PoC)
* Instant messaging and presence—wireless village
* Internet applications for smart devices through wireless application protocol (WAP)
* Point-to-point (P2P) service: inter-networking with the Internet (IP)
* Point-to-multipoint (P2M) service: point-to-multipoint multicast and point-to-multipoint group calls

If SMS over GPRS is used, an SMS transmission speed of about 30 SMS messages per minute may be achieved. This is much faster than using the ordinary SMS over GSM, whose SMS transmission speed is about 6 to 10 SMS messages per minute.

=== Frequencies ===
As the GPRS standard is an extension of GSM capabilities, the service operates on the 2G and 3G cellular communication GSM frequencies. GPRS devices can typically use (one or more) of the frequencies within one of the frequency bands the radio supports (850, 900, 1800, 1900 MHz). Depending on the device, location and intended use, regulations may be imposed either restricting or explicitly specifying authorised frequency bands.

GSM-850 and GSM-1900 are used in the United States, Canada, and many other countries in the Americas. GSM-900 and GSM-1800 are used in: Europe, Middle East, Africa and most of Asia. In South Americas these bands are used in Costa Rica (GSM-1800), Brazil (GSM-850, 900 and 1800), Guatemala (GSM-850, GSM-900 and 1900), El Salvador (GSM-850, GSM-900 and 1900). There is a more comprehensive record of international cellular service frequency assignments

=== Protocols supported ===
GPRS supports the following protocols:
* Internet Protocol (IP). In practice, built-in mobile browsers use IPv4 before IPv6 is widespread.
* Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) is typically not supported by mobile phone operators but if a cellular phone is used as a modem for a connected computer, PPP may be used to tunnel IP to the phone. This allows an IP address to be dynamically assigned (using IPCP rather than DHCP) to the mobile equipment.
* X.25 connections are typically used for applications like wireless payment terminals, although it has been removed from the standard. X.25 can still be supported over PPP, or even over IP, but this requires either a network-based router to perform encapsulation or software built into the end-device/terminal; e.g., user equipment (UE).

When TCP/IP is used, each phone can have one or more IP addresses allocated. GPRS will store and forward the IP packets to the phone even during handover. The TCP restores any packets lost (e.g. due to a radio noise induced pause).

=== Hardware ===
Devices supporting GPRS are grouped into three classes:
;Class A: Can be connected to GPRS service and GSM service (voice, SMS) simultaneously. Such devices are now available.
;Class B: Can be connected to GPRS service and GSM service (voice, SMS), but using only one at a time. During GSM service (voice call or SMS), GPRS service is suspended and resumed automatically after the GSM service (voice call or SMS) has concluded. Most GPRS mobile devices are Class B.
;Class C: Are connected to either GPRS service or GSM service (voice, SMS) and must be switched manually between one service and the other.

Because a Class A device must service GPRS and GSM networks together, it effectively needs two radios. To avoid this hardware requirement, a GPRS mobile device may implement the dual transfer mode (DTM) feature. A DTM-capable mobile can handle both GSM packets and GPRS packets with network coordination to ensure both types are not transmitted at the same time. Such devices are considered pseudo-Class A, sometimes referred to as &quot;simple class A&quot;. Some networks have supported DTM since 2007.

USB 3G/GPRS modems have a terminal-like interface over USB with V.42bis, and data formats. Some models include an external antenna connector. Modem cards for laptop PCs, or external USB modems are available, similar in shape and size to a computer mouse, or a pendrive.

=== Addressing ===
A GPRS connection is established by reference to its access point name (APN). The APN defines the services such as wireless application protocol (WAP)
access, short message service (SMS), multimedia messaging service (MMS), and for Internet communication services such as email and World Wide Web access.

In order to set up a GPRS connection for a wireless modem, a user must specify an APN, optionally a user name and password, and very rarely an IP address, provided by the network operator.

=== GPRS modems and modules ===
GSM module or GPRS modules are similar to modems, but there&#x27;s one difference: the modem is an external piece of equipment, whereas the GSM module or GPRS module can be integrated within an electrical or electronic equipment. It is an embedded piece of hardware. A GSM mobile, on the other hand, is a complete embedded system in itself. It comes with embedded processors dedicated to provide a functional interface between the user and the mobile network.

== Coding schemes and speeds ==
The upload and download speeds that can be achieved in GPRS depend on a number of factors such as:

* the number of BTS TDMA time slots assigned by the operator
* the channel encoding used.
* the maximum capability of the mobile device expressed as a GPRS multislot class

=== Multiple access schemes ===
The multiple access methods used in GSM with GPRS are based on frequency-division duplex (FDD) and TDMA. During a session, a user is assigned to one pair of up-link and down-link frequency channels. This is combined with time domain statistical multiplexing which makes it possible for several users to share the same frequency channel. The packets have constant length, corresponding to a GSM time slot. The down-link uses first-come first-served packet scheduling, while the up-link uses a scheme very similar to reservation ALOHA (R-ALOHA). This means that slotted ALOHA (S-ALOHA) is used for reservation inquiries during a contention phase, and then the actual data is transferred using dynamic TDMA with first-come first-served.

=== Channel encoding ===
The channel encoding process in GPRS consists of two steps: first, a cyclic code is used to add parity bits, which are also referred to as the Block Check Sequence, followed by coding with a possibly punctured convolutional code. The Coding Schemes CS-1 to CS-4 specify the number of parity bits generated by the cyclic code and the puncturing rate of the convolutional code. In Coding Schemes CS-1 through CS-3, the convolutional code is of rate 1/2, i.e. each input bit is converted into two coded bits. In Coding Schemes CS-2 and CS-3, the output of the convolutional code is punctured to achieve the desired code rate. In Coding Scheme CS-4, no convolutional coding is applied. The following table summarises the options.

The least robust, but fastest, coding scheme (CS-4) is available near a base transceiver station (BTS), while the most robust coding scheme (CS-1) is used when the mobile station (MS) is further away from a BTS.

Using the CS-4 it is possible to achieve a user speed of 20.0 kbit/s per time slot. However, using this scheme the cell coverage is 25% of normal. CS-1 can achieve a user speed of only 8.0 kbit/s per time slot, but has 98% of normal coverage. Newer network equipment can adapt the transfer speed automatically depending on the mobile location.

In addition to GPRS, there are two other GSM technologies which deliver data services: circuit-switched data (CSD) and high-speed circuit-switched data (HSCSD). In contrast to the shared nature of GPRS, these instead establish a dedicated circuit (usually billed per minute). Some applications such as video calling may prefer HSCSD, especially when there is a continuous flow of data between the endpoints.

The following table summarises some possible configurations of GPRS and circuit switched data services.

=== Multislot Class ===
The multislot class determines the speed of data transfer available in the Uplink and Downlink directions. It is a value between 1 and 45 which the network uses to allocate radio channels in the uplink and downlink direction. Multislot class with values greater than 31 are referred to as high multislot classes.

A multislot allocation is represented as, for example, 5+2. The first number is the number of downlink timeslots and the second is the number of uplink timeslots allocated for use by the mobile station. A commonly used value is class 10 for many GPRS/EGPRS mobiles which uses a maximum of 4 timeslots in downlink direction and 2 timeslots in uplink direction. However simultaneously a maximum number of 5 simultaneous timeslots can be used in both uplink and downlink. The network will automatically configure for either 3+2 or 4+1 operation depending on the nature of data transfer.

Some high end mobiles, usually also supporting UMTS, also support GPRS/EDGE multislot class 32. According to 3GPP TS 45.002 (Release 12), Table B.1, mobile stations of this class support 5 timeslots in downlink and 3 timeslots in uplink with a maximum number of 6 simultaneously used timeslots. If data traffic is concentrated in downlink direction the network will configure the connection for 5+1 operation. When more data is transferred in the uplink the network can at any time change the constellation to 4+2 or 3+3. Under the best reception conditions, i.e. when the best EDGE modulation and coding scheme can be used, 5 timeslots can carry a bandwidth of 5*59.2 kbit/s = 296 kbit/s. In uplink direction, 3 timeslots can carry a bandwidth of 3*59.2 kbit/s = 177.6 kbit/s.

==== Multislot Classes for GPRS/EGPRS ====

==== Attributes of a multislot class ====
Each multislot class identifies the following:
* the maximum number of Timeslots that can be allocated on uplink
* the maximum number of Timeslots that can be allocated on downlink
* the total number of timeslots which can be allocated by the network to the mobile
* the time needed for the MS to perform adjacent cell signal level measurement and get ready to transmit
* the time needed for the MS to get ready to transmit
* the time needed for the MS to perform adjacent cell signal level measurement and get ready to receive
* the time needed for the MS to get ready to receive.

The different multislot class specification is detailed in the Annex B of the 3GPP Technical Specification 45.002 (Multiplexing and multiple access on the radio path)

== Usability ==
The maximum speed of a GPRS connection offered in 2003 was similar to a modem connection in an analog wire telephone network, about 32–40 kbit/s, depending on the phone used. Latency is very high; round-trip time (RTT) is typically about 600–700 ms and often reaches 1s. GPRS is typically prioritized lower than speech, and thus the quality of connection varies greatly.

Devices with latency/RTT improvements (via, for example, the extended UL TBF mode feature) are generally available. Also, network upgrades of features are available with certain operators. With these enhancements the active round-trip time can be reduced, resulting in significant increase in application-level throughput speeds.

== History ==
GSM was designed for voice, not data. It did not provide direct access to the Internet and it had a limited capacity of 9600 bauds per second. The limitations of Circuit Switched Data (CSD) also included higher costs. GPRS opened in 2000 as a packet-switched data service embedded in the channel-switched cellular radio network GSM. GPRS extends the reach of the fixed Internet by connecting mobile terminals worldwide.

GPRS was established by European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) in response to the earlier CDPD and i-mode packet-switched cellular technologies and is integrated into GSM Release 97 and newer releases. It is now maintained by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP).

The CELLPAC protocol developed 1991–1993 was the trigger point for starting in 1993 the specification of standard GPRS by ETSI SMG. Especially, the CELLPAC Voice &amp; Data functions introduced in a 1993 ETSI Workshop contribution anticipate what was later known to be the roots of GPRS. This workshop contribution is referenced in 22 GPRS-related US patents. Successor systems to GSM/GPRS like W-CDMA (UMTS) and LTE rely on key GPRS functions for mobile Internet access as introduced by CELLPAC.

According to a study on history of GPRS development, Bernhard Walke and his student Peter Decker are the inventors of GPRS — the first system providing worldwide mobile Internet access.

== Enhanced GPRS ==
== See also ==
* Code-division multiple access (CDMA)
* GPRS core network
* High Speed Packet Access (HSDPA)
* IP Multimedia Subsystem
* List of interface bit rates
* Sub-network dependent convergence protocol (SNDCP)
* UMTS

== References ==
== External links ==
* 3GPP AT command set for user equipment (UE)
* Free GPRS resources 
* GSM World, the trade association for GSM and GPRS network operators.
* Palowireless GPRS resource center
* GPRS attach and PDP context activation sequence diagram </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79708" start="0" end="28" title="General Packet Radio Service" label="General Packet Radio Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q79708" start="30" end="34" title="General Packet Radio Service" label="GPRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79708" start="49" end="53" title="General Packet Radio Service" label="2.5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q640394" start="60" end="71" title="mobile data" label="mobile data"/>
<link wikidata="Q845349" start="88" end="90" title="2G" label="2G"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="91" end="113" title="cellular communication" label="cellular communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="129" end="168" title="Global System for Mobile Communications" label="global system for mobile communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="337" end="348" title="Packet switching" label="packet data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472399" start="458" end="473" title="Internet access" label="Internet access"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="478" end="481" title="World Wide Web" label="web"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="483" end="488" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q186224" start="490" end="493" title="Wireless Application Protocol" label="WAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q189443" start="504" end="532" title="Multimedia Messaging Service" label="Multimedia Messaging Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q506273" start="587" end="603" title="circuit switched" label="circuit switched"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="928" end="932" title="Kilobit" label="kbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q278321" start="976" end="997" title="Circuit Switched Data" label="Circuit Switched Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q204833" start="1038" end="1042" title="Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution" label="EDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q845349" start="1188" end="1190" title="2G" label="2G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="1192" end="1194" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="1199" end="1204" title="WCDMA" label="WCDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q992968" start="1205" end="1220" title="mobile telephony" label="mobile networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="1233" end="1243" title="Internet Protocol" label="IP packets"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1277" end="1285" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="1332" end="1335" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q779475" start="1336" end="1363" title="network switching subsystem" label="network switching subsystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q830287" start="1376" end="1395" title="best-effort service" label="best-effort service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383412" start="1415" end="1425" title="throughput" label="throughput"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771903" start="1430" end="1437" title="latency (engineering)" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q506273" start="1527" end="1544" title="circuit switching" label="circuit switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q220501" start="1562" end="1580" title="quality of service" label="quality of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q878344" start="1639" end="1668" title="time-division multiple access" label="time-division multiple access"/>
<link wikidata="Q845349" start="2805" end="2807" title="2G" label="2G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="2812" end="2814" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="2815" end="2837" title="cellular communication" label="cellular communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="3674" end="3691" title="Internet Protocol" label="Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q845620" start="3720" end="3734" title="mobile browser" label="mobile browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="3740" end="3744" title="IPv4" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="3752" end="3756" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q215179" start="3774" end="3797" title="Point-to-Point Protocol" label="Point-to-Point Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887204" start="3834" end="3855" title="mobile phone operator" label="mobile phone operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="3894" end="3899" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667988" start="4029" end="4033" title="Internet Protocol Control Protocol" label="IPCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166" start="4046" end="4050" title="Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol" label="DHCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="4079" end="4083" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="4309" end="4315" title="Router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="4422" end="4428" title="Internet protocol suite" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="4470" end="4480" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414679" start="4562" end="4570" title="handover" label="handover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262557" start="5452" end="5476" title="Dual Transfer Mode" label="dual transfer mode (DTM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071233" start="5806" end="5814" title="terminal software" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="5835" end="5838" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624253" start="5844" end="5851" title="V.42bis" label="V.42bis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="5903" end="5910" title="antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="6019" end="6033" title="computer mouse" label="computer mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647694" start="6040" end="6048" title="pendrive" label="pendrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q338978" start="6123" end="6140" title="Access Point Name" label="access point name"/>
<link wikidata="Q186224" start="6185" end="6214" title="Wireless Application Protocol" label="wireless application protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="6229" end="6250" title="Short Message Service" label="short message service"/>
<link wikidata="Q189443" start="6258" end="6286" title="Multimedia Messaging Service" label="multimedia messaging service"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="6302" end="6310" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="6342" end="6347" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="6352" end="6366" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549420" start="6419" end="6433" title="Mobile broadband modem" label="wireless modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="6519" end="6529" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005322" start="7207" end="7210" title="Base Transceiver Station" label="BTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79708" start="7342" end="7362" title="Multislot Class" label="GPRS multislot class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665191" start="7400" end="7422" title="multiple access method" label="multiple access method"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="7459" end="7484" title="frequency-division duplex" label="frequency-division duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978010" start="7629" end="7653" title="statistical multiplexing" label="statistical multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q847526" start="7820" end="7843" title="first-come first-served" label="first-come first-served"/>
<link wikidata="Q294502" start="7911" end="7928" title="reservation ALOHA" label="reservation ALOHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q294502" start="7956" end="7969" title="slotted ALOHA" label="slotted ALOHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q878344" start="8087" end="8099" title="dynamic TDMA" label="dynamic TDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395022" start="8366" end="8384" title="convolutional code" label="convolutional code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899825" start="8735" end="8744" title="punctured code" label="punctured"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005322" start="8955" end="8979" title="Base Transceiver Station" label="base transceiver station"/>
<link wikidata="Q278321" start="9528" end="9549" title="Circuit Switched Data" label="circuit-switched data"/>
<link wikidata="Q278321" start="9560" end="9592" title="high-speed circuit-switched data" label="high-speed circuit-switched data"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="9743" end="9756" title="video calling" label="video calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833047" start="10054" end="10060" title="Uplink" label="Uplink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833047" start="10065" end="10073" title="Downlink" label="Downlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="10925" end="10929" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q204833" start="10949" end="10953" title="EDGE" label="EDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q229804" start="10987" end="10991" title="3GPP" label="3GPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714551" start="11461" end="11489" title="modulation and coding scheme" label="modulation and coding scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="12582" end="12587" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771903" start="12685" end="12692" title="Latency (engineering)" label="Latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q278321" start="13389" end="13410" title="Circuit Switched Data" label="Circuit Switched Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="13555" end="13558" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q899383" start="13672" end="13719" title="European Telecommunications Standards Institute" label="European Telecommunications Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744436" start="13754" end="13758" title="CDPD" label="CDPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q284305" start="13763" end="13769" title="i-mode" label="i-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q229804" start="13894" end="13928" title="3rd Generation Partnership Project" label="3rd Generation Partnership Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="14341" end="14345" title="Universal Mobile Telecommunications System" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="14351" end="14354" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q826110" start="14489" end="14503" title="Bernhard Walke" label="Bernhard Walke"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="14660" end="14689" title="Code-division multiple access" label="Code-division multiple access"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642473" start="14699" end="14716" title="GPRS core network" label="GPRS core network"/>
<link wikidata="Q731991" start="14719" end="14743" title="High Speed Packet Access" label="High Speed Packet Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140664" start="14754" end="14777" title="IP Multimedia Subsystem" label="IP Multimedia Subsystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149752" start="14780" end="14807" title="List of interface bit rates" label="List of interface bit rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391828" start="14810" end="14852" title="SNDCP" label="Sub-network dependent convergence protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="14863" end="14867" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12922" wikidata="Q421261" url="?curid=12922" title="Gnosis">
<text>Gnosis is the common Greek noun for knowledge (, &quot;gnōsis&quot;, f.). The term was used among various Hellenistic religions and philosophies in the Greco-Roman world. It is best known for its implication within Gnosticism, where it signifies a spiritual knowledge or insight into humanity&#x27;s real nature as divine, leading to the deliverance of the divine spark within humanity from the constraints of earthly existence.

== Etymology ==
&quot;Gnosis&quot; is a feminine Greek noun which means &quot;knowledge&quot; or &quot;awareness.&quot; It is often used for personal knowledge compared with intellectual knowledge (εἴδειν &quot;eídein&quot;), as with the French &quot;connaître&quot; compared with &quot;savoir&quot;, the Portuguese &quot;conhecer&quot; compared with &quot;saber&quot;, the Spanish &quot;conocer&quot; compared with &quot;saber&quot;, the Italian &quot;conoscere&quot; compared with &quot;sapere&quot;, the German &quot;kennen&quot; rather than &quot;wissen&quot;, or the Modern Greek γνωρίζω compared with ξέρω.

A related term is the adjective &quot;gnostikos&quot;, &quot;cognitive&quot;, a reasonably common adjective in Classical Greek. The terms do not appear to indicate any mystic, esoteric or hidden meaning in the works of Plato, but instead expressed a sort of higher intelligence and ability analogous to talent.

In the Hellenistic era the term became associated with the mystery cults.

In the Acts of Thomas, translated by G.R.S. Mead, the &quot;motions of gnosis&quot; are also referred to as &quot;kingly motions&quot;.

Irenaeus used the phrase &quot;knowledge falsely so-called&quot; (&quot;&quot;, from 1 Timothy 6:20) for the title of his book &quot;On the Detection and Overthrow of False Knowledge&quot;, that contains the adjective &quot;gnostikos&quot;, which is the source for the 17th-century English term &quot;Gnosticism&quot;.

== Subtle distinctions ==

===&quot;Epignosis&quot;===

The difference and meaning of &quot;epignosis&quot; () contrasted with gnosis is disputed. One proposed distinction is between the abstract and absolute knowledge (&quot;gnosis&quot;) and a practical or more literal knowledge (&quot;epignosis&quot;). Other interpretations have suggested that 2 Peter is referring to an &quot;epignosis of Jesus Christ&quot;, what J. B. Lightfoot described as a &quot;larger and more thorough knowledge&quot;. Conversion to Christianity is seen as evidence of the deeper knowledge protecting against false doctrine.

===&quot;Episteme&quot;===

Episteme, like Gnosis, is a Greek word for &quot;knowledge,&quot; but they represent distinct kinds of understanding—though not necessarily exclusively. Episteme refers to knowledge gained through experience and reason. It encompasses the body of ideas we typically recognize as knowledge, and is the source of our word epistemology. Gnosis, however, is often associated with experiential, intuitive, or spiritual understanding rather than empirical or logical deduction. While episteme deals with objective truths and verifiable facts, gnosis is more concerned with personal insight, inner transformation, and an engagement more ineffable than explicable.

== Gnosticism ==

Gnosticism originated in the late 1st century CE in non-rabbinical Jewish and developed further within early Christianity. In the early years of Christianity, various sectarian groups, labeled &quot;gnostics&quot; by their opponents, emphasised salvation by secret knowledge (&quot;gnosis&quot;), over faith (&quot;pistis&quot;) or grace (gratia) in the teachings and traditions of the various communities of Christians. Gnosticism presents a distinction between the highest, unknowable God, and the Demiurge, &quot;creator&quot; of the material universe. The Gnostics considered the most essential part of the process of salvation to be this esoteric knowledge, in contrast to God&#x27;s grace as an outlook in their worldview along with faith in the ecclesiastical authority.

In Gnosticism, the biblical serpent in the Garden of Eden was praised and thanked for bringing knowledge (&quot;gnosis&quot;) to Adam and Eve and thereby freeing them from the malevolent Demiurge&#x27;s control. Gnostic Christian doctrines rely on a dualistic cosmology that implies the eternal conflict between good and evil, and a conception of the serpent as the liberating savior and bestower of knowledge to humankind opposed to the Demiurge or creator god, identified with the Hebrew God of the Old Testament. Gnostic Christians considered the Hebrew God of the Old Testament as the evil, false god and creator of the material universe, and the Unknown God of the Gospel, the father of Jesus Christ and creator of the spiritual world, as the true, good God. In the Archontic, Sethian, and Ophite systems, Yaldabaoth (Yahweh) is regarded as the malevolent Demiurge and false god of the Old Testament who generated the material universe and keeps the souls trapped in physical bodies, imprisoned in the world full of pain and suffering that he created.

However, not all Gnostic movements regarded the creator of the material universe as inherently evil or malevolent. For instance, Valentinians believed that the Demiurge is merely an ignorant and incompetent creator, trying to fashion the world as good as he can, but lacking the proper power to maintain its goodness. All Gnostics were regarded as heretics by the proto-orthodox Early Church Fathers.

=== Mandaeism ===
In Mandaeism, the concept of &quot;manda&quot; (&quot;knowledge&quot;, &quot;wisdom&quot;, &quot;intellect&quot;) is roughly equivalent to the Gnostic concept of gnosis. Mandaeism (&#x27;having knowledge&#x27;) is the only surviving Gnostic religion from antiquity. Mandaeans formally refer to themselves as &quot;Nasurai&quot; (Nasoraeans) meaning guardians or possessors of secret rites and knowledge. The Mandaeans emphasize salvation of the soul through secret knowledge (gnosis) of its divine origin. Mandaeism &quot;provides knowledge of whence we have come and whither we are going.&quot;

==Christian usage==
===New Testament===
The New Testament uses the term γνῶσις (Strong&#x27;s G1108, Transliteration gnōsis) 28 times. Most of this usage is found in Paul&#x27;s Epistles, which later Gnostics used to develop their distinct concept of gnosis.

=== Patristic literature ===
The Church Fathers, such as Clement of Alexandria, used the word &quot;gnosis&quot; (knowledge), alongside the word syneidesis (conscience) to mean a spiritual knowledge by which believers could use reason to intuitively discern truth or righteousness. This positive usage was to contrast it with how gnostic sectarians used the word. Cardiognosis (&quot;knowledge of the heart&quot;) from Eastern Christianity related to the tradition of the starets and in Roman Catholic theology is the view that only God knows the condition of one&#x27;s relationship with God.
Boston College Catholic philosopher Dermot Moran notes that
=== Eastern Orthodox thought ===
&quot;Gnosis&quot; in Orthodox Christian (primarily Eastern Orthodox) thought is the spiritual knowledge of a saint (one who has obtained theosis) or divinely-illuminated human being. Within the cultures of the term&#x27;s provenance (Byzantine and Hellenic) &quot;Gnosis&quot; was a knowledge or insight into the infinite, divine and uncreated in all and above all, rather than knowledge strictly into the finite, natural or material world. Gnosis is transcendental as well as mature understanding. It indicates direct spiritual, experiential knowledge and intuitive knowledge, mystic rather than that from rational or reasoned thinking. Gnosis itself is gained through understanding at which one can arrive via inner experience or contemplation such as an internal epiphany of intuition and external epiphany such as the theophany.

In the &quot;Philokalia,&quot; it is emphasized that such knowledge is not secret knowledge but rather a maturing, transcendent form of knowledge derived from contemplation (&quot;theoria&quot; resulting from practice of &quot;hesychasm)&quot;, since knowledge cannot truly be derived from knowledge, but rather, knowledge can only be derived from &quot;theoria&quot; (to witness, see (vision) or experience). Knowledge, thus plays an important role in relation to &quot;theosis&quot; (deification/personal relationship with God) and &quot;theoria&quot; (revelation of the divine, vision of God). Gnosis, as the proper use of the spiritual or noetic faculty plays an important role in Orthodox Christian theology. Its importance in the economy of salvation is discussed periodically in the &quot;Philokalia&quot; where as direct, personal knowledge of God (&quot;noesis&quot;) it is distinguished from ordinary epistemological knowledge (episteme—i.e., speculative philosophy).

== Islam ==
=== Sufism ===

Knowledge (or &quot;gnosis&quot;) in Sufism refers to knowledge of Self and God. The gnostic is called &quot;al-arif bi&#x27;lah&quot; or &quot;one who knows by God&quot;. The goal of the Sufi practitioner is to remove inner obstacles to the knowledge of God. Sufism, understood as the quest for Truth, is to seek for the separate existence of the Self to be consumed by Truth, as stated by the Sufi poet Mansur al-Hallaj, who was executed for saying &quot;I am the Truth&quot; (ana&#x27;l haqq).

== Jewish usage ==

=== Hellenistic Jewish literature ===
The Greek word &quot;gnosis&quot; (knowledge) is used as a standard translation of the Hebrew word &quot;knowledge&quot; ( ) in the Septuagint, thus:

Philo also refers to the &quot;knowledge&quot; (&quot;gnosis&quot;) and &quot;wisdom&quot; (&quot;sophia&quot;) of God.

== See also ==

== References ==
=== Sources ===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q421261" start="0" end="6" title="Gnosis" label="Gnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="21" end="26" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="36" end="45" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373305" start="106" end="126" title="Hellenistic religion" label="Hellenistic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q753132" start="132" end="144" title="Hellenistic philosophy" label="philosophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="152" end="169" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman world"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="215" end="225" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="248" end="257" title="Spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="258" end="267" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="284" end="292" title="Humans" label="humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="668" end="674" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="735" end="745" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="804" end="811" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="869" end="876" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="937" end="943" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="1220" end="1228" title="esoteric" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="1263" end="1268" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="1363" end="1378" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q766852" start="1438" end="1452" title="Acts of Thomas" label="Acts of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508202" start="1468" end="1479" title="G. R. S. Mead" label="G.R.S. Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="1568" end="1576" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281900" start="1701" end="1750" title="On the Detection and Overthrow of Knowledge Falsely So Called" label="On the Detection and Overthrow of False Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="1869" end="1879" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131178" start="2237" end="2244" title="2 Peter" label="2 Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706574" start="2308" end="2323" title="J. B. Lightfoot" label="J. B. Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q814999" start="2387" end="2413" title="Conversion to Christianity" label="Conversion to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="2477" end="2491" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="false doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="2842" end="2854" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="3198" end="3208" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="3265" end="3271" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="3301" end="3319" title="early Christianity" label="early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="3328" end="3355" title="History of early Christianity" label="early years of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352121" start="3365" end="3374" title="sectarian" label="sectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="3443" end="3452" title="Salvation in Christianity" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="3500" end="3505" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q205194" start="3530" end="3535" title="Grace in Christianity" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897848" start="3665" end="3688" title="Monad (Gnosticism)" label="highest, unknowable God"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3698" end="3706" title="Demiurge#Gnosticism" label="Demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q190995" start="3787" end="3796" title="Essential property" label="essential"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="3820" end="3829" title="salvation" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12558574" start="3916" end="3925" title="Perspective (cognitive)" label="worldview"/>
<link wikidata="Q26048811" start="3950" end="3974" title="Great Church" label="ecclesiastical authority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3996" end="4012" title="Serpents in the Bible#Eden" label="biblical serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="4020" end="4034" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="4106" end="4118" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319573" start="4153" end="4163" title="Dystheism" label="malevolent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4164" end="4172" title="Demiurge#Gnosticism" label="Demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310255" start="4227" end="4246" title="dualistic cosmology" label="dualistic cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="4343" end="4360" title="Salvation" label="liberating savior"/>
<link wikidata="Q635155" start="4427" end="4438" title="creator god" label="creator god"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="4460" end="4470" title="Yahweh" label="Hebrew God"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="4478" end="4491" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757556" start="4572" end="4581" title="false god" label="false god"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897848" start="4628" end="4639" title="Monad (Gnosticism)" label="Unknown God"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="4647" end="4653" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="4669" end="4681" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q636180" start="4748" end="4757" title="Archontics" label="Archontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209468" start="4759" end="4766" title="Sethianism" label="Sethian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193062" start="4772" end="4778" title="Ophites" label="Ophite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603125" start="4788" end="4798" title="Yaldabaoth" label="Yaldabaoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="5025" end="5032" title="Creationism" label="created"/>
<link wikidata="Q204603" start="5164" end="5176" title="Valentinianism" label="Valentinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="5383" end="5391" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heretics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543814" start="5399" end="5413" title="Proto-orthodox Christianity" label="proto-orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="5414" end="5434" title="Early Church Fathers" label="Early Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="5458" end="5467" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933630" start="5490" end="5495" title="Manda (Mandaeism)" label="manda"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="5625" end="5634" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="5721" end="5730" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5784" end="5794" title="Nazarene (sect)#Nasoraean Mandaeans" label="Nasoraeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="6218" end="6229" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q215495" start="6230" end="6238" title="Epistle" label="Epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="6345" end="6359" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508810" start="6457" end="6467" title="Synderesis" label="syneidesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038706" start="6676" end="6688" title="Cardiognosis" label="Cardiognosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q761741" start="6784" end="6791" title="starets" label="starets"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6799" end="6813" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="6906" end="6920" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262831" start="6942" end="6954" title="Dermot Moran" label="Dermot Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="7021" end="7039" title="Orthodoxy" label="Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="7051" end="7067" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="7109" end="7114" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129863" start="7137" end="7144" title="Theosis (Eastern Orthodox theology)" label="theosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284165" start="7149" end="7169" title="divine illumination" label="divinely-illuminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="7234" end="7243" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="7248" end="7256" title="Ancient Greece" label="Hellenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553259" start="7296" end="7303" title="insight" label="insight"/>
<link wikidata="Q193359" start="7451" end="7465" title="Transcendence (philosophy)" label="transcendental"/>
<link wikidata="Q620995" start="7477" end="7497" title="Apperception" label="mature understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q189222" start="7557" end="7566" title="intuition (knowledge)" label="intuitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="7578" end="7584" title="mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123855" start="7732" end="7745" title="contemplation" label="contemplation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312056" start="7766" end="7774" title="Epiphany (feeling)" label="epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q899918" start="7822" end="7831" title="theophany" label="theophany"/>
<link wikidata="Q929140" start="7847" end="7857" title="Philokalia" label="Philokalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193359" start="7949" end="7961" title="Transcendence (philosophy)" label="transcendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123855" start="7993" end="8006" title="contemplation" label="contemplation"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="8014" end="8021" title="theoria" label="theoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q629589" start="8061" end="8070" title="hesychasm" label="hesychasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738771" start="8305" end="8312" title="Divinization (Christian)" label="theosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="8374" end="8381" title="theoria" label="theoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q835041" start="8477" end="8483" title="Nous" label="noetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294384" start="8519" end="8546" title="Eastern Orthodox Christian theology" label="Orthodox Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q929140" start="8630" end="8640" title="Philokalia" label="Philokalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="8878" end="8884" title="Sufism" label="Sufism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942579" start="8908" end="8912" title="Rūḥ" label="Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="8917" end="8920" title="Allah" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q172862" start="9246" end="9262" title="Mansur al-Hallaj" label="Mansur al-Hallaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="9529" end="9539" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q189597" start="9548" end="9553" title="Philo" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="9663" end="9666" title="God" label="God"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12923" wikidata="Q411370" url="?curid=12923" title="Georgian">
<text>Georgian may refer to:
==Common meanings==
* Anything related to, or originating from Georgia (country)
**Georgians, an indigenous Caucasian ethnic group
**Georgian language, a Kartvelian language spoken by Georgians
**Georgian scripts, three scripts used to write the language
**Georgian (Unicode block), a Unicode block containing the Mkhedruli and Asomtavruli scripts
**Georgian cuisine, cooking styles and dishes with origins in the nation of Georgia and prepared by Georgian people around the world
* Someone from Georgia (U.S. state)
* Georgian era, a period of British history (1714–1837)
**Georgian architecture, the set of architectural styles current between 1714 and 1837

== Places ==
*Georgian Bay, a bay of Lake Huron
*Georgian Cliff, a cliff on Alexander Island, Antarctica

== Airlines ==
*Georgian Airways, an airline based in Tbilisi, Georgia
*Georgian International Airlines, an airline based in Tbilisi, Georgia
*Air Georgian, an airline based in Ontario, Canada
*Sky Georgia, an airline based in Tbilisi, Georgia

== Schools ==
*Georgian College, in Barrie, Ontario, Canada
*Georgian International Academy, a research and academic institution in Tbilisi, Georgia
*Georgian Technical University, a technical university in Tbilisi, Georgia

== Arts and entertainment ==
*The Georgians (Frank Guarente), an American jazz and dance band of the 1920s
*The Georgians (Nat Gonella), a British jazz band of the 1930s
*Georgian poets, a group of early 20th century English poets
*Georgian Theatre Royal, a theatre and playhouse in Richmond, North Yorkshire, UK

==People==

*Georgian Păun (born 1985), Romanian footballer
*Georgian Popescu (born 1984), Romanian amateur boxer
*Georgian Tobă (born 1989), Romanian footballer

== Other uses ==
*&quot;Atlanta Georgian&quot;, a defunct Hearst-owned newspaper
*Augusta Georgians, an American minor league baseball team from 1920 to 1921
*Georgian Mall, a mall in Barrie, Ontario, Canada
*Georgian (train), a Chicago-to-Atlanta passenger train route

==See also==
*Georgia (disambiguation)
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q411370" start="0" end="8" title="Georgian" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="86" end="103" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia (country)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973" start="106" end="115" title="Georgians" label="Georgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="156" end="173" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q161428" start="219" end="235" title="Georgian scripts" label="Georgian scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493880" start="280" end="304" title="Georgian (Unicode block)" label="Georgian (Unicode block)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199026" start="373" end="389" title="Georgian cuisine" label="Georgian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="519" end="539" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia (U.S. state)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="542" end="554" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="598" end="619" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267413" start="698" end="710" title="Georgian Bay" label="Georgian Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548008" start="733" end="747" title="Georgian Cliff" label="Georgian Cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q909076" start="806" end="822" title="Georgian Airways" label="Georgian Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509340" start="862" end="893" title="Georgian International Airlines" label="Georgian International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071382" start="933" end="945" title="Air Georgian" label="Air Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293317" start="984" end="995" title="Sky Georgia" label="Sky Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548011" start="1050" end="1066" title="Georgian College" label="Georgian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067553" start="1096" end="1126" title="Georgian International Academy" label="Georgian International Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425119" start="1185" end="1214" title="Georgian Technical University" label="Georgian Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711879" start="1290" end="1320" title="The Georgians (Frank Guarente)" label="The Georgians (Frank Guarente)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838809" start="1368" end="1395" title="The Georgians (Nat Gonella)" label="The Georgians (Nat Gonella)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509327" start="1431" end="1445" title="Georgian poets" label="Georgian poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548053" start="1492" end="1514" title="Georgian Theatre Royal" label="Georgian Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054235" start="1587" end="1600" title="Georgian Păun" label="Georgian Păun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548048" start="1635" end="1651" title="Georgian Popescu" label="Georgian Popescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548062" start="1689" end="1702" title="Georgian Tobă" label="Georgian Tobă"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816078" start="1761" end="1777" title="Atlanta Georgian" label="Atlanta Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820978" start="1819" end="1836" title="Augusta Georgians" label="Augusta Georgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548033" start="1896" end="1909" title="Georgian Mall" label="Georgian Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073105" start="1946" end="1962" title="Georgian (train)" label="Georgian (train)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962" start="2022" end="2046" title="Georgia (disambiguation)" label="Georgia (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12924" wikidata="Q1125300" url="?curid=12924" title="Georgian architecture">
<text>Georgian architecture is the name given in most English-speaking countries to the set of architectural styles current between 1714 and 1830. It is named after the first four British monarchs of the House of Hanover, George I, George II, George III, and George IV, who reigned in continuous succession from August 1714 to June 1830.

The Georgian cities of the British Isles were Edinburgh, Bath, pre-independence Dublin, and London, and to a lesser extent York and Bristol. The style was revived in the late 19th century in the United States as Colonial Revival architecture and in the early 20th century in Great Britain as Neo-Georgian architecture; in both it is also called Georgian Revival architecture.

In the United States, the term &quot;Georgian&quot; is generally used to describe all buildings from the period, regardless of style; in Britain it is generally restricted to buildings that are &quot;architectural in intention&quot;, and have stylistic characteristics that are typical of the period, though that covers a wide range.

The Georgian style is highly variable, but marked by symmetry and proportion based on the classical architecture of Greece and Rome, as revived in Renaissance architecture. Ornament is also normally in the classical tradition, but typically restrained, and sometimes almost completely absent on the exterior. The period brought the vocabulary of classical architecture to smaller and more modest buildings than had been the case before, replacing English vernacular architecture (or becoming the new vernacular style) for almost all new middle-class homes and public buildings by the end of the period.

Georgian architecture is characterized by its proportion and balance; simple mathematical ratios were used to determine the height of a window in relation to its width or the shape of a room as a double cube. Regularity, as with ashlar (uniformly cut) stonework, was strongly approved, imbuing symmetry and adherence to classical rules: the lack of symmetry, where Georgian additions were added to earlier structures remaining visible, was deeply felt as a flaw, at least before John Nash began to introduce it in a variety of styles. Regularity of housefronts along a street was a desirable feature of Georgian town planning. Until the start of the Gothic Revival in the early 19th century, Georgian designs usually lay within the Classical orders of architecture and employed a decorative vocabulary derived from ancient Rome or Greece.

==Characteristics==
In towns, which expanded greatly during the period, landowners turned into property developers, and rows of identical terraced houses became the norm. Even the wealthy were persuaded to live in these in town, especially if provided with a square of garden in front of the house. There was an enormous amount of building in the period, all over the English-speaking world, and the standards of construction were generally high. Where they have not been demolished, large numbers of Georgian buildings have survived two centuries or more, and they still form large parts of the core of cities such as London, Edinburgh, Dublin, Newcastle upon Tyne and Bristol.

The period saw the growth of a distinct and trained architectural profession; before the mid-century &quot;the high-sounding title, &#x27;architect&#x27; was adopted by anyone who could get away with it&quot;. This contrasted with earlier styles, which were primarily disseminated among craftsmen through the direct experience of the apprenticeship system. But most buildings were still designed by builders and landlords together, and the wide spread of Georgian architecture, and the Georgian styles of design more generally, came from dissemination through pattern books and inexpensive suites of engravings. Authors such as the prolific William Halfpenny (active 1723–1755) had editions in America as well as Britain.

A similar phenomenon can be seen in the commonality of housing designs in Canada and the United States (though of a wider variety of styles) from the 19th century through the 1950s, using pattern books drawn up by professional architects that were distributed by lumber companies and hardware stores to contractors and homebuilders.
From the mid-18th century, Georgian styles were assimilated into an architectural vernacular that became part and parcel of the training of every architect, designer, builder, carpenter, mason and plasterer, from Edinburgh to Maryland.

==Styles==
Georgian succeeded the English Baroque of Sir Christopher Wren, Sir John Vanbrugh, Thomas Archer, William Talman, and Nicholas Hawksmoor; this in fact continued into at least the 1720s, overlapping with a more restrained Georgian style. The architect James Gibbs was a transitional figure, his earlier buildings are Baroque, reflecting the time he spent in Rome in the early 18th century, but he adjusted his style after 1720. Major architects to promote the change in direction from Baroque were Colen Campbell, author of the influential book &quot;Vitruvius Britannicus&quot; (1715–1725); Richard Boyle, 3rd Earl of Burlington and his protégé William Kent; Isaac Ware; Henry Flitcroft and the Venetian Giacomo Leoni, who spent most of his career in England. 
Other prominent architects of the early Georgian period include James Paine, Robert Taylor, and John Wood, the Elder. The European Grand Tour became very common for wealthy patrons in the period, and Italian influence remained dominant, though at the start of the period Hanover Square, Westminster (1713 on), developed and occupied by Whig supporters of the new dynasty, seems to have deliberately adopted German stylistic elements in their honour, especially vertical bands connecting the windows.

The styles that resulted fall within several categories. In the mainstream of Georgian style were both Palladian architecture—and its whimsical alternatives, Gothic and Chinoiserie, which were the English-speaking world&#x27;s equivalent of European Rococo. From the mid-1760s a range of Neoclassical modes were fashionable, associated with the British architects Robert Adam, James Gibbs, Sir William Chambers, James Wyatt, George Dance the Younger, Henry Holland and Sir John Soane. John Nash was one of the most prolific architects of the late Georgian era known as Regency style, he was responsible for designing large areas of London. Greek Revival architecture was added to the repertory, beginning around 1750, but increasing in popularity after 1800. Leading exponents were William Wilkins and Robert Smirke.

In Britain, brick or stone are almost invariably used; brick is often disguised with stucco. The Georgian terraces of Dublin are noted for their almost uniform use of red brick, for example, whereas equivalent terraces in Edinburgh are constructed from stone. In America and other colonies wood remained very common, as its availability and cost-ratio with the other materials was more favourable. Raked roofs were mostly covered in earthenware tiles until Richard Pennant, 1st Baron Penrhyn led the development of the slate industry in Wales from the 1760s, which by the end of the century had become the usual material.

==Types of buildings==

===Houses===
Versions of revived Palladian architecture dominated English country house architecture. Houses were increasingly placed in grand landscaped settings, and large houses were generally made wide and relatively shallow, largely to look more impressive from a distance. The height was usually highest in the centre, and the Baroque emphasis on corner pavilions often found on the continent generally avoided. In grand houses, an entrance hall led to steps up to a &quot;piano nobile&quot; or mezzanine floor where the main reception rooms were. Typically the basement area or &quot;rustic&quot;, with kitchens, offices and service areas, as well as male guests with muddy boots, came some way above ground, and was lit by windows that were high on the inside, but just above ground level outside. A single block was typical, with perhaps a small court for carriages at the front marked off by railings and a gate, but rarely a stone gatehouse, or side wings around the court.

Windows in all types of buildings were large and regularly placed on a grid; this was partly to minimize window tax, which was in force throughout the period in Great Britain. Some windows were subsequently bricked-in. Their height increasingly varied between the floors, and they increasingly began below waist-height in the main rooms, making a small balcony desirable. Before this the internal plan and function of the rooms can generally not be deduced from the outside. To open these large windows the sash window, already developed by the 1670s, became very widespread. Corridor plans became universal inside larger houses.

Internal courtyards became more rare, except beside the stables, and the functional parts of the building were placed at the sides, or in separate buildings nearby hidden by trees. The views to and from the front and rear of the main block were concentrated on, with the side approaches usually much less important. The roof was typically invisible from the ground, though domes were sometimes visible in grander buildings. The roofline was generally clear of ornament except for a balustrade or the top of a pediment. Columns or pilasters, often topped by a pediment, were popular for ornament inside and out, and other ornament was generally geometrical or plant-based, rather than using the human figure. 
Inside ornament was far more generous, and could sometimes be overwhelming. The chimneypiece continued to be the usual main focus of rooms, and was now given a classical treatment, and increasingly topped by a painting or a mirror. Plasterwork ceilings, carved wood, and bold schemes of wallpaint formed a backdrop to increasingly rich collections of furniture, paintings, porcelain, mirrors, and objets d&#x27;art of all kinds. Wood-panelling, very common since about 1500, fell from favour around the mid-century, and wallpaper included very expensive imports from China.

Smaller houses in the country, such as vicarages, were simple regular blocks with visible raked roofs, and a central doorway, often the only ornamented area. Similar houses, often referred to as &quot;villas&quot; became common around the fringes of the larger cities, especially London, and detached houses in towns remained common, though only the very rich could afford them in central London.

In towns even most better-off people lived in terraced houses, which typically opened straight onto the street, often with a few steps up to the door. There was often an open space, protected by iron railings, dropping down to the basement level, with a discreet entrance down steps off the street for servants and deliveries; this is known as the &quot;area&quot;. This meant that the ground floor front was now removed and protected from the street and encouraged the main reception rooms to move there from the floor above. Often, when a new street or set of streets was developed, the road and pavements were raised up, and the gardens or yards behind the houses remained at a lower level, usually representing the original one.

Town terraced houses for all social classes remained resolutely tall and narrow, each dwelling occupying the whole height of the building. This contrasted with well-off continental dwellings, which had already begun to be formed of wide apartments occupying only one or two floors of a building; such arrangements were only typical in England when housing groups of batchelors, as in Oxbridge colleges, the lawyers in the Inns of Court or the Albany after it was converted in 1802. In the period in question, only in Edinburgh were working-class purpose-built tenements common, though lodgers were common in other cities. A curving crescent, often looking out at gardens or a park, was popular for terraces where space allowed. In early and central schemes of development, plots were sold and built on individually, though there was often an attempt to enforce some uniformity, but as development reached further out schemes were increasingly built as a uniform scheme and then sold.

The late Georgian period saw the birth of the semi-detached house, planned systematically, as a suburban compromise between the terraced houses of the city and the detached &quot;villas&quot; further out, where land was cheaper. There had been occasional examples in town centres going back to medieval times. Most early suburban examples are large, and in what are now the outer fringes of Central London, but were then in areas being built up for the first time. Blackheath, Chalk Farm and St John&#x27;s Wood are among the areas contesting being the original home of the semi. Sir John Summerson gave primacy to the Eyre Estate of St John&#x27;s Wood. A plan for this exists dated 1794, where &quot;the whole development consists of &quot;pairs of semi-detached houses&quot;, So far as I know, this is the first recorded scheme of the kind&quot;. In fact the French Wars put an end to this scheme, but when the development was finally built it retained the semi-detached form, &quot;a revolution of striking significance and far-reaching effect&quot;.

===Churches===
Until the Church Building Act 1818, the period saw relatively few churches built in Britain, which was already well-supplied, although in the later years of the period the demand for Non-conformist and Roman Catholic places of worship greatly increased. Anglican churches that were built were designed internally to allow maximum audibility, and visibility, for preaching, so the main nave was generally wider and shorter than in medieval plans, and often there were no side-aisles. Galleries were common in new churches. Especially in country parishes, the external appearance generally retained the familiar signifiers of a Gothic church, with a tower or spire, a large west front with one or more doors, and very large windows along the nave, but all with any ornament drawn from the classical vocabulary. Where funds permitted, a classical temple portico with columns and a pediment might be used at the west front. Interior decoration was generally chaste; however, walls often became lined with plaques and monuments to the more prosperous members of the congregation.

In the colonies new churches were certainly required, and generally repeated similar formulae. British Non-conformist churches were often more classical in mood, and tended not to feel the need for a tower or steeple.

The archetypal Georgian church is St Martin-in-the-Fields in London (1720), by Gibbs, who boldly added to the classical temple façade at the west end a large steeple on top of a tower, set back slightly from the main frontage. This formula shocked purists and foreigners, but became accepted and was very widely emulated, at home and in the colonies, for example at St Andrew&#x27;s Church, Chennai in India. And in Dublin, the extremely similar St. George&#x27;s Church, Dublin.

The 1818 Act allocated some public money for new churches required to reflect changes in population, and a commission to allocate it. Building of Commissioners&#x27; churches gathered pace in the 1820s, and continued until the 1850s. The early churches, falling into the Georgian period, show a high proportion of Gothic Revival buildings, along with the classically inspired.

===Public buildings===
Public buildings generally varied between the extremes of plain boxes with grid windows and Italian Late Renaissance palaces, depending on budget. Somerset House in London, designed by Sir William Chambers in 1776 for government offices, was as magnificent as any country house, though never quite finished, as funds ran out. Barracks and other less prestigious buildings could be as functional as the mills and factories that were growing increasingly large by the end of the period. But as the period came to an end many commercial projects were becoming sufficiently large, and well-funded, to become &quot;architectural in intention&quot;, rather than having their design left to the lesser class of &quot;surveyors&quot;.

==Colonial Georgian architecture==
Georgian architecture was widely disseminated in the English colonies during the Georgian era. American buildings of the Georgian period were very often constructed of wood with clapboards; even columns were made of timber, framed up, and turned on an oversized lathe. At the start of the period the difficulties of obtaining and transporting brick or stone made them a common alternative only in the larger cities, or where they were obtainable locally. Dartmouth College, Harvard University and the College of William and Mary offer leading examples of Georgian architecture in the Americas.

Unlike the Baroque style that it replaced, which was mostly used for palaces and churches, and had little representation in the British colonies, simpler Georgian styles were widely used by the upper and middle classes. Perhaps the best remaining house is the pristine Hammond-Harwood House (1774) in Annapolis, Maryland, designed by the colonial architect William Buckland and modelled on the Villa Pisani at Montagnana, Italy as depicted in Andrea Palladio&#x27;s &quot;I quattro libri dell&#x27;architettura&quot; (&quot;The Four Books of Architecture&quot;).

After independence, in the former American colonies, Federal-style architecture represented the equivalent of Regency architecture, with which it had much in common.

In Canada, the United Empire Loyalists embraced Georgian architecture as a sign of their fealty to Britain, and the Georgian style was dominant in the country for most of the first half of the 19th century. The Grange, for example, is a Georgian manor built in Toronto in 1817. In Montreal, English-born architect John Ostell worked on a significant number of remarkable constructions in the Georgian style such as the Old Montreal Custom House and the Grand séminaire de Montréal.

In Australia, the Old Colonial Georgian residential and non-residential styles were developed in the period from .

==Post-Georgian developments==
After about 1840, Georgian conventions were slowly abandoned as a number of revival styles, including Gothic Revival, that had originated in the Georgian period, developed and contested in Victorian architecture, and in the case of Gothic became better researched, and closer to their originals. Neoclassical architecture remained popular, and was the opponent of Gothic in the Battle of the Styles of the early Victorian period. In the United States the Federalist Style contained many elements of Georgian style, but incorporated revolutionary symbols.

In the early decades of the twentieth century when there was a growing nostalgia for its sense of order, the style was revived and adapted and in the United States came to be known as the Colonial Revival. The revived Georgian style that emerged in Britain during the same period is usually referred to as Neo-Georgian; the work of Edwin Lutyens and Vincent Harris includes some examples. The British town of Welwyn Garden City, established in the 1920s, is an example of &quot;pastiche&quot; or Neo-Georgian development of the early 20th century in Britain. Versions of the Neo-Georgian style were commonly used in Britain for certain types of urban architecture until the late 1950s, Bradshaw Gass &amp; Hope&#x27;s Police Headquarters in Salford of 1958 being a good example. Architects such as Raymond Erith, and Donald McMorran were among the few architects who continued the neo-Georgian style into the 1960s. Both in the United States and Britain, the Georgian style is still employed by architects like Quinlan Terry, Julian Bicknell, Ben Pentreath, Robert Adam Architects, and Fairfax and Sammons for private residences. A debased form in commercial housing developments, especially in the suburbs, is known in the UK as mock-Georgian.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* Golden ratio
* Jamaican Georgian architecture
* Canning, Liverpool
* Clifton, Bristol
* Georgian Dublin
* Grainger Town, Newcastle upon Tyne
* New Town, Edinburgh, an 18th- and 19th-century development that contains some of the largest surviving examples of Georgian-style architecture and layout.
* Newtown Pery, Limerick
* The Georgian Group

==Notes==
==References==
*Fletcher, Banister and Fletcher, Banister, &quot;A History of Architecture&quot;, 1901 edn., Batsford
*Esher, Lionel, &quot;The Glory of the English House&quot;, 1991, Barrie and Jenkins, 
*Jenkins, Simon (1999), &quot;England&#x27;s Thousand Best Churches&quot;, 1999, Allen Lane, 
*Jenkins, Simon (2003), &quot;England&#x27;s Thousand Best Houses&quot;, 2003, Allen Lane, 
*Musson, Jeremy, &quot;How to Read a Country House&quot;, 2005, Ebury Press, 
*Pevsner, Nikolaus. &quot;The Englishness of English Art&quot;, Penguin, 1964 edn.
*Sir John Summerson, &quot;Georgian London&quot; (1945), 1988 revised edition, Barrie &amp; Jenkins, . (Also see revised edition, edited by Howard Colvin, 2003)

==Further reading==

* Howard Colvin, &quot;A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects&quot;, 3rd ed., 1995.
* John Cornforth, &quot;Early Georgian Interiors&quot; (Paul Mellon Centre), 2005.
* James Stevens Curl, &quot;Georgian Architecture&quot;.
* Christopher Hussey, &quot;Early Georgian Houses&quot;, &quot;Mid-Georgian Houses&quot;, &quot;Late Georgian Houses&quot;. Reissued in paperback, Antique Collectors Club, 1986.
* Frank Jenkins, &quot;Architect and Patron&quot;, 1961.
* Barrington Kaye, &quot;The Development of the Architectural Profession in Britain&quot;, 1960.
* McAlester, Virginia &amp; Lee, &quot;A Field Guide to American Houses&quot;, 1996. .
* Sir John Summerson, &quot;Architecture in Britain&quot; (series: &quot;Pelican History of Art&quot;). Reissued in paperback 1970.
* Richard Sammons, &quot;The Anatomy of the Georgian Room&quot;. Period Homes, March 2006.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="0" end="21" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="48" end="74" title="English-speaking countries" label="English-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q32880" start="89" end="108" title="architectural style" label="architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="174" end="190" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="British monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="198" end="214" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="216" end="224" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="226" end="235" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="237" end="247" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="253" end="262" title="George IV" label="George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="379" end="388" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="390" end="394" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509345" start="413" end="419" title="Georgian Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="425" end="431" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="456" end="460" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="465" end="472" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148367" start="545" end="574" title="Colonial Revival architecture" label="Colonial Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="625" end="650" title="Georgian architecture" label="Neo-Georgian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="678" end="707" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="1135" end="1157" title="classical architecture" label="classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q331273" start="1161" end="1167" title="Ancient Greek architecture" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="1172" end="1176" title="Roman architecture" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="1192" end="1216" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q930314" start="1500" end="1523" title="vernacular architecture" label="vernacular architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="1878" end="1884" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q309905" start="2128" end="2137" title="John Nash (architect)" label="John Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="2299" end="2313" title="Gothic Revival" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="2381" end="2413" title="Classical order" label="Classical orders of architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q695829" start="2584" end="2602" title="property developer" label="property developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="2627" end="2641" title="terraced house" label="terraced house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026833" start="2748" end="2764" title="Garden square" label="square of garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3108" end="3114" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="3116" end="3125" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509345" start="3127" end="3133" title="Georgian Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="3135" end="3154" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="3159" end="3166" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="3674" end="3680" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q85742771" start="3729" end="3741" title="pattern book" label="pattern book"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="3769" end="3778" title="engraving" label="engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010724" start="3810" end="3827" title="William Halfpenny" label="William Halfpenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q930314" start="4293" end="4317" title="Vernacular architecture" label="architectural vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="4371" end="4380" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787044" start="4382" end="4390" title="Architectural designer" label="designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q811122" start="4392" end="4399" title="construction worker" label="builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="4401" end="4410" title="carpenter" label="carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q272999" start="4412" end="4417" title="masonry" label="mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284879" start="4422" end="4431" title="plasterer" label="plasterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="4451" end="4459" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574110" start="4496" end="4511" title="English Baroque" label="English Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="4519" end="4535" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q333398" start="4541" end="4554" title="John Vanbrugh" label="John Vanbrugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q534286" start="4556" end="4569" title="Thomas Archer" label="Thomas Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q964066" start="4571" end="4585" title="William Talman (architect)" label="William Talman"/>
<link wikidata="Q366674" start="4591" end="4609" title="Nicholas Hawksmoor" label="Nicholas Hawksmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352355" start="4724" end="4735" title="James Gibbs" label="James Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="4830" end="4834" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="4906" end="4915" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q254245" start="4970" end="4984" title="Colen Campbell" label="Colen Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q254245" start="5023" end="5044" title="Vitruvius Britannicus" label="Vitruvius Britannicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q555723" start="5064" end="5101" title="Richard Boyle, 3rd Earl of Burlington" label="Richard Boyle, 3rd Earl of Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q445433" start="5118" end="5130" title="William Kent" label="William Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909904" start="5132" end="5142" title="Isaac Ware" label="Isaac Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526292" start="5144" end="5159" title="Henry Flitcroft" label="Henry Flitcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="5168" end="5176" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q721253" start="5177" end="5190" title="Giacomo Leoni" label="Giacomo Leoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140884" start="5298" end="5309" title="James Paine (architect)" label="James Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938437" start="5311" end="5324" title="Robert Taylor (architect)" label="Robert Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389094" start="5330" end="5350" title="John Wood, the Elder" label="John Wood, the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="5365" end="5375" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783111" start="5505" end="5532" title="Hanover Square, Westminster" label="Hanover Square, Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="5570" end="5574" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="5838" end="5860" title="Palladian architecture" label="Palladian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="5893" end="5899" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q863679" start="5904" end="5915" title="Chinoiserie" label="Chinoiserie"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="5932" end="5954" title="English-speaking world" label="English-speaking world"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="5985" end="5991" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="6023" end="6035" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q312635" start="6099" end="6110" title="Robert Adam" label="Robert Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q455155" start="6129" end="6145" title="William Chambers (architect)" label="William Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350728" start="6147" end="6158" title="James Wyatt" label="James Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770335" start="6160" end="6184" title="George Dance the Younger" label="George Dance the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q179638" start="6186" end="6199" title="Henry Holland (architect)" label="Henry Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q549786" start="6208" end="6218" title="John Soane" label="John Soane"/>
<link wikidata="Q309905" start="6220" end="6229" title="John Nash (architect)" label="John Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931689" start="6304" end="6317" title="Regency architecture" label="Regency style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="6375" end="6401" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q676998" start="6517" end="6532" title="William Wilkins (architect)" label="William Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q983719" start="6537" end="6550" title="Robert Smirke (architect)" label="Robert Smirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="6565" end="6570" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q272999" start="6574" end="6579" title="Masonry" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="6638" end="6644" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328358" start="7010" end="7044" title="Richard Pennant, 1st Baron Penrhyn" label="Richard Pennant, 1st Baron Penrhyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478550" start="7072" end="7095" title="slate industry in Wales" label="slate industry in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="7233" end="7255" title="Palladian architecture" label="Palladian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="7266" end="7287" title="English country house" label="English country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q815421" start="7679" end="7691" title="piano nobile" label="piano nobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q958148" start="7701" end="7710" title="mezzanine" label="mezzanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q277760" start="8142" end="8151" title="gatehouse" label="gatehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q480310" start="8291" end="8301" title="window tax" label="window tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q170552" start="8539" end="8546" title="balcony" label="balcony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724263" start="8693" end="8704" title="sash window" label="sash window"/>
<link wikidata="Q240854" start="8762" end="8770" title="Hall" label="Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9245" end="9253" title="roofline" label="roofline"/>
<link wikidata="Q658386" start="9299" end="9309" title="balustrade" label="balustrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q190996" start="9326" end="9334" title="pediment" label="pediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q175112" start="9347" end="9355" title="pilaster" label="pilaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327778" start="9606" end="9618" title="chimneypiece" label="chimneypiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q572879" start="9758" end="9769" title="Plasterwork" label="Plasterwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="9899" end="9908" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075109" start="9923" end="9940" title="objets d&amp;#x27;art" label="objets d&amp;#x27;art"/>
<link wikidata="Q191529" start="10046" end="10055" title="wallpaper" label="wallpaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788508" start="10847" end="10863" title="Area (architecture)" label="&amp;quot;area&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839857" start="11142" end="11147" title="backyard" label="yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q642576" start="11617" end="11625" title="Oxbridge" label="Oxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q278697" start="11655" end="11668" title="Inns of Court" label="Inns of Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637274" start="11676" end="11682" title="Albany (London)" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="11750" end="11759" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078374" start="11793" end="11801" title="tenement" label="tenement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139659" start="11865" end="11873" title="Crescent (architecture)" label="crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419624" start="12264" end="12277" title="semi-detached" label="semi-detached"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="12314" end="12320" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q880861" start="12683" end="12693" title="Blackheath, London" label="Blackheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648511" start="12695" end="12705" title="Chalk Farm" label="Chalk Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153758" start="12710" end="12729" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Wood" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q552784" start="12802" end="12816" title="John Summerson" label="John Summerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152869" start="13299" end="13323" title="Church Building Act 1818" label="Church Building Act 1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="13472" end="13486" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Non-conformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="13651" end="13660" title="preaching" label="preaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="13674" end="13678" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335201" start="14618" end="14641" title="St Martin-in-the-Fields" label="St Martin-in-the-Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q189141" start="14950" end="14982" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Church, Chennai" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Church, Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588110" start="15030" end="15062" title="St. George&amp;#x27;s Church, Dublin" label="St. George&amp;#x27;s Church, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152869" start="15211" end="15237" title="Commissioners&amp;#x27; church" label="Commissioners&amp;#x27; church"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="15379" end="15393" title="Gothic Revival" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344889" start="15613" end="15627" title="Somerset House" label="Somerset House"/>
<link wikidata="Q455155" start="15651" end="15671" title="Sir William Chambers" label="Sir William Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="16310" end="16322" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="16684" end="16701" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="16703" end="16721" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="16730" end="16757" title="College of William and Mary" label="College of William and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="16835" end="16842" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126542" start="17093" end="17114" title="Hammond-Harwood House" label="Hammond-Harwood House"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="17125" end="17134" title="Annapolis" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="17136" end="17144" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006093" start="17181" end="17197" title="William Buckland (architect)" label="William Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705507" start="17218" end="17230" title="Villa Pisani (Montagnana)" label="Villa Pisani"/>
<link wikidata="Q34605" start="17234" end="17244" title="Montagnana" label="Montagnana"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="17246" end="17251" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177692" start="17267" end="17282" title="Andrea Palladio" label="Andrea Palladio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191646" start="17296" end="17334" title="I quattro libri dell&amp;#x27;architettura" label="I quattro libri dell&amp;#x27;architettura"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="17422" end="17439" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="American colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400086" start="17441" end="17467" title="Federal architecture" label="Federal-style architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="17558" end="17564" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829231" start="17570" end="17592" title="United Empire Loyalist" label="United Empire Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737530" start="17762" end="17772" title="The Grange (Toronto)" label="The Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="17816" end="17823" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="17836" end="17844" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182226" start="17869" end="17880" title="John Ostell" label="John Ostell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845849" start="17974" end="17999" title="Old Montreal Custom House" label="Old Montreal Custom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114833" start="18008" end="18035" title="Grand séminaire de Montréal" label="Grand séminaire de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="18041" end="18050" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18056" end="18089" title="Australian residential architectural styles#Old Colonial Georgian style" label="Old Colonial Georgian residential"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18094" end="18109" title="Australian non-residential architectural styles#Georgian" label="non-residential"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="18287" end="18301" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="18374" end="18396" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873019" start="18563" end="18583" title="Battle of the Styles" label="Battle of the Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148367" start="18929" end="18945" title="Colonial Revival architecture" label="Colonial Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="19073" end="19086" title="Edwin Lutyens" label="Edwin Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575925" start="19091" end="19105" title="Vincent Harris" label="Vincent Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19789" start="19150" end="19168" title="Welwyn Garden City" label="Welwyn Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128018" start="19219" end="19227" title="pastiche" label="pastiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955112" start="19427" end="19451" title="Bradshaw Gass &amp;amp; Hope" label="Bradshaw Gass &amp;amp; Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q47952" start="19482" end="19489" title="Salford" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930680" start="19539" end="19552" title="Raymond Erith" label="Raymond Erith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294862" start="19558" end="19573" title="Donald McMorran" label="Donald McMorran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342762" start="19752" end="19765" title="Quinlan Terry" label="Quinlan Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306984" start="19767" end="19782" title="Julian Bicknell" label="Julian Bicknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q106594882" start="19784" end="19797" title="Ben Pentreath" label="Ben Pentreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651014" start="19799" end="19821" title="ADAM Architecture" label="Robert Adam Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328872" start="19839" end="19846" title="Richard Sammons" label="Sammons"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="19940" end="19946" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="20015" end="20027" title="Golden ratio" label="Golden ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849402" start="20030" end="20060" title="Jamaican Georgian architecture" label="Jamaican Georgian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032674" start="20063" end="20081" title="Canning, Liverpool" label="Canning, Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376216" start="20084" end="20100" title="Clifton, Bristol" label="Clifton, Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509345" start="20103" end="20118" title="Georgian Dublin" label="Georgian Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485277" start="20121" end="20155" title="Grainger Town" label="Grainger Town, Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q590710" start="20158" end="20177" title="New Town, Edinburgh" label="New Town, Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020740" start="20315" end="20327" title="Newtown Pery, Limerick" label="Newtown Pery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777369" start="20340" end="20358" title="The Georgian Group" label="The Georgian Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855796" start="20386" end="20404" title="Banister Fletcher (senior)" label="Fletcher, Banister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634186" start="20409" end="20427" title="Banister Fletcher (junior)" label="Fletcher, Banister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555554" start="20489" end="20502" title="Lionel Brett, 4th Viscount Esher" label="Esher, Lionel"/>
<link wikidata="Q587339" start="20576" end="20590" title="Simon Jenkins" label="Jenkins, Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q587339" start="20670" end="20684" title="Simon Jenkins" label="Jenkins, Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181716" start="20762" end="20776" title="Jeremy Musson" label="Musson, Jeremy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="20840" end="20857" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Pevsner, Nikolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q552784" start="20927" end="20941" title="John Summerson" label="John Summerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919342" start="21062" end="21075" title="Howard Colvin" label="Howard Colvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112590" start="21340" end="21358" title="Christopher Hussey (historian)" label="Christopher Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328872" start="21891" end="21906" title="Richard Sammons" label="Richard Sammons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12926" wikidata="Q1778812" url="?curid=12926" title="Goshen, Indiana">
<text>Goshen ( ) is a city in and the county seat of Elkhart County, Indiana, United States. It is the smaller of the two principal cities of the Elkhart–Goshen Metropolitan Statistical Area, which in turn is part of the South Bend–Elkhart–Mishawaka Combined Statistical Area. It is located in the northern part of Indiana near the Michigan border, in a region known as Michiana. Goshen is located 10 miles southeast of Elkhart, 25 miles southeast of South Bend, 120 miles east of Chicago, and 150 miles north of Indianapolis. The population of Goshen was 34,517 at the 2020 census.

The city is known as a prominent recreational vehicle and accessories manufacturing center, the home of Goshen College, a small Mennonite liberal arts college, and the Elkhart County 4-H Fair, one of the largest county fairs in the United States.

==History==
Before the arrival of white colonists, the land that is today Goshen, Indiana, was populated by Native Americans, specifically the Miami people, the Peoria people, and Potawatomi peoples. These people inhabited this land for thousands of years. In 1830, the US Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, requiring all indigenous people to relocate west of the Mississippi River.

Goshen was platted in 1831. It was named after the Land of Goshen. The initial settlers consisted entirely of old stock &quot;Yankee&quot; immigrants, who were descended from the English Puritans who settled New England in the 1600s. The New England Yankee population that founded towns such as Goshen considered themselves the &quot;chosen people,&quot; and identified with the Israelites of the Old Testament and they thought of North America as their Canaan. They founded a large number of towns and counties across what is known as the Northern Tier of the upper midwest. It was in this context that Goshen was named.

The Yankee migration to Indiana was a result of several factors, one of which was the overpopulation of New England. The old-stock Yankee population had large families, often bearing up to ten children in one household. Most people were expected to have their own piece of land to farm, and due to the massive and nonstop population boom, land in New England became scarce as every son claimed his own farmstead. As a result, there was not enough land for every family to have a self-sustaining farm, and Yankee settlers began leaving New England for the Midwestern United States.

They were aided in this effort by the construction and completion of the Erie Canal which made traveling to the region much easier, causing an additional surge in migrants coming from New England. Added to this was the end of the Black Hawk War, which made the region much safer for white settlers to travel through and settle in. However, the Black Hawk War also forced the native people who called Goshen home for so long to leave. The 1833 Treaty of Chicago ultimately set the conditions that would force the Potawatomi in particular to leave the Midwest, Goshen included, in 1837. This forced exile is known today as the Potawatomi Trail of Death.

These settlers were primarily members of the Congregational Church, though due to the Second Great Awakening, many of them had converted to Methodism, and some had become Baptists before coming to what is now Indiana. The Congregational Church has subsequently gone through many divisions, and some factions, including those in Goshen, are now known as the Church of Christ and the United Church of Christ. When the New Englanders arrived in what is now Elkhart County there was nothing but a dense virgin forest and wild prairie. They laid out farms, constructed roads, erected government buildings, and established post routes.
On Palm Sunday, April 11, 1965, a large outbreak of tornadoes struck the Midwest. The most famous pair of tornadoes devastated the Midway Trailer Park (now inside the city limits of Goshen), and the Sunnyside Housing Addition in Dunlap, Indiana. Another, smaller F4 tornado also struck neighborhoods on the southeast side of Goshen on the same day. Statewide, 137 Hoosiers died in the storms—55 of them in Elkhart County. Days later, President Lyndon B. Johnson visited the Dunlap site.

The Goshen Historic District, added in 1983 to the National Register of Historic Places is bounded by Pike, RR, Cottage, Plymouth, Main, Purl, the Canal, and Second Sts. with the Elkhart County Courthouse at its center.

In April 2006, Goshen was the site of an immigration march. Officials estimated that from 2,000 to 3,000 people marched from Linway Plaza to the County Courthouse.

Goshen has been called a &quot;sundown town&quot;, and African Americans were allegedly prevented from living in, or entering, the town, under threat of violence. However, there was never a city ordinance or official policy to enforce such a restriction. Nevertheless, in March 2015, the city issued a formal apology for racial discrimination in the past. A documentary made at Goshen College, &quot;Goshen: A Sundown Town&#x27;s Transformation,&quot; tells the story of why Goshen has been called a sundown town.

The Elkhart County Courthouse, Fort Wayne Street Bridge, Goshen Carnegie Public Library, Goshen Historic District, William N. Violett House, and Violett-Martin House and Gardens are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

==Geography==
Goshen is located at . The Elkhart River winds its way through the city and through a dam on the south side making the Goshen Dam Pond. Rock Run Creek also runs through town. The city is divided east–west by Main Street and north–south by Lincoln Avenue.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.

=== Environmental leadership ===
In February 2018, the Elkhart River flooded as a result of heavy rain and snowmelt. The river rose to a record 13.2 feet, damaging more than 300 structures and prompting evacuations. City government has responded to the increase in severe weather such as flooding, hail, and heavy rains with measures including stormwater management, and &quot;an initiative to grow the town&#x27;s tree canopy by 45%.&quot; Goshen completed 92 solar projects in 2019. Goshen outranked Phoenix, Sacramento, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Denver with its 2019 production of 116 watts of solar power per capita.

===Climate===
==Demographics==

===2020 census===
===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 31,719 people, 11,344 households, and 7,580 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 12,631 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 78.2% White, 2.6% African American, 0.5% Native American, 1.2% Asian, 14.8% from other races, and 2.7% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 28.1% of the population.

There were 11,344 households, of which 36.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.4% were married couples living together, 13.1% had a female householder with no husband present, 6.3% had a male householder with no wife present, and 33.2% were non-families. 27.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.2% had someone who was 65 years of age or older living alone. The average household size was 2.67, and the average family size was 3.23.

The median age in the city was 32.4 years. 27.4% of residents were under 18; 11.3% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 26.1% were from 25 to 44; 20% were from 45 to 64, and 14.9% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.9% male and 51.1% female.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 29,383 people, 10,675 households, and 7,088 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 11,264 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 83.15% White, 1.53% Black or African American, 0.26% Native American, 1.10% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 12.00% from other races, and 1.94% from two or more races. 19.33% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 10,675 households, of which 32.6% had children under 18 living with them, 50.8% were married couples living together, 10.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.6% were non-families. 27.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61, and the average family size was 3.14.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 25.9% under 18, 12.9% from 18 to 24, 30.0% from 25 to 44, 17.6% from 45 to 64, and 13.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.6 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 97.7 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $39,383, and the median income for a family was $46,877. Males had a median income of $32,159 versus $23,290 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,899. About 6.0% of families and 9.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.8% of those under age 18 and 5.3% of those aged 65 or over.

==Economy==
Industry in Goshen centers around the automotive and recreational vehicle business. There are automotive component manufacturers such as Benteler; firms that build custom bodies onto chassis such as Supreme, Independent Protection, and Showhauler Trucks. RV manufacturing companies include Dutchmen, Forest River, and Keystone.

==Government==
The government consists of a mayor, a clerk-treasurer, a city council, and a youth advisor. The mayor and clerk are elected in a citywide vote. The city council consists of seven members. Five are elected from individual districts. Two are elected at large. The youth advisor position was added in 2016 and is elected by the students of Goshen High School.

Gina Leichty, a member of the Democratic Party, is the first woman to become Mayor of Goshen in its 192-year history. Leichty became Mayor following the resignation of former mayor Jeremy Stutsman. Stutsman left the mayorship to be CEO of a local nonprofit housing agency, LaCasa.

==Education==
Goshen Community Schools serves the portion of the city in Elkhart Township. This system consists of six elementary schools, Goshen Intermediate School, Goshen Junior High School, and Goshen High School.

In 2012, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked Goshen High School as the 12th best high school in Indiana and the top 6% of high schools in the country.

Small parts of the city of Goshen are covered by several other school districts, including Middlebury Community Schools, Concord Community Schools, and WaNee Community Schools.

Additionally, Goshen is served by Bethany Christian Schools, a private Christian school for grades 4–12.

Goshen College, located on the south side of town, has an enrollment of approximately 773, with 37% male and 63% female. Tuition and fees for the 2024–2025 year were $38,890.

The town has a free lending library, the Goshen Public Library.

==Transportation==

===Airports===
Goshen Municipal Airport is a public-use airport located about 3.5 miles southeast of downtown Goshen. The Goshen Board of Aviation Commissioners owns the airport.

The closest airports with regularly scheduled commercial service are South Bend International Airport (about away) and Fort Wayne International Airport (about away). O&#x27;Hare International Airport in Chicago is about away.

===Bus===
The Interurban Trolley bus connects Goshen to the nearby city of Elkhart and the unincorporated town of Dunlap via Concord and Elkhart-Goshen routes. The routes pass at Elkhart&#x27;s Amtrak station, allowing passengers to connect to the &quot;Capitol Limited&quot; and &quot;Lake Shore Limited&quot; trains. Riders can also transfer to the North Pointe and Bittersweet/Mishawaka routes. The former allows riders to connect to Elkhart&#x27;s Greyhound bus station, while the later connects the riders to the city of Mishawaka and town of Osceola. The Bittersweet/Mishawaka route also allows them to transfer to TRANSPO Route 9 to connect to destinations throughout the South Bend-Goshen metropolitan region and the South Shore Line&#x27;s South Bend International Airport station.

==Recreation==

Goshen has seven parks and has a few different greenways and trails winding through the city, one of which runs along the old Mill Race and hydraulic canal, which was once used to power an old hydroelectric power plant. Plans were drawn up in 2005 call for the plant to be reopened and redevelopment to begin along the canal.

The Pumpkinvine Nature Trail runs from Goshen to Middlebury and Shipshewana, along the former Pumpkin Vine Railroad. The trail starts northeast of Goshen at Abshire Park. It is one of the recreational highlights of Goshen. Along with the Maple City Greenway and the Millrace trail, they provide many miles of easily accessible trails for walking, running, and biking.

The Elkhart County Fairgrounds are also located in the city, where the Elkhart County 4-H Fair is held in late July. It is the largest county fair in Indiana and one of the largest 4-H County Fairs in the United States.

The Goshen Air Show is also an annual event that takes place at the Goshen Municipal Airport.

In 2007, Downtown Goshen, Inc., a public-private partnership formed from the merger of Face of the City and the Downtown Action Team, started a First Fridays program. Occurring year round, First Fridays happens on the first Friday of each month with stores open until 9, music and other entertainment, and other events occurring within Goshen&#x27;s downtown district.

One favorite pastime of Goshen residents is driving cars.

==Culture==
The south side Wal-Mart is rumored to be the first Wal-Mart in the United States to provide a covered stable for its frequent Amish customers. The Amish built the stable with lumber and other supplies donated by Wal-Mart.

&quot;Lonesome Jim&quot; (2005) which was written by former resident James Strouse, directed by Steve Buscemi and starred Liv Tyler and Casey Affleck, was shot in Goshen.

==Notable people==
=== Mayors of Goshen ===
===Politicians===
* John Baker, U.S. Representative from Indiana (1832–1915)
* Ebenezer M. Chamberlain, U.S. Representative from Indiana (1805–1861)
* Joseph Hutton Defrees, U.S. Representative from Indiana (1812–1885)
* Charles W. Miller, Indiana Attorney General, mayor of Goshen
* Joseph Mitchell, Justice of the Indiana Supreme Court, third mayor of Goshen

===Entertainment===
* James Carew, silent film actor (1876–1938)
* Howard Hawks, film director (1896–1977)
* Kenneth Hawks, film director (1898–1930)
* Philip Proctor, comedian and actor, Firesign Theatre (b. 1940)
* Raymond L. Schrock, screenwriter (1892–1950)
* Tim Showalter, musician (Strand of Oaks)
* James C. Strouse, screenwriter
* Jordon Hodges, actor
* Lotus, band (formed at Goshen College, 1998)

===Sports===
* Shek Borkowski, coach of Haiti national soccer team
* Rick Mirer, quarterback in the NFL
* Patricia Roy, AAGPBL player and IHSAA commissioner
* Doug Weaver, college football player and head coach
* Justin Yoder, soap box racer

===Other===
* Frederick A. Herring, physician and botanist (1812–1908)
* Ida Shepard Oldroyd, conchologist and curator (1856–1940)
* Lois Gunden, a Righteous Among the Nations (1915–2005)
* Kate Bolduan, CNN anchor
* Andrew Tate, social media influencer

==Sister cities==
Goshen has two sister cities as designated by Sister Cities International.
* Bexbach, Saarland, Germany
* Emmeloord, Flevoland, Netherlands

==See also==
* List of sundown towns in the United States

==References==
==External links==

* Official website
* Goshen Chamber of Commerce
* Goshen on citydata.com – collection of statistics and graphs of Goshen demographics.
* Pumpkinvine Nature Trail</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1778812" start="0" end="6" title="Goshen, Indiana" label="Goshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="32" end="43" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q24645" start="47" end="70" title="Elkhart County, Indiana" label="Elkhart County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985090" start="244" end="269" title="Combined Statistical Area" label="Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="326" end="334" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769502" start="364" end="372" title="Michiana" label="Michiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008706" start="414" end="421" title="Elkhart, Indiana" label="Elkhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q486877" start="445" end="455" title="South Bend, Indiana" label="South Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="507" end="519" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="564" end="575" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q746448" start="611" end="631" title="recreational vehicle" label="recreational vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538540" start="682" end="696" title="Goshen College" label="Goshen College"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="706" end="715" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="716" end="736" title="liberal arts college" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364227" start="746" end="769" title="Elkhart County 4-H Fair" label="Elkhart County 4-H Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q956264" start="969" end="981" title="Miami people" label="Miami people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518090" start="987" end="1000" title="Peoria people" label="Peoria people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="1006" end="1016" title="Potawatomi" label="Potawatomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q786008" start="1119" end="1137" title="Indian Removal Act" label="Indian Removal Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q831939" start="1226" end="1230" title="plat" label="plat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261081" start="1266" end="1280" title="Land of Goshen" label="Land of Goshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q692062" start="1341" end="1347" title="Yankee" label="Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="1402" end="1410" title="Puritans" label="Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="1453" end="1464" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q692062" start="1465" end="1471" title="Yankee" label="Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="1612" end="1625" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="1669" end="1675" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059077" start="1755" end="1768" title="Northern Tier (United States)" label="Northern Tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="2393" end="2417" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="2493" end="2503" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q879980" start="2650" end="2664" title="Black Hawk War" label="Black Hawk War"/>
<link wikidata="Q87256769" start="2858" end="2880" title="1833 Treaty of Chicago" label="1833 Treaty of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q373781" start="3045" end="3070" title="Potawatomi Trail of Death" label="Potawatomi Trail of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="3118" end="3139" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q285667" start="3159" end="3181" title="Second Great Awakening" label="Second Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="3213" end="3222" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="3244" end="3252" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q10452632" start="3430" end="3446" title="Church of Christ" label="Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="3455" end="3478" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240286" start="3737" end="3764" title="1965 Palm Sunday tornado outbreak" label="large outbreak of tornadoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="4147" end="4164" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298871" start="4608" end="4620" title="sundown town" label="sundown town"/>
<link wikidata="Q22034010" start="5096" end="5121" title="Elkhart County Courthouse" label="Elkhart County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q22034044" start="5123" end="5147" title="Fort Wayne Street Bridge" label="Fort Wayne Street Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q22034084" start="5149" end="5179" title="Goshen Carnegie Public Library" label="Goshen Carnegie Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022628" start="5181" end="5205" title="Goshen Historic District (Goshen, Indiana)" label="Goshen Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017290" start="5207" end="5231" title="William N. Violett House" label="William N. Violett House"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017286" start="5237" end="5269" title="Violett-Martin House and Gardens" label="Violett-Martin House and Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="5288" end="5324" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364237" start="5368" end="5381" title="Elkhart River" label="Elkhart River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5614" end="5641" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752906" start="5959" end="5985" title="Climate change in Indiana" label="increase in severe weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421263" start="6050" end="6071" title="Stormwater" label="stormwater management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="6121" end="6132" title="Canopy (biology)" label="tree canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12069557" start="6309" end="6320" title="Solar power in the United States" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="8782" end="8795" title="median income" label="median income"/>
<link wikidata="Q746448" start="9216" end="9236" title="recreational vehicle" label="recreational vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405028" start="9257" end="9277" title="automotive component" label="automotive component"/>
<link wikidata="Q818228" start="9300" end="9308" title="Benteler International" label="Benteler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469093" start="9463" end="9475" title="Forest River (company)" label="Forest River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587268" start="9844" end="9862" title="Goshen High School (Indiana)" label="Goshen High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="9895" end="9911" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10161" end="10185" title="Goshen Community Schools" label="Goshen Community Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587268" start="10345" end="10363" title="Goshen High School (Indiana)" label="Goshen High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10621" end="10649" title="Middlebury Community Schools" label="Middlebury Community Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q28147952" start="10651" end="10676" title="Concord Community Schools (Indiana)" label="Concord Community Schools"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10682" end="10705" title="WaNee Community Schools" label="WaNee Community Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897727" start="10742" end="10767" title="Bethany Christian Schools" label="Bethany Christian Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="10771" end="10778" title="private school" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q867738" start="10779" end="10795" title="Christian school" label="Christian school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538540" start="10814" end="10828" title="Goshen College" label="Goshen College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587274" start="11090" end="11114" title="Goshen Municipal Airport" label="Goshen Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566309" start="11324" end="11356" title="South Bend International Airport" label="South Bend International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472295" start="11374" end="11406" title="Fort Wayne International Airport" label="Fort Wayne International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q213717" start="11421" end="11454" title="O&amp;#x27;Hare International Airport" label="O&amp;#x27;Hare International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057241" start="11496" end="11514" title="Interurban Trolley" label="Interurban Trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008706" start="11557" end="11564" title="Elkhart, Indiana" label="Elkhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364223" start="11676" end="11690" title="Elkhart (Amtrak station)" label="Amtrak station"/>
<link wikidata="Q756629" start="11736" end="11751" title="Capitol Limited (Amtrak train)" label="Capitol Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q608268" start="11768" end="11786" title="Lake Shore Limited" label="Lake Shore Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q990691" start="12008" end="12017" title="Mishawaka" label="Mishawaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286753" start="12030" end="12037" title="Osceola, Indiana" label="Osceola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566310" start="12103" end="12110" title="South Bend TRANSPO" label="TRANSPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q31313" start="12207" end="12223" title="South Shore Line (NICTD)" label="South Shore Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566309" start="12231" end="12263" title="South Bend International Airport" label="South Bend International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566297" start="12264" end="12271" title="South Bend Airport (NICTD)" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="12483" end="12508" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="13758" end="13766" title="Wal-Mart" label="Wal-Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="13869" end="13874" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755153" start="13972" end="13984" title="Lonesome Jim" label="Lonesome Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q104061" start="14062" end="14075" title="Steve Buscemi" label="Steve Buscemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q168763" start="14088" end="14097" title="Liv Tyler" label="Liv Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q270730" start="14102" end="14115" title="Casey Affleck" label="Casey Affleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247703" start="14202" end="14212" title="John Baker (Indiana politician)" label="John Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="14214" end="14233" title="U.S. Representative" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278660" start="14261" end="14284" title="Ebenezer M. Chamberlain" label="Ebenezer M. Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394758" start="14333" end="14354" title="Joseph Hutton Defrees" label="Joseph Hutton Defrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q112701115" start="14403" end="14420" title="Charles W. Miller" label="Charles W. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023060" start="14422" end="14446" title="Indiana Attorney General" label="Indiana Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950770" start="14466" end="14481" title="Joseph Mitchell (Indiana judge)" label="Joseph Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644915" start="14498" end="14519" title="Indiana Supreme Court" label="Indiana Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131012" start="14566" end="14577" title="James Carew" label="James Carew"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581" start="14611" end="14623" title="Howard Hawks" label="Howard Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390193" start="14653" end="14666" title="Kenneth Hawks" label="Kenneth Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379068" start="14696" end="14710" title="Philip Proctor" label="Philip Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520884" start="14732" end="14748" title="Firesign Theatre" label="Firesign Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420964" start="14761" end="14779" title="Raymond L. Schrock" label="Raymond L. Schrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403243" start="14808" end="14821" title="Strand of Oaks" label="Tim Showalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806481" start="14851" end="14867" title="James C. Strouse" label="James C. Strouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277524" start="14884" end="14897" title="Jordon Hodges" label="Jordon Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685090" start="14907" end="14912" title="Lotus (American band)" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538540" start="14930" end="14944" title="Goshen College" label="Goshen College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493195" start="14968" end="14982" title="Shek Borkowski" label="Shek Borkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="15008" end="15014" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q914311" start="15022" end="15032" title="Rick Mirer" label="Rick Mirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="15034" end="15045" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="15053" end="15056" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q41657178" start="15059" end="15071" title="Patricia Roy" label="Patricia Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052634" start="15073" end="15079" title="AAGPBL" label="AAGPBL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023224" start="15091" end="15096" title="Indiana High School Athletic Association" label="IHSAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300995" start="15112" end="15123" title="Doug Weaver" label="Doug Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="15125" end="15141" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q11979597" start="15166" end="15178" title="Justin Yoder" label="Justin Yoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q655882" start="15180" end="15188" title="gravity racer" label="soap box"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15210" end="15230" title=":de:Friedrich Arnold Herring" label="Frederick A. Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="15232" end="15241" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="15246" end="15254" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664806" start="15269" end="15288" title="Ida Shepard Oldroyd" label="Ida Shepard Oldroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q862072" start="15290" end="15302" title="conchology" label="conchologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709985" start="15329" end="15340" title="Lois Gunden" label="Lois Gunden"/>
<link wikidata="Q112197" start="15344" end="15371" title="Righteous Among the Nations" label="Righteous Among the Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375381" start="15386" end="15398" title="Kate Bolduan" label="Kate Bolduan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="15400" end="15403" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637166" start="15413" end="15424" title="Andrew Tate" label="Andrew Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="15484" end="15497" title="sister cities" label="sister cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639784" start="15515" end="15542" title="Sister Cities International" label="Sister Cities International"/>
<link wikidata="Q504022" start="15546" end="15553" title="Bexbach" label="Bexbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201" start="15555" end="15563" title="Saarland" label="Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60705" start="15575" end="15584" title="Emmeloord" label="Emmeloord"/>
<link wikidata="Q707" start="15586" end="15595" title="Flevoland" label="Flevoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130251383" start="15625" end="15667" title="List of sundown towns in the United States" label="List of sundown towns in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12929" wikidata="Q192860" url="?curid=12929" title="Gallipoli">
<text>The Gallipoli peninsula (; ; ) is located in the southern part of East Thrace, the European part of Turkey, with the Aegean Sea to the west and the Dardanelles strait to the east.

Gallipoli is the Italian form of the Greek name (), meaning &#x27;beautiful city&#x27;, the original name of the modern town of Gelibolu. In antiquity, the peninsula was known as the Thracian Chersonese (; ).

The peninsula runs in a south-westerly direction into the Aegean Sea, between the Dardanelles (formerly known as the Hellespont), and the Gulf of Saros (formerly the bay of Melas). In antiquity, it was protected by the Long Wall, a defensive structure built across the narrowest part of the peninsula near the ancient city of Agora. The isthmus traversed by the wall was only 36 stadia in breadth or about , but the length of the peninsula from this wall to its southern extremity, Cape Mastusia, was 420 stadia or about .

==History==

===Antiquity and Middle Ages===

In ancient times, the Gallipoli Peninsula was known as the Thracian Chersonese (from Greek , &#x27;peninsula&#x27;) to the Greeks and later the Romans. It was the location of several prominent towns, including Cardia, Pactya, Callipolis (Gallipoli), Alopeconnesus (), Sestos, Madytos, and Elaeus. The peninsula was renowned for its wheat. It also benefited from its strategic importance on the main route between Europe and Asia, as well as from its control of the shipping route from Crimea. The city of Sestos was the main crossing-point on the Hellespont.

According to Herodotus, the Thracian tribe of Dolonci () (or &#x27;barbarians&#x27; according to Cornelius Nepos) held possession of the peninsula before Greek colonizers arrived. Then, settlers from Ancient Greece, mainly of Ionian and Aeolian stock, founded about 12 cities on the peninsula in the 7th century BC. The Athenian statesman Miltiades the Elder founded a major Athenian colony there around 560 BC. He took authority over the entire peninsula, augmenting its defences against incursions from the mainland. It eventually passed to his nephew, the more famous Miltiades the Younger, about 524 BC. The peninsula was abandoned to the Persians in 493 BC after the beginning of the Greco-Persian Wars (499–478 BC).

The Persians were eventually expelled, after which the peninsula was for a time ruled by Athens, which enrolled it into the Delian League in 478 BC. The Athenians established a number of cleruchies on the Thracian Chersonese and sent an additional 1,000 settlers around 448 BC. Sparta gained control after the decisive Battle of Aegospotami in 404 BC, but the peninsula subsequently reverted to the Athenians. During the 4th century BC, the Thracian Chersonese became the focus of a bitter territorial dispute between Athens and Macedon, whose king Philip II sought its possession. It was eventually ceded to Philip in 338 BC.

After the death of Philip&#x27;s son Alexander the Great in 323 BC, the Thracian Chersonese became the object of contention among Alexander&#x27;s successors. Lysimachus established his capital Lysimachia here. In 278 BC, Celtic tribes from Galatia in Asia Minor settled in the area. In 196 BC, the Seleucid king Antiochus III seized the peninsula. This alarmed the Greeks and prompted them to seek the aid of the Romans, who conquered the Thracian Chersonese, which they gave to their ally Eumenes II of Pergamon in 188 BC. At the extinction of the Attalid dynasty in 133 BC it passed again to the Romans, who from 129 BC administered it in the Roman province of Asia. It was subsequently made a state-owned territory () and during the reign of the emperor Augustus it was imperial property.
The Thracian Chersonese was part of the Eastern Roman Empire from its foundation in 395 AD. In 443 AD, Attila the Hun invaded the Gallipoli Peninsula during one of the last stages of his grand campaign that year. He captured both Callipolis and Sestus. Aside from a brief period from 1204 to 1235, when it was controlled by the Republic of Venice, the Byzantine Empire ruled the territory until 1356. During the night between 1 and 2 March 1354, a strong earthquake destroyed the city of Gallipoli and its city walls, weakening its defenses.

===Ottoman era===
====Ottoman conquest====
Within a month after the devastating 1354 earthquake the Ottomans besieged and captured the town of Gallipoli, making it the first Ottoman stronghold in Europe and the staging area for Ottoman expansion across the Balkans. The Savoyard Crusade recaptured Gallipoli for Byzantium in 1366, but the beleaguered Byzantines were forced to hand it back in September 1376. The Greeks living there were allowed to continue their everyday activities. In the 19th century, Gallipoli (, ) was a district () in the Vilayet of Adrianople, with about thirty thousand inhabitants: comprising Greeks, Turks, Armenians and Jews.

====Crimean War (1853–1856)====

Gallipoli became a major encampment for British and French forces in 1854 during the Crimean War, and the harbour was also a stopping-off point between the western Mediterranean and Istanbul (formerly Constantinople).

In March 1854 British and French engineers constructed an line of defence to protect the peninsula from a possible Russian attack and secure control of the route to the Mediterranean Sea.

====First Balkan War (1912–1913)====
During the First Balkan War, the 1913 Battle of Bulair and several minor skirmishes took place where the Ottoman army fought in the Greek villages near Gallipoli&quot;. The Report of the International Commission on the Balkan Wars mention destruction and massacres in the area by the Ottoman army against Greek and Bulgarian population.

The Ottoman Government, under the pretext that a village was within the firing line, ordered its evacuation within three hours. The residents abandoned everything they possessed, left their village and went to Gallipoli. Seven of the Greek villagers who stayed two minutes later than the three-hour limit allowed for the evacuation were shot by the soldiers. After the end of the Balkan War the exiles were allowed to return. But as the Government allowed only the Turks to rebuild their houses and furnish them, the exiled Greeks were compelled to remain in Gallipoli.

====World War I: Gallipoli Campaign (1914–1918)====


During World War I (1914–1918), French, British, and allied forces (Australian, New Zealand, Newfoundland, Irish and Indian) fought the Gallipoli campaign (1915–1916) in and near the peninsula, seeking to secure a sea route to relieve their eastern ally, Russia. The Ottomans set up defensive fortifications along the peninsula and contained the invading forces.

In early 1915, attempting to seize a strategic advantage in World War I by capturing the Bosporus Strait at Istanbul (formerly Constantinople), the British authorised an attack on the peninsula by French, British, and British Empire forces. The first Australian troops landed at ANZAC Cove early in the morning of 25 April 1915. After eight months of heavy fighting the last Allied soldiers withdrew by 9 January 1916.

The campaign, one of the greatest Ottoman victories during the war, is considered by historians as a humiliating Allied failure. Turks regard it as a defining moment in their nation&#x27;s history and national identity, contributing to the establishment of the Republic of Turkey eight years later under President Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, who first rose to prominence as a commander at Gallipoli.

The Ottoman Empire instituted the Gallipoli Star as a military decoration in 1915 and awarded it throughout the rest of World War I.

The campaign was the first major military action of Australia and New Zealand (or ANZACs) as independent dominions, setting a foundation for Australian and New Zealand military history, and contributing to their developing national identities. The date of the landing, 25 April, is known as &quot;ANZAC Day&quot;. It remains the most significant commemoration of military casualties and &quot;returned soldiers&quot; in Australia and New Zealand.

On the Allied side, one of the promoters of the expedition was Britain&#x27;s First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, whose bullish optimism caused damage to his reputation that took years to repair.

Prior to the Allied landings in April 1915, the Ottoman Empire deported Greek residents from Gallipoli and the surrounding region and from the islands in the sea of Marmara, to the interior where they were at the mercy of hostile Turks. The Greeks had little time to pack and the Ottoman authorities permitted them to take only some bedding and the rest was handed over to the Government. The Turks then plundered the houses and properties. A testimony of a deportee described how the deportees were forced onto crowded steamers, standing-room only, then on disembarking, men of military age were removed (for forced labour in the labour battalions of the Ottoman army). The rest were &quot;scattered… among the farms like ownerless cattle.&quot;

The Metropolitan bishop of Gallipoli wrote on 17 July 1915 that the extermination of the Christian refugees was methodical. He also mentions that &quot;The Turks, like beasts of prey, immediately plundered all the Christians&#x27; property and carried it off. The inhabitants and refugees of my district are entirely without shelter, awaiting to be sent no one knows where ...&quot;. Many Greeks died from hunger and there were frequent cases of rape of women and young girls, as well as their forced conversion to Islam. In some cases, Muhacirs appeared in the villages even before the Greek inhabitants were deported and stoned the houses and threatened the inhabitants that they would kill them if they did not leave.

====Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922)====
Greek troops occupied Gallipoli on 4 August 1920 during the Greco-Turkish War of 1919–22, considered part of the Turkish War of Independence. After the Armistice of Mudros of 30 October 1918 it became a Greek prefecture centre as &quot;Kallipolis&quot;. However, Greece was forced to cede Eastern Thrace after the Armistice of Mudanya of October 1922. Gallipoli was briefly handed over to British troops on 20 October 1922, but finally returned to Turkish rule on 26 November 1922.

In 1920, after the defeat of the Russian White army of General Pyotr Wrangel, a significant number of émigré soldiers and their families evacuated to Gallipoli from the Crimean Peninsula. From there, many went to European countries, such as Yugoslavia, where they found refuge.

There are now many cemeteries and war memorials on the Gallipoli peninsula.

===Turkish Republic===
Between 1923 and 1926 Gallipoli became the centre of Gelibolu Province, comprising the districts of Gelibolu, Eceabat, Keşan and Şarköy. After the dissolution of the province, it became a district centre in Çanakkale Province.

==Notable people==
*Ahmed Bican (1398 – ), author
*Piri Reis (1465/70 – 1553), admiral, geographer and cartographer
*Mustafa Âlî (1541–1600), Ottoman historian, politician and writer
*Sofia Vembo (1910–1978), Greek singer and actress

==References==
==External links==
*Gallipoli Peninsula Historical National Park photos with info
*Tours of Gallipoli 
*Australia&#x27;s role in the Gallipoli Campaign – Website (ABC and Dept of Veteran&#x27;s Affairs)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="4" end="13" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="14" end="23" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q171323" start="66" end="77" title="East Thrace" label="East Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="83" end="89" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="100" end="106" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="117" end="127" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="148" end="159" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="218" end="223" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q216907" start="309" end="317" title="Gelibolu" label="Gelibolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="322" end="331" title="classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="364" end="383" title="Gallipoli" label="Thracian Chersonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="473" end="484" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474092" start="529" end="542" title="Gulf of Saros" label="Gulf of Saros"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="575" end="584" title="ancient Greece" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q21956444" start="610" end="619" title="Long Wall (Thracian Chersonese)" label="Long Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717842" start="717" end="722" title="Agora (Thrace)" label="Agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q93267" start="728" end="735" title="isthmus" label="isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="770" end="776" title="stadia (length)" label="stadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="1020" end="1039" title="Thracian Chersonese" label="Thracian Chersonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1046" end="1051" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q965581" start="1171" end="1177" title="Cardia (Thrace)" label="Cardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123145" start="1179" end="1185" title="Pactya" label="Pactya"/>
<link wikidata="Q593737" start="1229" end="1235" title="Sestos" label="Sestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728889" start="1237" end="1244" title="Madytos (Thrace)" label="Madytos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234913" start="1250" end="1256" title="Elaeus" label="Elaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="1293" end="1298" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1374" end="1380" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="1385" end="1389" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="1446" end="1452" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="1508" end="1518" title="Hellespont" label="Hellespont"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="1534" end="1543" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289475" start="1567" end="1574" title="Dolonci" label="Dolonci"/>
<link wikidata="Q109594" start="1618" end="1633" title="Cornelius Nepos" label="Cornelius Nepos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1721" end="1735" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="1747" end="1752" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q406336" start="1758" end="1765" title="Aeolians" label="Aeolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="1841" end="1849" title="Classical Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q963777" start="1860" end="1879" title="Miltiades the Elder" label="Miltiades the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q210350" start="2092" end="2113" title="Miltiades the Younger" label="Miltiades the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="2164" end="2172" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="2210" end="2228" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Greco-Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="2368" end="2381" title="Delian League" label="Delian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774212" start="2431" end="2441" title="cleruchy" label="cleruchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="2522" end="2528" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q866862" start="2563" end="2584" title="Battle of Aegospotami" label="Battle of Aegospotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="2773" end="2780" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="2793" end="2802" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="2909" end="2928" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q201546" start="3002" end="3029" title="Diadochi" label="Alexander&amp;#x27;s successors"/>
<link wikidata="Q32133" start="3031" end="3041" title="Lysimachus" label="Lysimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q517690" start="3066" end="3076" title="Lysimachia (Thrace)" label="Lysimachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401464" start="3094" end="3107" title="List of ancient Celtic peoples and tribes" label="Celtic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26847" start="3113" end="3120" title="Galatia" label="Galatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="3171" end="3179" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365" start="3185" end="3198" title="Antiochus III the Great" label="Antiochus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="3286" end="3292" title="Roman Republic" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q270678" start="3363" end="3373" title="Eumenes II" label="Eumenes II"/>
<link wikidata="Q18986" start="3377" end="3385" title="Pergamon" label="Pergamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022162" start="3422" end="3437" title="Attalid dynasty" label="Attalid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="3518" end="3532" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q210718" start="3536" end="3540" title="Asia (Roman province)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="3630" end="3638" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3705" end="3725" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="3768" end="3782" title="Attila the Hun" label="Attila the Hun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="3993" end="4011" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4017" end="4033" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4308" end="4316" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q916266" start="4317" end="4338" title="Fall of Gallipoli" label="besieged and captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="4465" end="4472" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925721" start="4478" end="4494" title="Savoyard Crusade" label="Savoyard Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="4621" end="4627" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311980" start="4754" end="4775" title="Vilayet of Adrianople" label="Vilayet of Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198413" start="4922" end="4932" title="military camp" label="encampment"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="4982" end="4993" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="5079" end="5087" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="5098" end="5112" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="5285" end="5302" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="5353" end="5369" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q842670" start="5380" end="5396" title="Battle of Bulair" label="Battle of Bulair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567533" start="5515" end="5572" title="Report of the International Commission on the Balkan Wars" label="Report of the International Commission on the Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q216907" start="5890" end="5899" title="Gelibolu" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="6441" end="6459" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="6560" end="6566" title="Imperial Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="6758" end="6773" title="Bosporus Strait" label="Bosporus Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="6777" end="6785" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="6796" end="6810" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q433110" start="6948" end="6958" title="ANZAC Cove" label="ANZAC Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7123" end="7130" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="7202" end="7208" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="7218" end="7223" title="Turkey" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="7403" end="7424" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313499" start="7519" end="7533" title="Gallipoli Star (Ottoman Empire)" label="Gallipoli Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="7671" end="7680" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="7685" end="7696" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q433119" start="7701" end="7707" title="Australian and New Zealand Army Corps" label="ANZACs"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="7724" end="7732" title="dominion" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q295859" start="7916" end="7925" title="Anzac Day" label="ANZAC Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q193891" start="8006" end="8035" title="veteran" label="&amp;quot;returned soldiers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="8145" end="8172" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="8174" end="8191" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467740" start="8348" end="8363" title="Ottoman Greeks" label="Greek residents"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="8434" end="8448" title="sea of Marmara" label="sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109967" start="8907" end="8924" title="labour Battalions (Ottoman Empire)" label="labour battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q189854" start="9028" end="9047" title="Metropolitan bishop" label="Metropolitan bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="9539" end="9544" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393212" start="9561" end="9569" title="Muhacirs" label="Muhacirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="9844" end="9872" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)" label="Greco-Turkish War of 1919–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="9897" end="9924" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q328499" start="9936" end="9955" title="Armistice of Mudros" label="Armistice of Mudros"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541445" start="10098" end="10118" title="Armistice of Mudanya" label="Armistice of Mudanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="10300" end="10318" title="White movement" label="Russian White army"/>
<link wikidata="Q108260" start="10330" end="10343" title="Pyotr Wrangel" label="Pyotr Wrangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="10369" end="10384" title="White émigré" label="émigré soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="10436" end="10453" title="Crimean Peninsula" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="10508" end="10518" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434301" start="10565" end="10593" title="list of war cemeteries and memorials on the Gallipoli Peninsula" label="cemeteries and war memorials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023153" start="10756" end="10763" title="Eceabat" label="Eceabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q951495" start="10765" end="10770" title="Keşan" label="Keşan"/>
<link wikidata="Q388544" start="10775" end="10781" title="Şarköy" label="Şarköy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47813" start="10853" end="10871" title="Çanakkale Province" label="Çanakkale Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585036" start="10894" end="10905" title="Ahmed Bican" label="Ahmed Bican"/>
<link wikidata="Q217915" start="10925" end="10934" title="Piri Reis" label="Piri Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646767" start="10991" end="11002" title="Mustafa Âlî" label="Mustafa Âlî"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976974" start="11058" end="11069" title="Sofia Vembo" label="Sofia Vembo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12935" wikidata="Q188990" url="?curid=12935" title="Gram stain">
<text>Gram stain (Gram staining or Gram&#x27;s method), is a method of staining used to classify bacterial species into two large groups: gram-positive bacteria and gram-negative bacteria. It may also be used to diagnose a fungal infection. The name comes from the Danish bacteriologist Hans Christian Gram, who developed the technique in 1884.

Gram staining differentiates bacteria by the chemical and physical properties of their cell walls. Gram-positive cells have a thick layer of peptidoglycan in the cell wall that retains the primary stain, crystal violet. Gram-negative cells have a thinner peptidoglycan layer that allows the crystal violet to wash out on addition of ethanol. They are stained pink or red by the counterstain, commonly safranin or fuchsine. Lugol&#x27;s iodine solution is always added after addition of crystal violet to form a stable complex with crystal violet that strengthen the bonds of the stain with the cell wall.

Gram staining is almost always the first step in the identification of a bacterial group. While Gram staining is a valuable diagnostic tool in both clinical and research settings, not all bacteria can be definitively classified by this technique. This gives rise to &quot;gram-variable&quot; and &quot;gram-indeterminate&quot; groups.

== History ==
The method is named after its inventor, the Danish scientist Hans Christian Gram (1853–1938), who developed the technique while working with Carl Friedländer in the morgue of the city hospital in Berlin in 1884. Gram devised his technique not for the purpose of distinguishing one type of bacterium from another but to make bacteria more visible in stained sections of lung tissue. Gram noticed that some bacterial cells possessed noticeable resistance to decolorization. Based on these observations, Gram developed the initial gram staining procedure, initially making use of Ehrlich&#x27;s aniline-gentian violet, Lugol&#x27;s iodine, absolute alcohol for decolorization, and Bismarck brown for counterstain. He published his method in 1884, and included in his short report the observation that the typhus bacillus did not retain the stain. Gram did not initially make the distinction between Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria using his procedure.

== Uses ==

Gram staining is a bacteriological laboratory technique used to differentiate bacterial species into two large groups (gram-positive and gram-negative) based on the physical properties of their cell walls. Gram staining can also be used to diagnose a fungal infection. Gram staining is not used to classify archaea, since these microorganisms yield widely varying responses that do not follow their phylogenetic groups.

Some organisms are gram-variable (meaning they may stain either negative or positive); some are not stained with either dye used in the Gram technique and are not seen.

=== Medical ===

Gram stains are performed on body fluid or biopsy when infection is suspected. Gram stains yield results much more quickly than culturing, and are especially important when infection would make an important difference in the patient&#x27;s treatment and prognosis; examples are cerebrospinal fluid for meningitis and synovial fluid for septic arthritis.

== Staining mechanism ==

Gram-positive bacteria have a thick mesh-like cell wall made of peptidoglycan (50–90% of cell envelope), and as a result are stained purple by crystal violet, whereas gram-negative bacteria have a thinner layer (10% of cell envelope), so do not retain the purple stain and are counter-stained pink by safranin. There are four basic steps of the Gram stain:
# Applying a primary stain (crystal violet) to a heat-fixed smear of a bacterial culture. Heat fixation kills some bacteria but is mostly used to affix the bacteria to the slide so that they do not rinse out during the staining procedure.
# The addition of iodine, which binds to crystal violet and traps it in the cell
# Rapid decolorization with ethanol or acetone
# Counterstaining with safranin. Carbol fuchsin is sometimes substituted for safranin since it more intensely stains anaerobic bacteria, but it is less commonly used as a counterstain.

Crystal violet (CV) dissociates in aqueous solutions into and chloride () ions. These ions penetrate the cell wall of both gram-positive and gram-negative cells. The ion interacts with negatively charged components of bacterial cells and stains the cells purple.

Iodide ( or ) interacts with and forms large complexes of crystal violet and iodine (CV–I) within the inner and outer layers of the cell. Iodine is often referred to as a mordant, but is a trapping agent that prevents the removal of the CV–I complex and, therefore, colors the cell.

When a decolorizer such as alcohol or acetone is added, it interacts with the lipids of the cell membrane. A gram-negative cell loses its outer lipopolysaccharide membrane, and the inner peptidoglycan layer is left exposed. The CV–I complexes are washed from the gram-negative cell along with the outer membrane. In contrast, a gram-positive cell becomes dehydrated from an ethanol treatment. The large CV–I complexes become trapped within the gram-positive cell due to the multilayered nature of its peptidoglycan. The decolorization step is critical and must be timed correctly; the crystal violet stain is removed from both gram-positive and negative cells if the decolorizing agent is left on too long (a matter of seconds).

After decolorization, the gram-positive cell remains purple and the gram-negative cell loses its purple color. Counterstain, which is usually positively charged safranin or basic fuchsine, is applied last to give decolorized gram-negative bacteria a pink or red color. Both gram-positive bacteria and gram-negative bacteria pick up the counterstain. The counterstain, however, is unseen on gram-positive bacteria because of the darker crystal violet stain.

== Examples ==

=== Gram-positive bacteria ===
Gram-positive bacteria generally have a single membrane (&quot;monoderm&quot;) surrounded by a thick peptidoglycan.
This rule is followed by two phyla: Bacillota (except for the classes Mollicutes and Negativicutes) and the Actinomycetota. In contrast, members of the Chloroflexota (green non-sulfur bacteria) are monoderms but possess a thin or absent (class Dehalococcoidetes) peptidoglycan and can stain negative, positive or indeterminate; members of the Deinococcota stain positive but are diderms with a thick peptidoglycan.

The cell wall&#x27;s strength is enhanced by teichoic acids, glycopolymeric substances embedded within the peptidoglycan. Teichoic acids play multiple roles, such as generating the cell&#x27;s net negative charge, contributing to cell wall rigidity and shape maintenance, and aiding in cell division and resistance to various stressors, including heat and salt. Despite the density of the peptidoglycan layer, it remains relatively porous, allowing most substances to permeate. For larger nutrients, Gram-positive bacteria utilize exoenzymes, secreted extracellularly to break down macromolecules outside the cell.

Historically, the gram-positive forms made up the phylum Firmicutes, a name now used for the largest group. It includes many well-known genera such as &quot;Lactobacillus, Bacillus&quot;, &quot;Listeria&quot;, &quot;Staphylococcus&quot;, &quot;Streptococcus&quot;, &quot;Enterococcus&quot;, and &quot;Clostridium&quot;. It has also been expanded to include the Mollicutes, bacteria such as &quot;Mycoplasma and Thermoplasma&quot; that lack cell walls and so cannot be Gram-stained, but are derived from such forms.

Some bacteria have cell walls which are particularly adept at retaining stains. These will appear positive by Gram stain even though they are not closely related to other gram-positive bacteria. These are called acid-fast bacteria, and can only be differentiated from other gram-positive bacteria by special staining procedures.

=== Gram-negative bacteria ===
Gram-negative bacteria generally possess a thin layer of peptidoglycan between two membranes (&quot;diderm&quot;). Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is the most abundant antigen on the cell surface of most gram-negative bacteria, contributing up to 80% of the outer membrane of &quot;E. coli&quot; and &quot;Salmonella&quot;. These LPS molecules, consisting of the O-antigen or O-polysaccharide, core polysaccharide, and lipid A, serve multiple functions including contributing to the cell&#x27;s negative charge and protecting against certain chemicals. LPS&#x27;s role is critical in host-pathogen interactions, with the O-antigen eliciting an immune response and lipid A acting as an endotoxin.

Additionally, the outer membrane acts as a selective barrier, regulated by porins, transmembrane proteins forming pores that allow specific molecules to pass. The space between the cell membrane and the outer membrane, known as the periplasm, contains periplasmic enzymes for nutrient processing. A significant structural component linking the peptidoglycan layer and the outer membrane is Braun&#x27;s lipoprotein, which provides additional stability and strength to the bacterial cell wall.

Most bacterial phyla are gram-negative, including the cyanobacteria, green sulfur bacteria, and most Pseudomonadota (exceptions being some members of the Rickettsiales and the insect-endosymbionts of the Enterobacteriales).

=== Gram-variable and gram-indeterminate bacteria ===

Some bacteria, after staining with the Gram stain, yield a gram-variable pattern: a mix of pink and purple cells are seen. In cultures of &quot;Bacillus, Butyrivibrio&quot;, and &quot;Clostridium&quot;, a decrease in peptidoglycan thickness during growth coincides with an increase in the number of cells that stain gram-negative. In addition, in all bacteria stained using the Gram stain, the age of the culture may influence the results of the stain.

Gram-indeterminate bacteria do not respond predictably to Gram staining and, therefore, cannot be determined as either gram-positive or gram-negative. Examples include many species of &quot;Mycobacterium&quot;, including &quot;Mycobacterium bovis&quot;, &quot;Mycobacterium leprae&quot; and &quot;Mycobacterium tuberculosis&quot;, the latter two of which are the causative agents of leprosy and tuberculosis, respectively. Bacteria of the genus &quot;Mycoplasma&quot; lack a cell wall around their cell membranes, which means they do not stain by Gram&#x27;s method and are resistant to the antibiotics that target cell wall synthesis.

== Orthographic note ==
The term &quot;Gram staining&quot; is derived from the surname of Hans Christian Gram; the eponym (Gram) is therefore capitalized but not the common noun (stain) as is usual for scientific terms. The initial letters of &quot;gram-positive&quot; and &quot;gram-negative&quot;, which are eponymous adjectives, can be either capital &quot;G&quot; or lowercase &quot;g&quot;, depending on what style guide (if any) governs the document being written. Lowercase style is used by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other style regimens such as the AMA style. Dictionaries may use lowercase, uppercase, or both. Uppercase &quot;Gram-positive&quot; or &quot;Gram-negative&quot; usage is also common in many scientific journal articles and publications. When articles are submitted to journals, each journal may or may not apply house style to the postprint version. Preprint versions contain whichever style the author happened to use. Even style regimens that use lowercase for the adjectives &quot;gram-positive&quot; and &quot;gram-negative&quot; still typically use capital for &quot;Gram stain&quot;.

== See also ==
* Bacterial cell structure
* Ziehl–Neelsen stain

== References ==
== External links ==
* Gram staining technique video</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188990" start="0" end="10" title="Gram stain" label="Gram stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188990" start="12" end="25" title="Gram stain" label="Gram staining"/>
<link wikidata="Q188990" start="29" end="47" title="Gram stain" label="Gram&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332446" start="65" end="73" title="staining" label="staining"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="91" end="99" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="132" end="154" title="gram-positive bacteria" label="gram-positive bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="159" end="181" title="gram-negative bacteria" label="gram-negative bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q464067" start="217" end="233" title="fungal infection" label="fungal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q15816836" start="266" end="280" title="bacteriologist" label="bacteriologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q310005" start="281" end="300" title="Hans Christian Gram" label="Hans Christian Gram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="427" end="436" title="Cell wall#Bacterial cell walls" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="481" end="494" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q420705" start="544" end="558" title="crystal violet" label="crystal violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="673" end="680" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115375" start="718" end="730" title="counterstain" label="counterstain"/>
<link wikidata="Q413672" start="741" end="749" title="safranin" label="safranin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419167" start="753" end="761" title="fuchsine" label="fuchsine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409860" start="763" end="782" title="Lugol&amp;#x27;s iodine" label="Lugol&amp;#x27;s iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q128700" start="934" end="943" title="cell wall" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1340" end="1346" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q310005" start="1357" end="1376" title="Hans Christian Gram" label="Hans Christian Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q86698" start="1437" end="1453" title="Carl Friedländer" label="Carl Friedländer"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1492" end="1498" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="2098" end="2104" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753295" start="2105" end="2113" title="Bacillus (shape)" label="bacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q243748" start="2286" end="2301" title="bacteriology" label="bacteriological"/>
<link wikidata="Q483242" start="2302" end="2312" title="laboratory" label="laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="2345" end="2354" title="Bacterium" label="bacterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="2386" end="2399" title="gram-positive" label="gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="2404" end="2417" title="gram-negative" label="gram-negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q128700" start="2461" end="2470" title="cell wall" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q464067" start="2518" end="2534" title="fungal infection" label="fungal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="2574" end="2581" title="archaea" label="archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="2666" end="2685" title="Phylogenetics" label="phylogenetic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058795" start="2904" end="2914" title="body fluid" label="body fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q179991" start="2918" end="2924" title="biopsy" label="biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="2930" end="2939" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125312" start="3003" end="3012" title="microbiological culture" label="culturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="3153" end="3172" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="3177" end="3187" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25581" start="3192" end="3206" title="synovial fluid" label="synovial fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q924421" start="3211" end="3227" title="septic arthritis" label="septic arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="3320" end="3333" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q420705" start="3641" end="3655" title="gentian violet" label="crystal violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422013" start="3703" end="3716" title="Heat fixation" label="Heat fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="3870" end="3876" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="3961" end="3968" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="3972" end="3979" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115375" start="3982" end="3994" title="Counterstain" label="Counterstain"/>
<link wikidata="Q413672" start="4003" end="4011" title="safranin" label="safranin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493309" start="4013" end="4027" title="Carbol fuchsin" label="Carbol fuchsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420705" start="4166" end="4180" title="Crystal violet" label="Crystal violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5857145" start="4601" end="4608" title="mordant" label="mordant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25519942" start="6101" end="6110" title="Bacillota" label="Bacillota"/>
<link wikidata="Q131796" start="6135" end="6145" title="Mollicutes" label="Mollicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q623144" start="6150" end="6163" title="Negativicutes" label="Negativicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q62573436" start="6173" end="6187" title="Actinomycetota" label="Actinomycetota"/>
<link wikidata="Q21442539" start="6217" end="6230" title="Chloroflexota" label="Chloroflexota"/>
<link wikidata="Q62033604" start="6309" end="6326" title="Dehalococcoidetes" label="Dehalococcoidetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q88926185" start="6408" end="6420" title="Deinococcota" label="Deinococcota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840005" start="7097" end="7109" title="Bacterial taxonomy" label="Historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="7147" end="7153" title="phylum (biology)" label="phylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25519942" start="7154" end="7164" title="Bacillota" label="Firmicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212032" start="7254" end="7277" title="Bacillus" label="Lactobacillus, Bacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746209" start="7291" end="7299" title="Listeria" label="Listeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q199695" start="7313" end="7327" title="Staphylococcus" label="Staphylococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190161" start="7341" end="7354" title="Streptococcus" label="Streptococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q517258" start="7368" end="7380" title="Enterococcus" label="Enterococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q327663" start="7398" end="7409" title="Clostridium" label="Clostridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q210975" start="7493" end="7503" title="Mycoplasma" label="Mycoplasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278217" start="7825" end="7843" title="acid-fastness" label="acid-fast bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q198921" start="7913" end="7940" title="Ziehl–Neelsen stain" label="special staining procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="8089" end="8107" title="Lipopolysaccharide" label="Lipopolysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="8135" end="8142" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376866" start="9163" end="9178" title="bacterial phyla" label="bacterial phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="9212" end="9225" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962791" start="9227" end="9248" title="green sulfur bacteria" label="green sulfur bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962137" start="9259" end="9273" title="Pseudomonadota" label="Pseudomonadota"/>
<link wikidata="Q136644" start="9312" end="9325" title="Rickettsiales" label="Rickettsiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034931" start="9362" end="9379" title="Enterobacteriales" label="Enterobacteriales"/>
<link wikidata="Q194309" start="10082" end="10095" title="Mycobacterium" label="Mycobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q155891" start="10152" end="10172" title="Mycobacterium leprae" label="Mycobacterium leprae"/>
<link wikidata="Q130971" start="10189" end="10215" title="Mycobacterium tuberculosis" label="Mycobacterium tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210975" start="10343" end="10353" title="Mycoplasma" label="Mycoplasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q128700" start="10367" end="10376" title="cell wall" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="10390" end="10403" title="cell membrane" label="cell membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q310005" start="10619" end="10638" title="Hans Christian Gram" label="Hans Christian Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="10644" end="10650" title="eponym" label="eponym"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10839" end="10859" title="Eponym#Orthographic conventions" label="eponymous adjectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q198614" start="10943" end="10954" title="style guide" label="style guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="11034" end="11076" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652533" start="11114" end="11123" title="AMA style" label="AMA style"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="11271" end="11289" title="scientific journal" label="scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106255" start="11411" end="11420" title="postprint" label="postprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q580922" start="11430" end="11438" title="Preprint" label="Preprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293735" start="11688" end="11712" title="Bacterial cell structure" label="Bacterial cell structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q198921" start="11715" end="11734" title="Ziehl–Neelsen stain" label="Ziehl–Neelsen stain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12936" wikidata="Q857288" url="?curid=12936" title="Gram-positive bacteria">
<text>In bacteriology, Gram-positive bacteria are bacteria that give a positive result in the Gram stain test, which is traditionally used to quickly classify bacteria into two broad categories according to their type of cell wall.

The Gram stain is used by microbiologists to place bacteria into two main categories, Gram-positive (+) and Gram-negative (−). Gram-positive bacteria have a thick layer of peptidoglycan within the cell wall, and Gram-negative bacteria have a thin layer of peptidoglycan.

Gram-positive bacteria retain the crystal violet stain used in the test, resulting in a purple color when observed through an optical microscope. The thick layer of peptidoglycan in the bacterial cell wall retains the stain after it has been fixed in place by iodine. During the decolorization step, the decolorizer removes crystal violet from all other cells.

Conversely, gram-negative bacteria cannot retain the violet stain after the decolorization step; alcohol used in this stage degrades the outer membrane of gram-negative cells, making the cell wall more porous and incapable of retaining the crystal violet stain. Their peptidoglycan layer is much thinner and sandwiched between an inner cell membrane and a bacterial outer membrane, causing them to take up the counterstain (safranin or fuchsine) and appear red or pink.

Despite their thicker peptidoglycan layer, gram-positive bacteria are more receptive to certain cell wall–targeting antibiotics than gram-negative bacteria, due to the absence of the outer membrane.

== Characteristics ==
In general, the following characteristics are present in gram-positive bacteria:

# Cytoplasmic lipid membrane
# Thick peptidoglycan layer
# Teichoic acids and lipoids are present, forming lipoteichoic acids, which serve as chelating agents, and also for certain types of adherence.
# Peptidoglycan chains are cross-linked to form rigid cell walls by a bacterial enzyme -transpeptidase.
# A much smaller volume of periplasm than that in gram-negative bacteria.

Only some species have a capsule, usually consisting of polysaccharides. Only some species are flagellates, and those with flagella have just two basal body rings for support, in contrast to the four found in Gram-negative bacteria. Both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria commonly have a surface layer called an S-layer. In gram-positive bacteria, the S-layer is attached to the peptidoglycan layer. Gram-negative bacteria&#x27;s S-layer is attached directly to the outer membrane. Specific to gram-positive bacteria is the presence of teichoic acids in the cell wall. Some of these are lipoteichoic acids, which have a lipid component in the cell membrane that can assist in anchoring the peptidoglycan.

== Classification ==
Along with cell shape, Gram staining is a rapid method used to differentiate bacterial species. Such staining, together with growth requirement and antibiotic susceptibility testing, and other macroscopic and physiologic tests, forms a basis for practical classification and subdivision of the bacteria (e.g., see figure and pre-1990 versions of &quot;Bergey&#x27;s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology&quot;).

Historically, the kingdom Monera was divided into four divisions based primarily on Gram staining: Bacillota (positive in staining), Gracilicutes (negative in staining), Mollicutes (neutral in staining) and Mendocutes (variable in staining). Based on 16S ribosomal RNA phylogenetic studies of the late microbiologist Carl Woese and collaborators and colleagues at the University of Illinois, the monophyly of the gram-positive bacteria was challenged, with major implications for the therapeutic and general study of these organisms. Based on molecular studies of the 16S sequences, Woese recognised twelve bacterial phyla. Two of these were gram-positive and were divided on the proportion of the guanine and cytosine content in their DNA. The high G + C phylum was made up of the Actinobacteria, and the low G + C phylum contained the Firmicutes. The Actinomycetota include the &quot;Corynebacterium&quot;, &quot;Mycobacterium&quot;, &quot;Nocardia&quot; and &quot;Streptomyces&quot; genera. The (low G + C) Bacillota, have a 45–60% GC content, but this is lower than that of the Actinomycetota.

== Importance of the outer cell membrane in bacterial classification ==
Although bacteria are traditionally divided into two main groups, gram-positive and gram-negative, based on their Gram stain retention property, this classification system is ambiguous as it refers to three distinct aspects (staining result, envelope organization, taxonomic group), which do not necessarily coalesce for some bacterial species. The gram-positive and gram-negative staining response is also not a reliable characteristic as these two kinds of bacteria do not form phylogenetic coherent groups. However, although Gram staining response is an empirical criterion, its basis lies in the marked differences in the ultrastructure and chemical composition of the bacterial cell wall, marked by the absence or presence of an outer lipid membrane.

All gram-positive bacteria are bound by a single-unit lipid membrane, and, in general, they contain a thick layer (20–80 nm) of peptidoglycan responsible for retaining the Gram stain. A number of other bacteria—that are bound by a single membrane, but stain gram-negative due to either lack of the peptidoglycan layer, as in the mycoplasmas, or their inability to retain the Gram stain because of their cell wall composition—also show close relationship to the gram-positive bacteria. For the bacterial cells bound by a single cell membrane, the term &quot;monoderm bacteria&quot; has been proposed.

In contrast to gram-positive bacteria, all typical gram-negative bacteria are bound by a cytoplasmic membrane and an outer cell membrane; they contain only a thin layer of peptidoglycan (2–3 nm) between these membranes. The presence of inner and outer cell membranes defines a new compartment in these cells: the periplasmic space or the periplasmic compartment. These bacteria have been designated as diderm bacteria. The distinction between the monoderm and diderm bacteria is supported by conserved signature indels in a number of important proteins (viz. DnaK, GroEL). Of these two structurally distinct groups of bacteria, monoderms are indicated to be ancestral. Based upon a number of observations including that the gram-positive bacteria are the major producers of antibiotics and that, in general, gram-negative bacteria are resistant to them, it has been proposed that the outer cell membrane in gram-negative bacteria (diderms) has evolved as a protective mechanism against antibiotic selection pressure. Some bacteria, such as &quot;Deinococcus&quot;, which stain gram-positive due to the presence of a thick peptidoglycan layer and also possess an outer cell membrane are suggested as intermediates in the transition between monoderm (gram-positive) and diderm (gram-negative) bacteria. The diderm bacteria can also be further differentiated between simple diderms lacking lipopolysaccharide, the archetypical diderm bacteria where the outer cell membrane contains lipopolysaccharide, and the diderm bacteria where outer cell membrane is made up of mycolic acid.

=== Exceptions ===
In general, gram-positive bacteria are monoderms and have a single lipid bilayer whereas gram-negative bacteria are diderms and have two bilayers. Exceptions include:
* Some taxa lack peptidoglycan (such as the class Mollicutes, some members of the Rickettsiales, and the insect-endosymbionts of the Enterobacteriales) and are gram-indeterminate.
* The Deinococcota have gram-positive stains, although they are structurally similar to gram-negative bacteria with two layers.
* The Chloroflexota have a single layer, yet (with some exceptions) stain negative. Two related phyla to the Chloroflexi, the TM7 clade and the Ktedonobacteria, are also monoderms.

Some Bacillota species are not gram-positive. The class Negativicutes, which includes &quot;Selenomonas&quot;, are diderm and stain gram-negative. Additionally, a number of bacterial taxa (viz. Negativicutes, Fusobacteriota, Synergistota, and Elusimicrobiota) that are either part of the phylum Bacillota or branch in its proximity are found to possess a diderm cell structure. However, a conserved signature indel (CSI) in the HSP60 (GroEL) protein distinguishes all traditional phyla of gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonadota, Aquificota, Chlamydiota, Bacteroidota, Chlorobiota, &quot;Cyanobacteria&quot;, Fibrobacterota, Verrucomicrobiota, Planctomycetota, Spirochaetota, Acidobacteriota, etc.) from these other atypical diderm bacteria, as well as other phyla of monoderm bacteria (e.g., Actinomycetota, Bacillota, Thermotogota, Chloroflexota, etc.). The presence of this CSI in all sequenced species of conventional LPS (lipopolysaccharide)-containing gram-negative bacterial phyla provides evidence that these phyla of bacteria form a monophyletic clade and that no loss of the outer membrane from any species from this group has occurred.

== Pathogenicity ==

In the classical sense, six gram-positive genera are typically pathogenic in humans. Two of these, &quot;Streptococcus&quot; and &quot;Staphylococcus&quot;, are cocci (sphere-shaped). The remaining organisms are bacilli (rod-shaped) and can be subdivided based on their ability to form spores. The non-spore formers are &quot;Corynebacterium&quot; and &quot;Listeria&quot; (a coccobacillus), whereas &quot;Bacillus&quot; and &quot;Clostridium&quot; produce spores. The spore-forming bacteria can again be divided based on their respiration: &quot;Bacillus&quot; is a facultative anaerobe, while &quot;Clostridium&quot; is an obligate anaerobe. Also, &quot;Rathybacter&quot;, &quot;Leifsonia&quot;, and &quot;Clavibacter&quot; are three gram-positive genera that cause plant disease. Gram-positive bacteria are capable of causing serious and sometimes fatal infections in newborn infants. Novel species of clinically relevant gram-positive bacteria also include &quot;Catabacter hongkongensis&quot;, which is an emerging pathogen belonging to Bacillota.

==Bacterial transformation==
Transformation is one of three processes for horizontal gene transfer, in which exogenous genetic material passes from a donor bacterium to a recipient bacterium, the other two processes being conjugation (transfer of genetic material between two bacterial cells in direct contact) and transduction (injection of donor bacterial DNA by a bacteriophage virus into a recipient host bacterium). In transformation, the genetic material passes through the intervening medium, and uptake is completely dependent on the recipient bacterium.

As of 2014 about 80 species of bacteria were known to be capable of transformation, about evenly divided between gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria; the number might be an overestimate since several of the reports are supported by single papers. Transformation among gram-positive bacteria has been studied in medically important species such as &quot;Streptococcus pneumoniae&quot;, &quot;Streptococcus mutans&quot;, &quot;Staphylococcus aureus&quot; and &quot;Streptococcus sanguinis&quot; and in gram-positive soil bacteria &quot;Bacillus subtilis&quot; and &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot;.

== Orthographic note ==

The adjectives &quot;gram-positive&quot; and &quot;gram-negative&quot; derive from the surname of Hans Christian Gram; as eponymous adjectives, their initial letter &quot;G&quot; can be either a capital or lower-case, depending on which style guide (e.g., that of the CDC), if any, governs the document being written.

== References ==
== External links ==
* 3D structures of proteins associated with plasma membrane of gram-positive bacteria
* 3D structures of proteins associated with outer membrane of gram-positive bacteria</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q243748" start="3" end="15" title="bacteriology" label="bacteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="17" end="39" title="Gram-positive bacteria" label="Gram-positive bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="44" end="52" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188990" start="88" end="98" title="Gram stain" label="Gram stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q128700" start="215" end="224" title="cell wall" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="399" end="412" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q420705" start="533" end="547" title="crystal violet" label="crystal violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q912313" start="625" end="643" title="optical microscope" label="optical microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332446" start="717" end="722" title="Stain (biology)" label="stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="873" end="895" title="gram-negative bacteria" label="gram-negative bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="958" end="965" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="1191" end="1210" title="inner cell membrane" label="inner cell membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q258248" start="1217" end="1241" title="bacterial outer membrane" label="bacterial outer membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115375" start="1271" end="1283" title="counterstain" label="counterstain"/>
<link wikidata="Q413672" start="1285" end="1293" title="safranin" label="safranin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419167" start="1297" end="1305" title="fuchsine" label="fuchsine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1428" end="1437" title="cell wall#Bacterial cell walls" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="1448" end="1459" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="1673" end="1686" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q899834" start="1695" end="1709" title="Teichoic acids" label="Teichoic acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q781350" start="1743" end="1760" title="lipoteichoic acid" label="lipoteichoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="1778" end="1787" title="chelating" label="chelating"/>
<link wikidata="Q420272" start="1924" end="1939" title="DD-Transpeptidase" label="-transpeptidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198990" start="1968" end="1977" title="periplasm" label="periplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137328" start="2041" end="2048" title="Bacterial capsule" label="capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="2072" end="2086" title="polysaccharide" label="polysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q240433" start="2111" end="2121" title="flagellate" label="flagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="2139" end="2147" title="flagella" label="flagella"/>
<link wikidata="Q809753" start="2162" end="2172" title="basal body" label="basal body"/>
<link wikidata="Q418821" start="2335" end="2342" title="S-layer" label="S-layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q258248" start="2489" end="2503" title="Bacterial outer membrane" label="outer membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q899834" start="2559" end="2572" title="teichoic acid" label="teichoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2761" end="2771" title="Bacterial cell structure#Cell morphology" label="cell shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052569" start="3102" end="3149" title="Bergey&amp;#x27;s Manual" label="Bergey&amp;#x27;s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3159" end="3171" title="Bacterial taxonomy#History" label="Historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q97263158" start="3185" end="3191" title="Monera" label="Monera"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="3214" end="3223" title="Taxonomic rank" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q25519942" start="3258" end="3267" title="Bacillota" label="Bacillota"/>
<link wikidata="Q425684" start="3292" end="3304" title="Gracilicutes" label="Gracilicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131796" start="3329" end="3339" title="Mollicutes" label="Mollicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209205" start="3410" end="3427" title="16S ribosomal RNA" label="16S ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q310067" start="3476" end="3486" title="Carl Woese" label="Carl Woese"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="3527" end="3549" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="3555" end="3564" title="monophyly" label="monophyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="3702" end="3719" title="Molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376866" start="3766" end="3781" title="bacterial phyla" label="bacterial phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="3857" end="3864" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="3869" end="3877" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="3895" end="3898" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q62573436" start="3941" end="3955" title="Actinomycetota" label="Actinobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25519942" start="3996" end="4006" title="Bacillota" label="Firmicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q133976" start="4045" end="4060" title="Corynebacterium" label="Corynebacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q194309" start="4074" end="4087" title="Mycobacterium" label="Mycobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q135175" start="4101" end="4109" title="Nocardia" label="Nocardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144013" start="4126" end="4138" title="Streptomyces" label="Streptomyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q210975" start="5416" end="5426" title="mycoplasma" label="mycoplasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198990" start="6001" end="6018" title="periplasmic space" label="periplasmic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="6090" end="6105" title="diderm bacteria" label="diderm bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="6674" end="6684" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021315" start="6734" end="6745" title="Deinococcus" label="Deinococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q414506" start="7251" end="7263" title="mycolic acid" label="mycolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q423279" start="7352" end="7365" title="lipid bilayer" label="lipid bilayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131796" start="7502" end="7512" title="Mollicutes" label="Mollicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q136644" start="7534" end="7547" title="Rickettsiales" label="Rickettsiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034931" start="7585" end="7602" title="Enterobacteriales" label="Enterobacteriales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7612" end="7630" title="Gram stain#Gram-variable and gram-indeterminate bacteria" label="gram-indeterminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q88926185" start="7638" end="7650" title="Deinococcota" label="Deinococcota"/>
<link wikidata="Q21442539" start="7766" end="7779" title="Chloroflexota" label="Chloroflexota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031741" start="7886" end="7889" title="TM7" label="TM7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954750" start="8034" end="8045" title="Selenomonas" label="Selenomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q623144" start="8136" end="8149" title="Negativicutes" label="Negativicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21441825" start="8151" end="8165" title="Fusobacteriota" label="Fusobacteriota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12971472" start="8167" end="8179" title="Synergistota" label="Synergistota"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286677" start="8185" end="8200" title="Elusimicrobiota" label="Elusimicrobiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q24771589" start="8370" end="8375" title="HSP60" label="HSP60"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864994" start="8377" end="8382" title="GroEL" label="GroEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962137" start="8461" end="8475" title="Pseudomonadota" label="Pseudomonadota"/>
<link wikidata="Q21439067" start="8477" end="8487" title="Aquificota" label="Aquificota"/>
<link wikidata="Q20388896" start="8489" end="8500" title="Chlamydiota" label="Chlamydiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q9810870" start="8502" end="8514" title="Bacteroidota" label="Bacteroidota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962791" start="8516" end="8527" title="Chlorobiota" label="Chlorobiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="8535" end="8548" title="Cyanobacteria" label="Cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063165" start="8556" end="8570" title="Fibrobacterota" label="Fibrobacterota"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228461" start="8572" end="8589" title="Verrucomicrobiota" label="Verrucomicrobiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q18674593" start="8591" end="8606" title="Planctomycetota" label="Planctomycetota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12673555" start="8608" end="8621" title="Spirochaetota" label="Spirochaetota"/>
<link wikidata="Q73346630" start="8623" end="8638" title="Acidobacteriota" label="Acidobacteriota"/>
<link wikidata="Q62573436" start="8740" end="8754" title="Actinomycetota" label="Actinomycetota"/>
<link wikidata="Q25519942" start="8756" end="8765" title="Bacillota" label="Bacillota"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869797" start="8767" end="8779" title="Thermotogota" label="Thermotogota"/>
<link wikidata="Q21442539" start="8781" end="8794" title="Chloroflexota" label="Chloroflexota"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="8874" end="8892" title="lipopolysaccharide" label="lipopolysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190161" start="9221" end="9234" title="Streptococcus" label="Streptococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199695" start="9251" end="9265" title="Staphylococcus" label="Staphylococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753295" start="9277" end="9282" title="Coccus" label="cocci"/>
<link wikidata="Q149128" start="9328" end="9335" title="bacilli" label="bacilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="9402" end="9407" title="endospore" label="spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q133976" start="9442" end="9457" title="Corynebacterium" label="Corynebacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q746209" start="9474" end="9482" title="Listeria" label="Listeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q212032" start="9522" end="9530" title="Bacillus" label="Bacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q327663" start="9547" end="9558" title="Clostridium" label="Clostridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="9644" end="9655" title="Cellular respiration" label="respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="9683" end="9703" title="Facultative anaerobic organism" label="facultative anaerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915932" start="9741" end="9758" title="obligate anaerobe" label="obligate anaerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386039" start="9973" end="9983" title="Neonatal infection" label="infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q62878235" start="10083" end="10107" title="Catabacter hongkongensis" label="Catabacter hongkongensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25519942" start="10158" end="10167" title="Firmicutes" label="Bacillota"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="10199" end="10213" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="Transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="10244" end="10268" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273193" start="10392" end="10403" title="Bacterial conjugation" label="conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="10417" end="10433" title="Plasmid" label="genetic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q845870" start="10485" end="10497" title="Transduction (genetics)" label="transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="10537" end="10550" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="10865" end="10887" title="gram-negative bacteria" label="gram-negative bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q221179" start="11092" end="11116" title="Streptococcus pneumoniae" label="Streptococcus pneumoniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131452" start="11130" end="11150" title="Streptococcus mutans" label="Streptococcus mutans"/>
<link wikidata="Q188121" start="11164" end="11185" title="Staphylococcus aureus" label="Staphylococcus aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033849" start="11202" end="11225" title="Streptococcus sanguinis" label="Streptococcus sanguinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131238" start="11273" end="11290" title="Bacillus subtilis" label="Bacillus subtilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131307" start="11307" end="11322" title="Bacillus cereus" label="Bacillus cereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310005" start="11454" end="11473" title="Hans Christian Gram" label="Hans Christian Gram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11478" end="11498" title="Eponym#Orthographic conventions" label="eponymous adjectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q198614" start="11593" end="11604" title="style guide" label="style guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="11624" end="11627" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="CDC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12937" wikidata="Q632006" url="?curid=12937" title="Gram-negative bacteria">
<text>Gram-negative bacteria are bacteria that, unlike gram-positive bacteria, do not retain the crystal violet stain used in the Gram staining method of bacterial differentiation. Their defining characteristic is that their cell envelope consists of a thin peptidoglycan cell wall sandwiched between an inner (cytoplasmic) membrane and an outer membrane. These bacteria are found in all environments that support life on Earth.

Within this category, notable species include the model organism &quot;Escherichia coli&quot;, along with various pathogenic bacteria, such as &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot;, &quot;Chlamydia trachomatis&quot;, and &quot;Yersinia pestis&quot;. They pose significant challenges in the medical field due to their outer membrane, which acts as a protective barrier against numerous antibiotics (including penicillin), detergents that would normally damage the inner cell membrane, and the antimicrobial enzyme lysozyme produced by animals as part of their innate immune system. Furthermore, the outer leaflet of this membrane contains a complex lipopolysaccharide (LPS) whose lipid A component can trigger a toxic reaction when the bacteria are lysed by immune cells. This reaction may lead to septic shock, resulting in low blood pressure, respiratory failure, reduced oxygen delivery, and lactic acidosis.

Several classes of antibiotics have been developed to target gram-negative bacteria, including aminopenicillins, ureidopenicillins, cephalosporins, beta-lactam-betalactamase inhibitor combinations (such as piperacillin-tazobactam), folate antagonists, quinolones, and carbapenems. Many of these antibiotics also cover gram-positive bacteria. The antibiotics that specifically target gram-negative organisms include aminoglycosides, monobactams (such as aztreonam), and ciprofloxacin.

== Characteristics ==

Conventional gram-negative (LPS-diderm) bacteria display :
* An inner cell membrane is present (cytoplasmic)
* A thin peptidoglycan layer is present (this is much thicker in gram-positive bacteria)
* Has outer membrane containing lipopolysaccharides (LPS, which consists of lipid A, core polysaccharide, and O antigen) in its outer leaflet and phospholipids in the inner leaflet
* Porins exist in the outer membrane, which act like pores for particular molecules
* Between the outer membrane and the cytoplasmic membrane there is a space filled with a concentrated gel-like substance called periplasm
* The S-layer is directly attached to the outer membrane rather than to the peptidoglycan
* If present, flagella have four supporting rings instead of two
* Teichoic acids or lipoteichoic acids are absent
* Lipoproteins are attached to the polysaccharide backbone
* Some contain Braun&#x27;s lipoprotein, which serves as a link between the outer membrane and the peptidoglycan chain by a covalent bond
* Most, with few exceptions, do not form spores

However, the LPS-diderm group (corresponding to kingdom Pseudomonadati, formerly &#x27;Hydrobacteria&#x27;) is not the only type of bacteria that stain negative. &quot;Mycobacterium&quot; (or rather most of Mycobacteriales), which does not belong in the group, have independently evolved an outer cell membrane, with a cell wall made of mycolic acid. This gives it very different structure and features.

== Classification ==
Along with cell shape, Gram staining is a rapid diagnostic tool and once was used to group species at the subdivision of Bacteria.
Historically, the kingdom Monera was divided into four divisions based on Gram staining: Firmicutes (+), Gracillicutes (−), Mollicutes (0) and Mendocutes (var.).
Since 1987, the monophyly of the gram-negative bacteria has been disproven with molecular studies. However some authors, such as Cavalier-Smith still treat them as a monophyletic taxon (though not a clade; his definition of monophyly requires a single common ancestor but does not require holophyly, the property that all descendants be encompassed by the taxon) and refer to the group as a subkingdom &quot;Negibacteria&quot;.

Current knowledge divides the gram-negatives into two large groups and some straddlers. The more &quot;conventional&quot; Gram-negatives with an LPS outer membrane do share a common ancestor and are grouped in kingdom Pseudomonadati. The less conventional ones are, as mentioned above, the order Mycobacteriales, have a mycolic acid cell wall and an outer membrane. The kingdom and the order are each monophyletic (or rather, not holyphyletic), but the &quot;LPS-diderm&quot; and &quot;mycolic-diderm&quot; groups are not, because some bacteria in the kingdom and the order do not, in fact, stain gram negative. They will be discussed in the next section.

== Taxonomy ==


Bacteria are traditionally classified based on their Gram-staining response into the gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Having just one membrane, the gram-positive bacteria are also known as monoderm bacteria, while gram-negative bacteria, having two membranes, are also known as diderm bacteria. It was traditionally thought that the groups represent lineages, i.e., the extra membrane only evolved once, such that gram-negative bacteria are more closely related to one another than to any gram-positive bacteria. While this is often true, the classification system breaks down in some cases, with lineage groupings not matching the staining result. Thus, Gram staining cannot be reliably used to assess familial relationships of bacteria. Nevertheless, staining often gives reliable information about the composition of the cell membrane, distinguishing between the presence or absence of an outer lipid membrane.

Of these two structurally distinct groups of prokaryotic organisms, monoderm prokaryotes are thought to be ancestral. Based upon a number of different observations, including that the gram-positive bacteria are the most sensitive to antibiotics and that the gram-negative bacteria are, in general, resistant to antibiotics, it has been proposed that the outer cell membrane in gram-negative bacteria (diderms) evolved as a protective mechanism against antibiotic selection pressure. Some bacteria such as &quot;Deinococcus&quot;, which stain gram-positive due to the presence of a thick peptidoglycan layer, but also possess an outer cell membrane are suggested as intermediates in the transition between monoderm (gram-positive) and diderm (gram-negative) bacteria. 

The conventional LPS-&quot;diderm&quot; group of gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonadota, Aquificota, Chlamydiota, Bacteroidota, Chlorobiota, &quot;Cyanobacteria&quot;, Fibrobacterota, Verrucomicrobiota, Planctomycetota, Spirochaetota, Acidobacteriota) are uniquely identified by a few conserved signature indel (CSI) in the HSP60 (GroEL) protein. The presence of this CSI in all sequenced species of conventional lipopolysaccharide-containing gram-negative bacterial phyla provides evidence that these phyla of bacteria form a monophyletic clade and that no loss of the outer membrane from any species from this group has occurred. They have accordingly been assigned a kingdom Pseudomonadati (formerly &quot;Hydrobacteria&quot;).

The difficulty lies in the other taxa that also have a diderm structure.
* The first group is monophyletic but not holophyletic. It includes a number of taxa (including Negativicutes, Fusobacteriota, Synergistota, and Elusimicrobiota) that are either part of the phylum Bacillota (a monoderm group) or branches in its proximity. They lack the GroEL CSI signature, which is proof that they do not belong in the former group. Some members are likely monoderm, just with a very thin layer of LPS to not appear on the stain. Others have more convoluted structures.
* The second group are the clinically-relevant &quot;Mycobacterium&quot;, expanding to most of its encompassing order of Mycobacteriales. They do not have the CSI, and their cell wall is made of a different substance: mycolic acid.

=== Example species ===
The proteobacteria are a major superphylum of gram-negative bacteria, including &quot;E. coli&quot;, &quot;Salmonella&quot;, &quot;Shigella&quot;, and other Enterobacteriaceae, &quot;Pseudomonas&quot;, &quot;Moraxella&quot;, &quot;Helicobacter&quot;, &quot;Stenotrophomonas&quot;, &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot;, acetic acid bacteria, &quot;Legionella&quot; etc. Other notable groups of gram-negative bacteria include the cyanobacteria, spirochaetes, and green sulfur bacteria.

Medically-relevant gram-negative diplococci include the four types that cause a sexually transmitted disease (&quot;Neisseria gonorrhoeae&quot;), a meningitis (&quot;Neisseria meningitidis&quot;), and respiratory symptoms (&quot;Moraxella catarrhalis&quot;, A coccobacillus &quot;Haemophilus influenzae&quot; is another medically relevant coccal type.

Medically relevant gram-negative bacilli include a multitude of species. Some of them cause primarily respiratory problems (&quot;Klebsiella pneumoniae&quot;, &quot;Legionella pneumophila&quot;, &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot;), primarily urinary problems (&quot;Escherichia coli&quot;, &quot;Proteus mirabilis&quot;, &quot;Enterobacter cloacae&quot;, &quot;Serratia marcescens&quot;), and primarily gastrointestinal problems (&quot;Helicobacter pylori&quot;, &quot;Salmonella enteritidis&quot;, &quot;Salmonella typhi&quot;).

Gram-negative bacteria associated with hospital-acquired infections include &quot;Acinetobacter baumannii&quot;, which cause bacteremia, secondary meningitis, and ventilator-associated pneumonia in hospital intensive-care units.

==Bacterial transformation==
Transformation is one of three processes for horizontal gene transfer, in which exogenous genetic material passes from one bacterium to another, the other two being conjugation (transfer of genetic material between two bacterial cells in direct contact) and transduction (injection of foreign DNA by a bacteriophage virus into the host bacterium). In transformation, the genetic material passes through the intervening medium, and uptake is completely dependent on the recipient bacterium.

As of 2014 about 80 species of bacteria were known to be capable of transformation, about evenly divided between gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria; the number might be an overestimate since several of the reports are supported by single papers. Transformation has been studied in medically important gram-negative bacteria species such as &quot;Helicobacter pylori&quot;, &quot;Legionella pneumophila&quot;, &quot;Neisseria meningitidis&quot;, &quot;Neisseria gonorrhoeae&quot;, &quot;Haemophilus influenzae&quot; and &quot;Vibrio cholerae&quot;. It has also been studied in gram-negative species found in soil such as &quot;Pseudomonas stutzeri&quot;, &quot;Acinetobacter baylyi&quot;, and gram-negative plant pathogens such as &quot;Ralstonia solanacearum&quot; and &quot;Xylella fastidiosa&quot;.

==Role in disease==

One of the several unique characteristics of gram-negative bacteria is the structure of the bacterial outer membrane. The outer leaflet of this membrane contains lipopolysaccharide (LPS), whose lipid A portion acts as an endotoxin. If gram-negative bacteria enter the circulatory system, LPS can trigger an innate immune response, activating the immune system and producing cytokines (hormonal regulators). This leads to inflammation and can cause a toxic reaction, resulting in fever, an increased respiratory rate, and low blood pressure. That is why some infections with gram-negative bacteria can lead to life-threatening septic shock.

The outer membrane protects the bacteria from several antibiotics, dyes, and detergents that would normally damage either the inner membrane or the cell wall (made of peptidoglycan). The outer membrane provides these bacteria with resistance to lysozyme and penicillin. The periplasmic space (space between the two cell membranes) also contains enzymes which break down or modify antibiotics. Drugs commonly used to treat gram negative infections include amino, carboxy and ureido penicillins (ampicillin, amoxicillin, pipercillin, ticarcillin). These drugs may be combined with beta-lactamase inhibitors to combat the presence of enzymes that can digest these drugs (known as beta-lactamases) in the peri-plasmic space. Other classes of drugs that have gram negative spectrum include cephalosporins, monobactams (aztreonam), aminoglycosides, quinolones, macrolides, chloramphenicol, folate antagonists, and carbapenems.

== Orthographic note ==

The adjectives &quot;gram-positive&quot; and &quot;gram-negative&quot; derive from the surname of Hans Christian Gram, a Danish bacteriologist; as eponymous adjectives, their initial letter can be either capital &quot;G&quot; or lower-case &quot;g&quot;, depending on which style guide (e.g., that of the CDC), if any, governs the document being written. This is further explained at &quot;Gram staining § Orthographic note&quot;.

== See also ==
* Autochaperone
* Gram-variable and gram-indeterminate bacteria
* OMPdb (2011)
* Outer membrane receptor

== References ==


===Notes===
== External links ==
* 3D structures of proteins from inner membranes of Ellie Wyithe&#x27;s gram-negative bacteria</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="0" end="22" title="Gram-negative bacteria" label="Gram-negative bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="27" end="35" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="49" end="71" title="gram-positive bacteria" label="gram-positive bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q420705" start="91" end="111" title="Crystal violet" label="crystal violet stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188990" start="124" end="134" title="Gram stain" label="Gram stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886486" start="219" end="232" title="cell envelope" label="cell envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="252" end="265" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293735" start="266" end="275" title="gram-negative cell wall" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="305" end="316" title="Cytoplasm" label="cytoplasmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="318" end="326" title="Cell membrane" label="membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q258248" start="334" end="348" title="Bacterial outer membrane" label="outer membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="416" end="421" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="474" end="488" title="model organism" label="model organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="495" end="511" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q804517" start="538" end="557" title="pathogenic bacteria" label="pathogenic bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q31856" start="573" end="595" title="Pseudomonas aeruginosa" label="Pseudomonas aeruginosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131065" start="609" end="630" title="Chlamydia trachomatis" label="Chlamydia trachomatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153875" start="648" end="663" title="Yersinia pestis" label="Yersinia pestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="806" end="817" title="Antibiotic" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="829" end="839" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334637" start="842" end="852" title="Detergent" label="detergents"/>
<link wikidata="Q68541106" start="913" end="926" title="antimicrobial" label="antimicrobial"/>
<link wikidata="Q24779410" start="934" end="942" title="lysozyme" label="lysozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q428253" start="980" end="1000" title="innate immune system" label="innate immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q423279" start="1025" end="1032" title="Lipid_bilayer" label="leaflet"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="1069" end="1087" title="lipopolysaccharide" label="lipopolysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077338" start="1100" end="1107" title="lipid A" label="lipid A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218293" start="1169" end="1174" title="Lysis" label="lysed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765564" start="1218" end="1230" title="septic shock" label="septic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="1245" end="1263" title="hypotension" label="low blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="1265" end="1284" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="1286" end="1309" title="hypoxia (medical)" label="reduced oxygen delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500373" start="1315" end="1330" title="lactic acidosis" label="lactic acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1341" end="1362" title="Antibiotics#Classes" label="classes of antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q471724" start="1428" end="1443" title="aminopenicillin" label="aminopenicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900376" start="1446" end="1462" title="ureidopenicillin" label="ureidopenicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271021" start="1465" end="1478" title="cephalosporin" label="cephalosporin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41873" start="1481" end="1492" title="beta-lactam" label="beta-lactam"/>
<link wikidata="Q310286" start="1493" end="1516" title="Β-Lactamase inhibitor" label="betalactamase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197337" start="1539" end="1562" title="Piperacillin/tazobactam" label="piperacillin-tazobactam"/>
<link wikidata="Q50573407" start="1565" end="1582" title="Antifolate" label="folate antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q426549" start="1585" end="1594" title="quinolone" label="quinolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q410897" start="1601" end="1611" title="carbapenem" label="carbapenem"/>
<link wikidata="Q45355603" start="1748" end="1762" title="aminoglycoside" label="aminoglycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q417315" start="1765" end="1775" title="monobactam" label="monobactam"/>
<link wikidata="Q418546" start="1786" end="1795" title="aztreonam" label="aztreonam"/>
<link wikidata="Q256602" start="1802" end="1815" title="ciprofloxacin" label="ciprofloxacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="1911" end="1924" title="cell membrane" label="cell membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="1937" end="1946" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="1959" end="1972" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q258248" start="2045" end="2059" title="Bacterial outer membrane" label="outer membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="2071" end="2089" title="lipopolysaccharide" label="lipopolysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077338" start="2115" end="2122" title="lipid A" label="lipid A"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="2129" end="2143" title="polysaccharide" label="polysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="2149" end="2158" title="O antigen" label="O antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q186915" start="2185" end="2197" title="phospholipid" label="phospholipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q67101192" start="2222" end="2228" title="Porin (protein)" label="Porins"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="2341" end="2361" title="Cell membrane" label="cytoplasmic membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198990" start="2432" end="2441" title="periplasm" label="periplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q418821" start="2448" end="2455" title="S-layer" label="S-layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="2518" end="2531" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="2546" end="2554" title="flagella" label="flagella"/>
<link wikidata="Q899834" start="2599" end="2612" title="Teichoic acid" label="Teichoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q781350" start="2617" end="2634" title="lipoteichoic acid" label="lipoteichoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28350" start="2649" end="2660" title="Lipoprotein" label="Lipoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953641" start="2721" end="2745" title="Braun&amp;#x27;s lipoprotein" label="Braun&amp;#x27;s lipoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="2885" end="2891" title="Endospore" label="spores"/>
<link wikidata="Q117225134" start="2949" end="2963" title="Pseudomonadati" label="Pseudomonadati"/>
<link wikidata="Q194309" start="3061" end="3074" title="Mycobacterium" label="Mycobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q99299816" start="3100" end="3115" title="Mycobacteriales" label="Mycobacteriales"/>
<link wikidata="Q414506" start="3230" end="3242" title="mycolic acid" label="mycolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188990" start="3342" end="3352" title="Gram stain" label="Gram stain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3450" end="3462" title="Bacterial taxonomy#History" label="Historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q97263158" start="3476" end="3482" title="Monera" label="Monera"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="3505" end="3514" title="Taxonomic rank" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q25519942" start="3539" end="3549" title="Bacillota" label="Firmicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q425684" start="3555" end="3568" title="Gracilicutes" label="Gracillicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131796" start="3574" end="3584" title="Mollicutes" label="Mollicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169785" start="3593" end="3603" title="Methanogen" label="Mendocutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="3628" end="3637" title="monophyly" label="monophyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q516021" start="3677" end="3686" title="Proof (truth)" label="disproven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="3692" end="3709" title="Molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q454117" start="3741" end="3755" title="Cavalier-Smith" label="Cavalier-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="3778" end="3790" title="Monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="3791" end="3796" title="taxon" label="taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="3811" end="3816" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="3836" end="3845" title="monophyly" label="monophyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="3901" end="3910" title="Monophyly" label="holophyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="3968" end="3973" title="taxon" label="taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36732" start="4003" end="4013" title="Kingdom (biology)" label="subkingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q117225134" start="4259" end="4273" title="Pseudomonadati" label="Pseudomonadati"/>
<link wikidata="Q99299816" start="4337" end="4352" title="Mycobacteriales" label="Mycobacteriales"/>
<link wikidata="Q414506" start="4361" end="4373" title="mycolic acid" label="mycolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188990" start="4768" end="4778" title="Gram stain" label="Gram-stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="4800" end="4813" title="gram-positive" label="gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="4913" end="4930" title="monoderm bacteria" label="monoderm bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q258248" start="5616" end="5636" title="bacterial outer membrane" label="outer lipid membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="5684" end="5695" title="Prokaryote" label="prokaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="5872" end="5883" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="5937" end="5946" title="antimicrobial resistance" label="resistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27348" start="6102" end="6120" title="Evolutionary pressure" label="selection pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021315" start="6150" end="6161" title="Deinococcus" label="Deinococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="6226" end="6239" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962137" start="6487" end="6501" title="Pseudomonadota" label="Pseudomonadota"/>
<link wikidata="Q21439067" start="6503" end="6513" title="Aquificota" label="Aquificota"/>
<link wikidata="Q20388896" start="6515" end="6526" title="Chlamydiota" label="Chlamydiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q9810870" start="6528" end="6540" title="Bacteroidota" label="Bacteroidota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962791" start="6542" end="6553" title="Chlorobiota" label="Chlorobiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="6561" end="6574" title="Cyanobacteria" label="Cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063165" start="6582" end="6596" title="Fibrobacterota" label="Fibrobacterota"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228461" start="6598" end="6615" title="Verrucomicrobiota" label="Verrucomicrobiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q18674593" start="6617" end="6632" title="Planctomycetota" label="Planctomycetota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12673555" start="6634" end="6647" title="Spirochaetota" label="Spirochaetota"/>
<link wikidata="Q73346630" start="6649" end="6664" title="Acidobacteriota" label="Acidobacteriota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163163" start="6699" end="6724" title="conserved signature indel" label="conserved signature indel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24771589" start="6738" end="6743" title="HSP60" label="HSP60"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864994" start="6745" end="6750" title="GroEL" label="GroEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="6941" end="6953" title="Monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="6954" end="6959" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q117225134" start="7092" end="7106" title="Pseudomonadati" label="Pseudomonadati"/>
<link wikidata="Q117225134" start="7123" end="7136" title="Hydrobacteria" label="Hydrobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q623144" start="7315" end="7328" title="Negativicutes" label="Negativicutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21441825" start="7330" end="7344" title="Fusobacteriota" label="Fusobacteriota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12971472" start="7346" end="7358" title="Synergistota" label="Synergistota"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286677" start="7364" end="7379" title="Elusimicrobiota" label="Elusimicrobiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="7409" end="7415" title="phylum" label="phylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25519942" start="7416" end="7425" title="Bacillota" label="Bacillota"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864994" start="7489" end="7494" title="GroEL" label="GroEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q194309" start="7760" end="7773" title="Mycobacterium" label="Mycobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q99299816" start="7828" end="7843" title="Mycobacteriales" label="Mycobacteriales"/>
<link wikidata="Q414506" start="7925" end="7937" title="mycolic acid" label="mycolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962137" start="7968" end="7982" title="proteobacteria" label="proteobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="8050" end="8057" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="8071" end="8081" title="Salmonella" label="Salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q131029" start="8095" end="8103" title="Shigella" label="Shigella"/>
<link wikidata="Q380136" start="8121" end="8139" title="Enterobacteriaceae" label="Enterobacteriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131143" start="8147" end="8158" title="Pseudomonas" label="Pseudomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046669" start="8172" end="8181" title="Moraxella catarrhalis" label="Moraxella"/>
<link wikidata="Q134684" start="8195" end="8207" title="Helicobacter" label="Helicobacter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707476" start="8221" end="8237" title="Stenotrophomonas" label="Stenotrophomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q136602" start="8251" end="8263" title="Bdellovibrio" label="Bdellovibrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048822" start="8271" end="8291" title="acetic acid bacteria" label="acetic acid bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q158013" start="8299" end="8309" title="Legionella" label="Legionella"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="8380" end="8393" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12673555" start="8395" end="8406" title="spirochaete" label="spirochaete"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962791" start="8413" end="8434" title="green sulfur bacteria" label="green sulfur bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753295" start="8470" end="8480" title="diplococci" label="diplococci"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="8517" end="8545" title="sexually transmitted disease" label="sexually transmitted disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q131129" start="8553" end="8574" title="Neisseria gonorrhoeae" label="Neisseria gonorrhoeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="8585" end="8595" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154625" start="8603" end="8625" title="Neisseria meningitidis" label="Neisseria meningitidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046669" start="8666" end="8687" title="Moraxella catarrhalis" label="Moraxella catarrhalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753295" start="8697" end="8710" title="coccobacillus" label="coccobacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141979" start="8717" end="8739" title="Haemophilus influenzae" label="Haemophilus influenzae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753295" start="8823" end="8830" title="bacillus (shape)" label="bacilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q132592" start="8920" end="8941" title="Klebsiella pneumoniae" label="Klebsiella pneumoniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q147885" start="8955" end="8977" title="Legionella pneumophila" label="Legionella pneumophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q31856" start="8991" end="9013" title="Pseudomonas aeruginosa" label="Pseudomonas aeruginosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="9056" end="9072" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q311273" start="9086" end="9103" title="Proteus mirabilis" label="Proteus mirabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038096" start="9117" end="9137" title="Enterobacter cloacae" label="Enterobacter cloacae"/>
<link wikidata="Q140004" start="9151" end="9170" title="Serratia marcescens" label="Serratia marcescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q180556" start="9226" end="9245" title="Helicobacter pylori" label="Helicobacter pylori"/>
<link wikidata="Q21600865" start="9259" end="9281" title="Salmonella enteritidis" label="Salmonella enteritidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21600865" start="9295" end="9311" title="Salmonella typhi" label="Salmonella typhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215509" start="9360" end="9387" title="hospital-acquired infection" label="hospital-acquired infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241189" start="9403" end="9426" title="Acinetobacter baumannii" label="Acinetobacter baumannii"/>
<link wikidata="Q650912" start="9446" end="9456" title="bacteremia" label="bacteremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="9468" end="9478" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920253" start="9484" end="9515" title="ventilator-associated pneumonia" label="ventilator-associated pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094647" start="9528" end="9547" title="intensive-care unit" label="intensive-care unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="9580" end="9594" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="Transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="9625" end="9649" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="9703" end="9712" title="Bacteria" label="bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q273193" start="9745" end="9756" title="bacterial conjugation" label="conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="9770" end="9786" title="plasmid" label="genetic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q845870" start="9838" end="9850" title="transduction (genetics)" label="transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="9882" end="9895" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q123619" start="9951" end="9967" title="Nucleic acid" label="genetic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="10184" end="10197" title="gram-positive" label="gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q180556" start="10423" end="10442" title="Helicobacter pylori" label="Helicobacter pylori"/>
<link wikidata="Q147885" start="10456" end="10478" title="Legionella pneumophila" label="Legionella pneumophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q154625" start="10492" end="10514" title="Neisseria meningitidis" label="Neisseria meningitidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131129" start="10528" end="10549" title="Neisseria gonorrhoeae" label="Neisseria gonorrhoeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141979" start="10563" end="10585" title="Haemophilus influenzae" label="Haemophilus influenzae"/>
<link wikidata="Q160821" start="10602" end="10617" title="Vibrio cholerae" label="Vibrio cholerae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888828" start="10703" end="10723" title="Pseudomonas stutzeri" label="Pseudomonas stutzeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q16870362" start="10737" end="10757" title="Acinetobacter baylyi" label="Acinetobacter baylyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710840" start="10813" end="10835" title="Ralstonia solanacearum" label="Ralstonia solanacearum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019529" start="10852" end="10870" title="Xylella fastidiosa" label="Xylella fastidiosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258248" start="10992" end="11016" title="bacterial outer membrane" label="bacterial outer membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="11062" end="11080" title="lipopolysaccharide" label="lipopolysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077338" start="11094" end="11101" title="lipid A" label="lipid A"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="11121" end="11130" title="Lipopolysaccharide" label="endotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="11168" end="11186" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q428253" start="11207" end="11229" title="innate immune response" label="innate immune response"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="11246" end="11259" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="11274" end="11282" title="cytokine" label="cytokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="11321" end="11333" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="11421" end="11439" title="Hypotension" label="low blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765564" start="11526" end="11538" title="septic shock" label="septic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="11595" end="11605" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="11608" end="11611" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q334637" start="11618" end="11627" title="detergent" label="detergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="11708" end="11721" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24779410" start="11786" end="11794" title="lysozyme" label="lysozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="11799" end="11809" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198990" start="11815" end="11832" title="Periplasm" label="periplasmic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="11886" end="11892" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q244150" start="12035" end="12045" title="ampicillin" label="ampicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201928" start="12047" end="12058" title="amoxicillin" label="amoxicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q423787" start="12060" end="12071" title="Piperacillin" label="pipercillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601832" start="12073" end="12084" title="ticarcillin" label="ticarcillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q310286" start="12120" end="12144" title="beta-lactamase inhibitor" label="beta-lactamase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q311379" start="12218" end="12232" title="beta-lactamase" label="beta-lactamase"/>
<link wikidata="Q271021" start="12326" end="12339" title="cephalosporin" label="cephalosporin"/>
<link wikidata="Q417315" start="12342" end="12352" title="monobactam" label="monobactam"/>
<link wikidata="Q418546" start="12355" end="12364" title="aztreonam" label="aztreonam"/>
<link wikidata="Q426549" start="12384" end="12393" title="quinolone" label="quinolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q422687" start="12396" end="12405" title="macrolide" label="macrolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q274515" start="12408" end="12423" title="chloramphenicol" label="chloramphenicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q50573407" start="12425" end="12443" title="Antifolate" label="folate antagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q410897" start="12449" end="12459" title="carbapenem" label="carbapenem"/>
<link wikidata="Q310005" start="12586" end="12605" title="Hans Christian Gram" label="Hans Christian Gram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12635" end="12655" title="Eponym#Orthographic conventions" label="eponymous adjectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q198614" start="12762" end="12773" title="style guide" label="style guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="12793" end="12796" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="CDC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12878" end="12911" title="Gram staining#Orthographic note" label="Gram staining § Orthographic note"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826192" start="12937" end="12950" title="Autochaperone" label="Autochaperone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12953" end="12998" title="Gram stain#Gram-variable and gram-indeterminate bacteria" label="Gram-variable and gram-indeterminate bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072733" start="13001" end="13006" title="OMPdb" label="OMPdb"/>
<link wikidata="Q67599056" start="13016" end="13039" title="Outer membrane receptor" label="Outer membrane receptor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12938" wikidata="Q38571" url="?curid=12938" title="Greyhound">
<text>The English Greyhound, or simply the Greyhound, is a breed of dog, a sighthound which has been bred for coursing, greyhound racing and hunting. Since the rise in large-scale adoption of retired racing Greyhounds, the breed has seen a resurgence in popularity as a family pet.

Greyhounds are defined as a tall, muscular, smooth-coated, &quot;S-shaped&quot; type of sighthound with a long tail and tough feet. Greyhounds are a separate breed from other related sighthounds, such as the Italian greyhound.

The Greyhound&#x27;s combination of long, powerful legs, deep chest, flexible spine, and slim build allows it to reach average race speeds exceeding . A racing greyhound can reach a full speed of at least . 

However, the most common speeds at which they usually win races are . Its maximum speed is attained whether running on a straight track or a curved track. 

== Appearance ==

Males are usually tall at the withers, and weigh on average . Females tend to be smaller, with shoulder heights ranging from and weights from , although weights can be above and below these average weights. Greyhounds have very short fur, which is easy to maintain. There are approximately 30 recognized color forms, of which variations of white, brindle, fawn (pale tan to dark deer-red), black, red, and blue (gray) can appear uniquely or in combination. Greyhounds are dolichocephalic, with a skull which is relatively long in comparison to its breadth, and an elongated muzzle.

== Temperament ==

Greyhounds live most happily as pets in quiet environments. They do well in families with children, as long as the children are taught to treat the dog properly with politeness and appropriate respect. Greyhounds have a sensitive nature, and gentle commands work best as training methods.

Occasionally, a Greyhound may bark; however, they are generally not barkers, which is beneficial in suburban environments, and they are usually as friendly to strangers as they are with their own families. A 2008 University of Pennsylvania study found that Greyhounds are one of the least aggressive dog breeds towards strangers, owners, and other dogs. However, Greyhounds can be prone to sleep startle/sleep aggression if suddenly disturbed while napping. Owners can encounter this problem, as many greyhounds sleep with their eyes at least partially open, appearing awake.

A survey of those adopting rescue Greyhounds found that Greyhound adoptions have higher short term adoption success than shelters. The survey also found reported hyperactivity levels to be below that of shelter dogs.

Greyhounds tend to be outgoing, happy and sociable with people and seem to relish human contact, even following owners from room to room at home (known colloquially as being a &quot;Velcro dog&quot;). Small animals including cats may be the subject of prey-driven behaviour by Greyhounds.

== Sport ==
=== Coursing ===

The original primary use of Greyhounds, both in the British Isles and on the Continent of Europe, was in the coursing of deer for meat and sport; later, specifically in Britain, they specialized in competition hare coursing. Some Greyhounds are still used for coursing, although artificial lure sports like lure coursing and racing are far more common and popular. Many leading 300- to 550-yard sprinters have bloodlines traceable back through Irish sires, within a few generations of racers that won events such as the Irish Coursing Derby or the Irish Cup.

=== Racing ===

Until the early 20th century, Greyhounds were principally bred and trained for hunting and coursing. During the 1920s, modern greyhound racing was introduced into the United States, England (1926), Northern Ireland (1927), Scotland (1927), and the Republic of Ireland (1927). Australia also has a significant racing culture.

In the United States, aside from professional racing, many Greyhounds enjoy success on the amateur race track. Organizations like the Large Gazehound Racing Association (LGRA) and the National Oval Track Racing Association (NOTRA) provide opportunities for Greyhounds to compete.

== Companion ==
Historically, the Greyhound has, since its first appearance as a hunting type and breed, enjoyed a specific degree of fame and definition in Western literature, heraldry and art as the most elegant or noble companion and hunter of the canine world. In modern times, the professional racing industry, with its large numbers of track-bred greyhounds, as well as international adoption programs aimed at re-homing dogs has redefined the breed as a sporting dog that will supply friendly companionship in its retirement. This has been prevalent in recent years due to track closures in the United States. Outside the racing industry and coursing community, the Kennel Clubs&#x27; registered breed still enjoys a modest following as a show dog and pet.

== Health and physiology ==

A 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 11.5 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds. A 2005 Swedish study of insurance data found 60% of Greyhounds died by the age of 10, higher than the overall rate of 35% of dogs dying by the age of 10.

The speed of a Greyhound is due to its light but muscular build, large heart, highest percentage of oxidative–glycolytic fast twitch muscle fibers (Type IIa) of any breed, double suspension gallop, and extreme flexibility of its spine. &quot;Double suspension rotary gallop&quot; describes the fastest running gait of the Greyhound in which all four feet are free from the ground in two phases, contracted and extended, during each full stride.

The musculature of both hindlimbs constitutes more than 18 % of their body mass. The proportion of both forelimbs muscle mass is very similar. The proportion of back musculature is 12 % of their body mass. 

Due to the Greyhound&#x27;s unique physiology and anatomy, a veterinarian who understands the issues relevant to the breed is generally needed when the dogs need treatment, particularly when anesthesia is required. Greyhounds cannot metabolize barbiturate-based anesthesia in the same way that other breeds can because their livers have lower amounts of oxidative enzymes. Greyhounds demonstrate unusual blood chemistry, which can be misread by veterinarians not familiar with the breed and can result in an incorrect diagnosis.

Greyhounds are very sensitive to insecticides. Many vets do not recommend the use of flea collars or flea spray on Greyhounds if the product is pyrethrin-based. Products like Advantage, Frontline, Lufenuron, and Amitraz are safe for use on Greyhounds, however, and are very effective in controlling fleas and ticks.

Greyhounds have higher levels of red blood cells than other breeds. Since red blood cells carry oxygen to the muscles, this higher level allows the hound to move larger quantities of oxygen faster from the lungs to the muscles. Conversely, Greyhounds have lower levels of platelets than other breeds.

Delayed haemorrhage following trauma or routine surgery is more common in Greyhounds, with one study reporting significant haemorrhage in 26% of Greyhounds following routine gonadectomy, compared to 0-2% in other dog breeds. This is often termed greyhound fibrinolytic syndrome or breed-associated hyperfibrinolysis, where in there is a disorder of the fibrinolysis system without derangement of the primary or secondary coagulation systems, and is also not related to platelet count. In this syndrome there is initial adequate hemostasis following trauma or routine surgical procedures, however 36–48 hours later the site undergoes inappropriate hyperfibrinolysis. This results in delayed bleeding which can result in significant morbidity and mortality. Standard pre-operative blood work does not identify those at risk It is distinct from common bleeding disorders in other breeds such as von Willebrand&#x27;s disease, which is uncommon in Greyhounds. Although high-quality research data are lacking, it is thought that this condition can be prevented and treated by administering antifibrinolytic medication such as tranexamic acid via the oral or parenteral route. Intensive care and blood product administration may also be required in severe cases.

Greyhounds do not have undercoats and thus are less likely to trigger dog allergies in humans (they are sometimes incorrectly referred to as &quot;hypoallergenic&quot;). The lack of an undercoat, coupled with a general lack of body fat, also makes Greyhounds more susceptible to extreme temperatures (both hot and cold); because of this, they must be housed inside. Some Greyhounds are susceptible to corns on their paw pads; a variety of methods are used to treat them.

Thyroxine levels in the Greyhound are below the normal reference range for dogs; thyroxine response to thyroid-stimulating hormone is also lowered. This can impact testing for thyroid disease but it is not a concern for health.

== History ==

===Origins===
&quot;The true origin of the greyhound is unsure, but drawings of findings from the Çatalhöyük site in Turkey (6000 BC), the finding of a greyhound-&quot;like&quot; dog in a funeral vase in the town of Fusa in Iran (4200 BC) or in rock art in Tassili (dated at 5000 – 2000 BC) indicate that the greyhound is indeed one of the oldest breeds of dog.&quot;.

The ancient skeletal remains of a dog identified as being of the greyhound/saluki form were excavated at Tell Brak in modern Syria, and dated as being approximately 4,000 years old. Dogs that look similar to Salukis and Greyhounds were increasingly depicted on Egyptian tombs from the Middle Kingdom (2134 BC–1785 BC) onward.

Historical literature by Arrian on the vertragus (from the Latin , a word of Celtic origin), the first recorded sighthound in Europe and possible antecedent of the Greyhound, suggested that its origin lies with the Celts from Eastern Europe or Eurasia. Systematic archaeozoology of Britain conducted in 1974 ruled out the existence of a true greyhound-type in Britain prior to the Roman occupation, which was further confirmed in 2000. Written evidence from the early period of Roman occupation, the Vindolanda tablets (No. 594), demonstrate that the occupying troops from Continental Europe either had with them in the North of England, or certainly knew of, the vertragus and its hunting use.

During the Middle Ages, greyhounds could only be owned by rulers and nobles, having long been associated with heraldic symbols of the ruling class in England, France, and the Czech lands.

The earliest archaeological discovery found conclusively to be a greyhound specifically was at the Chotěbuz fort in the Czech Republic. This comprised sighthound type &quot;gracile&quot; bones dating from the 8th to 9th century AD. These bones matched those of a high &quot;greyhound&quot;, and were also genetically compared with the modern Greyhound and other sighthounds, and found to be almost completely identical with the modern Greyhound breed, with the exception of only four deletions and one substitution in the DNA sequences, which were interpreted as differences probably arising from 11 centuries of breeding of this type of dog.

All modern pedigree Greyhounds derive from the Greyhound stock recorded and registered first in private studbooks in the 18th century, then in public studbooks in the 19th century, which ultimately were registered with coursing, racing, and kennel club authorities of the United Kingdom. Historically, these sighthounds were used primarily for hunting in the open where their pursuit speed and keen eyesight were essential.
===Etymology===
The name &quot;Greyhound&quot; is generally believed to come from the Old English . is the antecedent of the modern &quot;hound&quot;, but the meaning of is undetermined, other than in reference to dogs in Old English and Old Norse. The word &quot;hund&quot; is still used for dogs in general in Scandinavian languages today. Its origin does not appear to have any common root with the modern word &quot;grey&quot; for color, and indeed the Greyhound is seen with a wide variety of coat colors. The lighter colors, patch-like markings and white appeared in the breed that was once ordinarily grey in color.

The Greyhound is the only dog mentioned by name in the Bible (, &quot;zarir mosna&#x27;im&quot;) in . Many versions, including the Jewish Publication Society and King James Version, name the Greyhound as one of the &quot;three that are stately of stride&quot;. However, some newer biblical translations, including the New International Version, have changed this to &#x27;strutting rooster&#x27;, which appears to be an alternative translation.

According to Pokorny, the English term &#x27;Greyhound&#x27; does not mean &quot;grey dog/hound&quot;, but simply &quot;fair dog&quot;. Subsequent words have been derived from the Proto-Indo-European root *g&#x27;her- &quot;shine, twinkle&quot;: English &#x27;grey&#x27;, Old High German &quot;grey, old&quot;, Old Icelandic &quot;piglet, pig&quot;, Old Icelandic &quot;to dawn&quot;, &quot;morning twilight&quot;, Old Irish &quot;sun&quot;, Old Church Slavonic &quot;morning twilight, brightness&quot;. The common sense of these words is &quot;to shine; bright&quot;.

In 1928, the first winner of Best in Show at Crufts was breeder/owner Mr. H. Whitley&#x27;s Greyhound &quot;Primley Sceptre&quot;. Greyhounds have won the award three times in total, the most recent being in 1956.

Historically, English Greyhounds were grouped: two for coursing, as a &quot;Brace&quot;, three for hunting, as a &quot;Leash&quot;, otherwise known as a &quot;couple and a half&quot;.

== See also ==
* List of dog breeds
* Afghan Hound
* Azawakh
* Borzoi (formerly known as Russian Wolfhound)
* Combai
* Chippiparai
* Fastest animal
* Galgo Español (Spanish Greyhound)
* Hortaya borzaya (Russian shorthaired sighthound)
* Irish Wolfhound
* Italian Greyhound
* Kanni
* Longdog (cross between two sighthound breeds)
* Lurcher (sighthound ancestry)
* Magyar agár (Hungarian Greyhound)
* Mudhol Hound
* Polish Greyhound
* Rajapalayam (India)
* Rampur Greyhound
* Saluki
* Scottish Deerhound
* Sloughi 
* Whippet
== References ==
== Further reading ==
*&quot;The Greyhound in 1864: ...&quot; Walsh 1864
*&quot;The Greyhound, ...&quot; Dalziel 1887
*&quot;Of Greyhounds and of Their Nature&quot;, Chapter XV: &quot;The Master of Game&quot;, Edward of York circa 1406
*&quot;The Greyhound&quot; Roger D. Williams, in &quot;The American Book of the Dog&quot; Editor George O. Shields. Chicago: Rand Mcnally, 1891
* &quot;Greyhound Nation: A Coevolutionary History of England, 1200–1900&quot;. Edmund Russell, Cambridge University Press, 2018. 
* &quot;The Greyhound and the Hare: A History of the Breed and the Sport&quot;. Charles Blanning, The National Coursing Club, 2018.
* &quot;Twenty Two Waterloo Cups 1981-2005&quot;. Charles Blanning, Fullerton Press in association with the National Coursing Club, 2022.
* &quot;High speed galloping in the cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) and the racing greyhound (Canis familiaris): spatio-temporal and kinetic characteristics&quot;. Hudson et al. &quot;Journal of Experimental Biology&quot; 215.14, 2012.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="4" end="11" title="Greyhound" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="12" end="21" title="Greyhound" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="37" end="46" title="Greyhound" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q39367" start="53" end="58" title="dog breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="62" end="65" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q39344" start="69" end="79" title="sighthound" label="sighthound"/>
<link wikidata="Q515302" start="104" end="112" title="coursing" label="coursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345388" start="114" end="130" title="greyhound racing" label="greyhound racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38503" start="485" end="502" title="Italian greyhound" label="Italian greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q493456" start="919" end="926" title="withers" label="withers"/>
<link wikidata="Q748758" start="1361" end="1376" title="dolichocephaly" label="dolichocephalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="1994" end="2020" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="2801" end="2804" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q260690" start="3106" end="3119" title="hare coursing" label="hare coursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361824" start="3203" end="3216" title="lure coursing" label="lure coursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769978" start="3416" end="3436" title="Irish Coursing Club" label="Irish Coursing Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q515302" start="3563" end="3571" title="coursing" label="coursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38945" start="4998" end="5009" title="Mongrel" label="crossbreeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="5237" end="5242" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048687" start="5287" end="5305" title="fast twitch muscle" label="fast twitch muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517365" start="5338" end="5362" title="double suspension gallop" label="double suspension gallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="5395" end="5400" title="Vertebral column" label="spine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="6011" end="6021" title="anesthesia" label="anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="6064" end="6075" title="barbiturate" label="barbiturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="6145" end="6150" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115638" start="6174" end="6190" title="oxidative enzyme" label="oxidative enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="6383" end="6394" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985273" start="6435" end="6446" title="flea collar" label="flea collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366855" start="6451" end="6461" title="Dog flea" label="flea spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q282970" start="6494" end="6503" title="pyrethrin" label="pyrethrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420098" start="6525" end="6534" title="Imidacloprid" label="Advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q415933" start="6536" end="6545" title="Fipronil" label="Frontline"/>
<link wikidata="Q412933" start="6547" end="6556" title="Lufenuron" label="Lufenuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q417878" start="6562" end="6569" title="Amitraz" label="Amitraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304508" start="6659" end="6663" title="tick" label="tick"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="6700" end="6714" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="6939" end="6948" title="platelets" label="platelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="6977" end="6988" title="haemorrhage" label="haemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482590" start="7143" end="7154" title="Neutering" label="gonadectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410794" start="7322" end="7341" title="Fibrinolysis" label="fibrinolysis system"/>
<link wikidata="Q179217" start="7369" end="7409" title="Coagulation" label="primary or secondary coagulation systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="7438" end="7446" title="platelet" label="platelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q487937" start="7497" end="7507" title="hemostasis" label="hemostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410794" start="7616" end="7633" title="Fibrinolysis" label="hyperfibrinolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q709360" start="7861" end="7890" title="von Willebrand&amp;#x27;s disease" label="von Willebrand&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q418666" start="8090" end="8105" title="tranexamic acid" label="tranexamic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q621636" start="8122" end="8132" title="parenteral" label="parenteral"/>
<link wikidata="Q540834" start="8374" end="8388" title="hypoallergenic" label="hypoallergenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154558" start="8628" end="8633" title="Corn (pathology)" label="corns"/>
<link wikidata="Q216852" start="8699" end="8708" title="Thyroxine" label="Thyroxine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211544" start="8802" end="8829" title="thyroid-stimulating hormone" label="thyroid-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192522" start="9041" end="9051" title="Çatalhöyük" label="Çatalhöyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="9167" end="9171" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q190048" start="9200" end="9207" title="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer" label="Tassili"/>
<link wikidata="Q39108" start="9388" end="9394" title="saluki" label="saluki"/>
<link wikidata="Q978443" start="9418" end="9427" title="Tell Brak" label="Tell Brak"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="9598" end="9612" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q31845" start="9665" end="9671" title="Arrian" label="Arrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="9699" end="9704" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="9855" end="9860" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153229" start="10140" end="10158" title="Vindolanda tablets" label="Vindolanda tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="10347" end="10358" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="10511" end="10516" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115905" start="10624" end="10632" title="Chotěbuz" label="Chotěbuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="10645" end="10659" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39344" start="11477" end="11487" title="sighthound" label="sighthound"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="11568" end="11576" title="eyesight" label="eyesight"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="11679" end="11690" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="11831" end="11840" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="11905" end="11927" title="North Germanic languages" label="Scandinavian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="12272" end="12277" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296939" start="12348" end="12374" title="Jewish Publication Society" label="Jewish Publication Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="12379" end="12397" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200072" start="12535" end="12560" title="New International Version" label="New International Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q215638" start="12676" end="12683" title="Julius Pokorny" label="Pokorny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142838" start="12843" end="12867" title="Proto-Indo-European root" label="Proto-Indo-European root"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="12935" end="12950" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="12974" end="12987" title="Old Norse" label="Old Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="13078" end="13087" title="Old Irish language" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="13105" end="13124" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986432" start="13262" end="13274" title="List of Best in Show winners of Crufts" label="Best in Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q126540" start="13278" end="13284" title="Crufts" label="Crufts"/>
<link wikidata="Q121288197" start="13341" end="13356" title="Primley Sceptre" label="Primley Sceptre"/>
<link wikidata="Q21078" start="13650" end="13668" title="List of dog breeds" label="List of dog breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q21080" start="13671" end="13683" title="Afghan Hound" label="Afghan Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q37859" start="13686" end="13693" title="Azawakh" label="Azawakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q37866" start="13696" end="13702" title="Borzoi" label="Borzoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29028" start="13743" end="13749" title="Combai" label="Combai"/>
<link wikidata="Q37667" start="13752" end="13763" title="Chippiparai" label="Chippiparai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422302" start="13766" end="13780" title="Fastest animal" label="Fastest animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37920" start="13783" end="13796" title="Galgo Español" label="Galgo Español"/>
<link wikidata="Q37678" start="13819" end="13834" title="Hortaya borzaya" label="Hortaya borzaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q38668" start="13870" end="13885" title="Irish Wolfhound" label="Irish Wolfhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38503" start="13888" end="13905" title="Italian Greyhound" label="Italian Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38958" start="13908" end="13913" title="Kanni" label="Kanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q38018" start="13916" end="13923" title="Longdog" label="Longdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37989" start="13964" end="13971" title="Lurcher" label="Lurcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q38871" start="13996" end="14007" title="Magyar agár" label="Magyar agár"/>
<link wikidata="Q37670" start="14032" end="14044" title="Mudhol Hound" label="Mudhol Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429" start="14047" end="14063" title="Polish Greyhound" label="Polish Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38312" start="14066" end="14077" title="Rajapalayam (dog)" label="Rajapalayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q38179" start="14088" end="14104" title="Rampur Greyhound" label="Rampur Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q39108" start="14107" end="14113" title="Saluki" label="Saluki"/>
<link wikidata="Q37929" start="14116" end="14134" title="Scottish Deerhound" label="Scottish Deerhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q37925" start="14137" end="14144" title="Sloughi" label="Sloughi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39122" start="14148" end="14155" title="Whippet" label="Whippet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12939" wikidata="Q1186649" url="?curid=12939" title="Geometric algebra">
<text>In mathematics, a geometric algebra (also known as a Clifford algebra) is an algebra that can represent and manipulate geometrical objects such as vectors. Geometric algebra is built out of two fundamental operations, addition and the geometric product. Multiplication of vectors results in higher-dimensional objects called multivectors. Compared to other formalisms for manipulating geometric objects, geometric algebra is noteworthy for supporting vector division (though generally not by all elements) and addition of objects of different dimensions.

The geometric product was first briefly mentioned by Hermann Grassmann, who was chiefly interested in developing the closely related exterior algebra. In 1878, William Kingdon Clifford greatly expanded on Grassmann&#x27;s work to form what are now usually called Clifford algebras in his honor (although Clifford himself chose to call them &quot;geometric algebras&quot;). Clifford defined the Clifford algebra and its product as a unification of the Grassmann algebra and Hamilton&#x27;s quaternion algebra. Adding the dual of the Grassmann exterior product allows the use of the Grassmann–Cayley algebra. In the late 1990s, plane-based geometric algebra and conformal geometric algebra (CGA) respectively provided a framework for euclidean geometry and classical geometries. In practice, these and several derived operations allow a correspondence of elements, subspaces and operations of the algebra with geometric interpretations. For several decades, geometric algebras went somewhat ignored, greatly eclipsed by the vector calculus then newly developed to describe electromagnetism. The term &quot;geometric algebra&quot; was repopularized in the 1960s by David Hestenes, who advocated its importance to relativistic physics.

The scalars and vectors have their usual interpretation and make up distinct subspaces of a geometric algebra. Bivectors provide a more natural representation of the pseudovector quantities of 3D vector calculus that are derived as a cross product, such as oriented area, oriented angle of rotation, torque, angular momentum and the magnetic field. A trivector can represent an oriented volume, and so on. An element called a blade may be used to represent a subspace and orthogonal projections onto that subspace. Rotations and reflections are represented as elements. Unlike a vector algebra, a geometric algebra naturally accommodates any number of dimensions and any quadratic form such as in relativity.

Examples of geometric algebras applied in physics include the spacetime algebra (and the less common algebra of physical space). Geometric calculus, an extension of GA that incorporates differentiation and integration, can be used to formulate other theories such as complex analysis and differential geometry, e.g. by using the Clifford algebra instead of differential forms. Geometric algebra has been advocated, most notably by David Hestenes and Chris Doran, as the preferred mathematical framework for physics. Proponents claim that it provides compact and intuitive descriptions in many areas including classical and quantum mechanics, electromagnetic theory, and relativity. GA has also found use as a computational tool in computer graphics and robotics.

== Definition and notation ==
There are a number of different ways to define a geometric algebra. Hestenes&#x27;s original approach was axiomatic, &quot;full of geometric significance&quot; and equivalent to the universal Clifford algebra.
Given a finite-dimensional vector space over a field with a symmetric bilinear form (the &quot;inner product&quot;, e.g., the Euclidean or Lorentzian metric) , the geometric algebra of the quadratic space is the Clifford algebra , an element of which is called a multivector. The Clifford algebra is commonly defined as a quotient algebra of the tensor algebra, though this definition is abstract, so the following definition is presented without requiring abstract algebra.

; Definition : A unital associative algebra with a &quot;nondegenerate&quot; symmetric bilinear form is the Clifford algebra of the quadratic space if 
;* it contains and as distinct subspaces
;* for 
;* generates as an algebra 
;* is not generated by any proper subspace of .

To cover degenerate symmetric bilinear forms, the last condition must be modified. It can be shown that these conditions uniquely characterize the geometric product.

For the remainder of this article, only the real case, , will be considered. The notation (respectively ) will be used to denote a geometric algebra for which the bilinear form has the signature (respectively ).

The product in the algebra is called the &quot;geometric product&quot;, and the product in the contained exterior algebra is called the &quot;exterior product&quot; (frequently called the &quot;wedge product&quot; or the &quot;outer product&quot;). It is standard to denote these respectively by juxtaposition (i.e., suppressing any explicit multiplication symbol) and the symbol .

The above definition of the geometric algebra is still somewhat abstract, so we summarize the properties of the geometric product here. For multivectors :
* (closure)
* , where is the identity element (existence of an identity element)
* (associativity)
* and (distributivity)
* for .

The exterior product has the same properties, except that the last property above is replaced by for .

Note that in the last property above, the real number need not be nonnegative if is not positive-definite. An important property of the geometric product is the existence of elements that have a multiplicative inverse. For a vector , if formula_1 then formula_2 exists and is equal to . A nonzero element of the algebra does not necessarily have a multiplicative inverse. For example, if formula_3 is a vector in formula_4 such that , the element formula_5 is both a nontrivial idempotent element and a nonzero zero divisor, and thus has no inverse.

It is usual to identify formula_6 and formula_4 with their images under the natural embeddings formula_8 and . In this article, this identification is assumed. Throughout, the terms &quot;scalar&quot; and &quot;vector&quot; refer to elements of formula_6 and formula_4 respectively (and of their images under this embedding).

=== Geometric product ===

For vectors and , we may write the geometric product of any two vectors and as the sum of a symmetric product and an antisymmetric product:
: formula_11

Thus we can define the &quot;inner product&quot; of vectors as
: formula_12
so that the symmetric product can be written as
: formula_13

Conversely, is completely determined by the algebra. The antisymmetric part is the exterior product of the two vectors, the product of the contained exterior algebra:
: formula_14

Then by simple addition:
: formula_15 the ungeneralized or vector form of the geometric product.

The inner and exterior products are associated with familiar concepts from standard vector algebra. Geometrically, formula_16 and formula_17 are parallel if their geometric product is equal to their inner product, whereas formula_16 and formula_17 are perpendicular if their geometric product is equal to their exterior product. In a geometric algebra for which the square of any nonzero vector is positive, the inner product of two vectors can be identified with the dot product of standard vector algebra. The exterior product of two vectors can be identified with the signed area enclosed by a parallelogram the sides of which are the vectors. The cross product of two vectors in formula_20 dimensions with positive-definite quadratic form is closely related to their exterior product.

Most instances of geometric algebras of interest have a nondegenerate quadratic form. If the quadratic form is fully degenerate, the inner product of any two vectors is always zero, and the geometric algebra is then simply an exterior algebra. Unless otherwise stated, this article will treat only nondegenerate geometric algebras.

The exterior product is naturally extended as an associative bilinear binary operator between any two elements of the algebra, satisfying the identities
: formula_21

where the sum is over all permutations of the indices, with formula_22 the sign of the permutation, and formula_23 are vectors (not general elements of the algebra). Since every element of the algebra can be expressed as the sum of products of this form, this defines the exterior product for every pair of elements of the algebra. It follows from the definition that the exterior product forms an alternating algebra.

The equivalent structure equation for Clifford algebra is 
: formula_24
where formula_25 is the Pfaffian of and formula_26 provides combinations, , of indices divided into and parts and is the parity of the combination.

The Pfaffian provides a metric for the exterior algebra and, as pointed out by Claude Chevalley, Clifford algebra reduces to the exterior algebra with a zero quadratic form. The role the Pfaffian plays can be understood from a geometric viewpoint by developing Clifford algebra from simplices. This derivation provides a better connection between Pascal&#x27;s triangle and simplices because it provides an interpretation of the first column of ones.

=== Blades, grades, and basis ===
A multivector that is the exterior product of formula_27 linearly independent vectors is called a &quot;blade&quot;, and is said to be of grade . A multivector that is the sum of blades of grade formula_27 is called a (homogeneous) multivector of grade . From the axioms, with closure, every multivector of the geometric algebra is a sum of blades.

Consider a set of formula_27 linearly independent vectors formula_30 spanning an -dimensional subspace of the vector space. With these, we can define a real symmetric matrix (in the same way as a Gramian matrix)
: formula_31

By the spectral theorem, formula_32 can be diagonalized to diagonal matrix formula_33 by an orthogonal matrix formula_34 via
: formula_35

Define a new set of vectors , known as orthogonal basis vectors, to be those transformed by the orthogonal matrix:
: formula_36

Since orthogonal transformations preserve inner products, it follows that formula_37 and thus the formula_38 are perpendicular. In other words, the geometric product of two distinct vectors formula_39 is completely specified by their exterior product, or more generally
: formula_40

Therefore, every blade of grade formula_27 can be written as the exterior product of formula_27 vectors. More generally, if a degenerate geometric algebra is allowed, then the orthogonal matrix is replaced by a block matrix that is orthogonal in the nondegenerate block, and the diagonal matrix has zero-valued entries along the degenerate dimensions. If the new vectors of the nondegenerate subspace are normalized according to
: formula_43
then these normalized vectors must square to formula_44 or . By Sylvester&#x27;s law of inertia, the total number of and the total number of s along the diagonal matrix is invariant. By extension, the total number formula_45 of these vectors that square to formula_44 and the total number formula_47 that square to formula_48 is invariant. (The total number of basis vectors that square to zero is also invariant, and may be nonzero if the degenerate case is allowed.) We denote this algebra . For example, formula_49 models three-dimensional Euclidean space, formula_50 relativistic spacetime and formula_51 a conformal geometric algebra of a three-dimensional space.

The set of all possible products of formula_52 orthogonal basis vectors with indices in increasing order, including formula_53 as the empty product, forms a basis for the entire geometric algebra (an analogue of the PBW theorem). For example, the following is a basis for the geometric algebra :
: formula_54
A basis formed this way is called a standard basis for the geometric algebra, and any other orthogonal basis for formula_4 will produce another standard basis. Each standard basis consists of formula_56 elements. Every multivector of the geometric algebra can be expressed as a linear combination of the standard basis elements. If the standard basis elements are formula_57 with formula_58 being an index set, then the geometric product of any two multivectors is
: formula_59

The terminology &quot;formula_60-vector&quot; is often encountered to describe multivectors containing elements of only one grade. In higher dimensional space, some such multivectors are not blades (cannot be factored into the exterior product of formula_60 vectors). By way of example, formula_62 in formula_63 cannot be factored; typically, however, such elements of the algebra do not yield to geometric interpretation as objects, although they may represent geometric quantities such as rotations. Only -, -, - and -vectors are always blades in -space.

=== Versor ===
A -versor is a multivector that can be expressed as the geometric product of formula_60 invertible vectors. Unit quaternions (originally called versors by Hamilton) may be identified with rotors in 3D space in much the same way as real 2D rotors subsume complex numbers; for the details refer to Dorst.

Some authors use the term &quot;versor product&quot; to refer to the frequently occurring case where an operand is &quot;sandwiched&quot; between operators. The descriptions for rotations and reflections, including their outermorphisms, are examples of such sandwiching. These outermorphisms have a particularly simple algebraic form. Specifically, a mapping of vectors of the form
: formula_65 extends to the outermorphism formula_66

Since both operators and operand are versors there is potential for alternative examples such as rotating a rotor or reflecting a spinor always provided that some geometrical or physical significance can be attached to such operations.

By the Cartan–Dieudonné theorem we have that every isometry can be given as reflections in hyperplanes and since composed reflections provide rotations then we have that orthogonal transformations are versors.

In group terms, for a real, non-degenerate , having identified the group formula_67 as the group of all invertible elements of , Lundholm gives a proof that the &quot;versor group&quot; formula_68 (the set of invertible versors) is equal to the Lipschitz group formula_69 ( Clifford group, although Lundholm deprecates this usage).

=== Subgroups of the Lipschitz group ===
We denote the grade involution as and reversion as .

Although the Lipschitz group (defined as ) and the versor group (defined as ) have divergent definitions, they are the same group. Lundholm defines the , , and subgroups of the Lipschitz group.

Multiple analyses of spinors use GA as a representation.

=== Grade projection ===
A -graded vector space structure can be established on a geometric algebra by use of the exterior product that is naturally induced by the geometric product.

Since the geometric product and the exterior product are equal on orthogonal vectors, this grading can be conveniently constructed by using an orthogonal basis .
Elements of the geometric algebra that are scalar multiples of formula_53 are of grade formula_71 and are called &quot;scalars&quot;. Elements that are in the span of formula_72 are of grade and are the ordinary vectors. Elements in the span of formula_73 are of grade formula_74 and are the bivectors. This terminology continues through to the last grade of -vectors. Alternatively, -vectors are called pseudoscalars, -vectors are called pseudovectors, etc. Many of the elements of the algebra are not graded by this scheme since they are sums of elements of differing grade. Such elements are said to be of &quot;mixed grade&quot;. The grading of multivectors is independent of the basis chosen originally.

This is a grading as a vector space, but not as an algebra. Because the product of an -blade and an -blade is contained in the span of formula_71 through -blades, the geometric algebra is a filtered algebra.

A multivector formula_76 may be decomposed with the grade-projection operator , which outputs the grade- portion of . As a result:
: formula_77

As an example, the geometric product of two vectors formula_78 since formula_79 and formula_80 and , for formula_81 other than formula_71 and .

A multivector formula_76 may also be decomposed into even and odd components, which may respectively be expressed as the sum of the even and the sum of the odd grade components above:
: formula_84
: formula_85

This is the result of forgetting structure from a -graded vector space to -graded vector space. The geometric product respects this coarser grading. Thus in addition to being a -graded vector space, the geometric algebra is a -graded algebra, a superalgebra.

Restricting to the even part, the product of two even elements is also even. This means that the even multivectors defines an &quot;even subalgebra&quot;. The even subalgebra of an -dimensional geometric algebra is algebra-isomorphic (without preserving either filtration or grading) to a full geometric algebra of formula_86 dimensions. Examples include formula_87 and .

=== Representation of subspaces ===

Geometric algebra represents subspaces of formula_4 as blades, and so they coexist in the same algebra with vectors from . A -dimensional subspace formula_89 of formula_4 is represented by taking an orthogonal basis formula_91 and using the geometric product to form the blade . There are multiple blades representing ; all those representing formula_89 are scalar multiples of . These blades can be separated into two sets: positive multiples of formula_93 and negative multiples of . The positive multiples of formula_93 are said to have &quot;the same orientation&quot; as , and the negative multiples the &quot;opposite orientation&quot;.

Blades are important since geometric operations such as projections, rotations and reflections depend on the factorability via the exterior product that (the restricted class of) -blades provide but that (the generalized class of) grade- multivectors do not when .

=== Unit pseudoscalars ===
Unit pseudoscalars are blades that play important roles in GA. A unit pseudoscalar for a non-degenerate subspace formula_89 of formula_4 is a blade that is the product of the members of an orthonormal basis for . It can be shown that if formula_97 and formula_98 are both unit pseudoscalars for , then formula_99 and . If one doesn&#x27;t choose an orthonormal basis for , then the Plücker embedding gives a vector in the exterior algebra but only up to scaling. Using the vector space isomorphism between the geometric algebra and exterior algebra, this gives the equivalence class of formula_100 for all . Orthonormality gets rid of this ambiguity except for the signs above.

Suppose the geometric algebra formula_101 with the familiar positive definite inner product on formula_102 is formed. Given a plane (two-dimensional subspace) of , one can find an orthonormal basis formula_103 spanning the plane, and thus find a unit pseudoscalar formula_104 representing this plane. The geometric product of any two vectors in the span of formula_105 and formula_106 lies in , that is, it is the sum of a -vector and a -vector.

By the properties of the geometric product, . The resemblance to the imaginary unit is not incidental: the subspace formula_107 is -algebra isomorphic to the complex numbers. In this way, a copy of the complex numbers is embedded in the geometric algebra for each two-dimensional subspace of formula_4 on which the quadratic form is definite.

It is sometimes possible to identify the presence of an imaginary unit in a physical equation. Such units arise from one of the many quantities in the real algebra that square to , and these have geometric significance because of the properties of the algebra and the interaction of its various subspaces.

In , a further familiar case occurs. Given a standard basis consisting of orthonormal vectors formula_109 of , the set of &quot;all&quot; -vectors is spanned by
: formula_110
Labelling these , formula_111 and formula_60 (momentarily deviating from our uppercase convention), the subspace generated by -vectors and -vectors is exactly . This set is seen to be the even subalgebra of , and furthermore is isomorphic as an -algebra to the quaternions, another important algebraic system.

=== Extensions of the inner and exterior products ===
It is common practice to extend the exterior product on vectors to the entire algebra. This may be done through the use of the above-mentioned grade projection operator:
: formula_113     (the &quot;exterior product&quot;)

This generalization is consistent with the above definition involving antisymmetrization. Another generalization related to the exterior product is the commutator product:
: formula_114     (the &quot;commutator product&quot;)

The regressive product is the dual of the exterior product (respectively corresponding to the &quot;meet&quot; and &quot;join&quot; in this context). The dual specification of elements permits, for blades and , the intersection (or meet) where the duality is to be taken relative to the a blade containing both and (the smallest such blade being the join).
: formula_115
with the unit pseudoscalar of the algebra. The regressive product, like the exterior product, is associative.

The inner product on vectors can also be generalized, but in more than one non-equivalent way. The paper gives a full treatment of several different inner products developed for geometric algebras and their interrelationships, and the notation is taken from there. Many authors use the same symbol as for the inner product of vectors for their chosen extension (e.g. Hestenes and Perwass). No consistent notation has emerged.

Among these several different generalizations of the inner product on vectors are:
: formula_116   (the &quot;left contraction&quot;)
: formula_117   (the &quot;right contraction&quot;)
: formula_118   (the &quot;scalar product&quot;)
: formula_119   (the &quot;(fat) dot&quot; product)

 makes an argument for the use of contractions in preference to Hestenes&#x27;s inner product; they are algebraically more regular and have cleaner geometric interpretations. 
A number of identities incorporating the contractions are valid without restriction of their inputs.
For example,
: formula_120
: formula_121
: formula_122
: formula_123 
: formula_124
: formula_125

Benefits of using the left contraction as an extension of the inner product on vectors include that the identity formula_126 is extended to formula_127 for any vector formula_16 and multivector , and that the projection operation formula_129 is extended to formula_130 for any blade formula_131 and any multivector formula_76 (with a minor modification to accommodate null , given below).

=== Dual basis ===
Let formula_133 be a basis of , i.e. a set of formula_52 linearly independent vectors that span the -dimensional vector space . The basis that is dual to formula_133 is the set of elements of the dual vector space formula_136 that forms a biorthogonal system with this basis, thus being the elements denoted formula_137 satisfying
: formula_138
where formula_139 is the Kronecker delta.

Given a nondegenerate quadratic form on , formula_136 becomes naturally identified with , and the dual basis may be regarded as elements of , but are not in general the same set as the original basis.

Given further a GA of , let 
: formula_141
be the pseudoscalar (which does not necessarily square to ) formed from the basis . The dual basis vectors may be constructed as
: formula_142
where the formula_143 denotes that the th basis vector is omitted from the product.

A dual basis is also known as a reciprocal basis or reciprocal frame.

A major usage of a dual basis is to separate vectors into components. Given a vector , scalar components formula_144 can be defined as
: formula_145
in terms of which formula_16 can be separated into vector components as
: formula_147
We can also define scalar components formula_23 as
: formula_149
in terms of which formula_16 can be separated into vector components in terms of the dual basis as
: formula_151

A dual basis as defined above for the vector subspace of a geometric algebra can be extended to cover the entire algebra. For compactness, we&#x27;ll use a single capital letter to represent an ordered set of vector indices. I.e., writing
: formula_152
where ,
we can write a basis blade as
: formula_153
The corresponding reciprocal blade has the indices in opposite order:
: formula_154
Similar to the case above with vectors, it can be shown that
: formula_155
where formula_156 is the scalar product.

With formula_76 a multivector, we can define scalar components as
: formula_158
in terms of which formula_76 can be separated into component blades as
: formula_160
We can alternatively define scalar components
: formula_161
in terms of which formula_76 can be separated into component blades as
: formula_163

=== Linear functions ===
Although a versor is easier to work with because it can be directly represented in the algebra as a multivector, versors are a subgroup of linear functions on multivectors, which can still be used when necessary. The geometric algebra of an -dimensional vector space is spanned by a basis of formula_56 elements. If a multivector is represented by a formula_165 real column matrix of coefficients of a basis of the algebra, then all linear transformations of the multivector can be expressed as the matrix multiplication by a formula_166 real matrix. However, such a general linear transformation allows arbitrary exchanges among grades, such as a &quot;rotation&quot; of a scalar into a vector, which has no evident geometric interpretation.

A general linear transformation from vectors to vectors is of interest. With the natural restriction to preserving the induced exterior algebra, the &quot;outermorphism&quot; of the linear transformation is the unique(1) = 1&lt;/math&gt; is usually added to ensure that the zero map is unique.}} extension of the versor. If formula_167 is a linear function that maps vectors to vectors, then its outermorphism is the function that obeys the rule
: formula_168
for a blade, extended to the whole algebra through linearity.

== Modeling geometries ==
Although a lot of attention has been placed on CGA, it is to be noted that GA is not just one algebra, it is one of a family of algebras with the same essential structure.

=== Vector space model ===
The even subalgebra of formula_169 is isomorphic to the complex numbers, as may be seen by writing a vector formula_170 in terms of its components in an orthonormal basis and left multiplying by the basis vector , yielding
: formula_171
where we identify formula_172 since
: formula_173

Similarly, the even subalgebra of formula_49 with basis formula_175 is isomorphic to the quaternions as may be seen by identifying , formula_176 and .

Every associative algebra has a matrix representation; replacing the three Cartesian basis vectors by the Pauli matrices gives a representation of :
: formula_177

Dotting the &quot;Pauli vector&quot; (a dyad):
: formula_178 with arbitrary vectors formula_179 and formula_180 and multiplying through gives:
: formula_181 (Equivalently, by inspection, )

=== Spacetime model ===
In physics, the main applications are the geometric algebra of Minkowski 3+1 spacetime, , called spacetime algebra (STA), or less commonly, , interpreted the algebra of physical space (APS).

While in STA, points of spacetime are represented simply by vectors, in APS, points of -dimensional spacetime are instead represented by paravectors, a three-dimensional vector (space) plus a one-dimensional scalar (time).

In spacetime algebra the electromagnetic field tensor has a bivector representation . Here, the formula_182 is the unit pseudoscalar (or four-dimensional volume element), formula_183 is the unit vector in time direction, and formula_184 and formula_131 are the classic electric and magnetic field vectors (with a zero time component). Using the four-current , Maxwell&#x27;s equations then become

In geometric calculus, juxtaposition of vectors such as in formula_186 indicate the geometric product and can be decomposed into parts as . Here formula_93 is the covector derivative in any spacetime and reduces to formula_188 in flat spacetime. Where formula_189 plays a role in Minkowski -spacetime which is synonymous to the role of formula_188 in Euclidean -space and is related to the d&#x27;Alembertian by . Indeed, given an observer represented by a future pointing timelike vector formula_183 we have
: formula_192
: formula_193

Boosts in this Lorentzian metric space have the same expression formula_194 as rotation in Euclidean space, where formula_195 is the bivector generated by the time and the space directions involved, whereas in the Euclidean case it is the bivector generated by the two space directions, strengthening the &quot;analogy&quot; to almost identity.

The Dirac matrices are a representation of , showing the equivalence with matrix representations used by physicists.

=== Homogeneous models ===
Homogeneous models generally refer to a projective representation in which the elements of the one-dimensional subspaces of a vector space represent points of a geometry.

In a geometric algebra of a space of formula_52 dimensions, the rotors represent a set of transformations with formula_197 degrees of freedom, corresponding to rotations – for example, formula_20 when formula_199 and formula_200 when . Geometric algebra is often used to model a projective space, i.e. as a &quot;homogeneous model&quot;: a point, line, plane, etc. is represented by an equivalence class of elements of the algebra that differ by an invertible scalar factor.

The rotors in a space of dimension formula_201 have formula_202 degrees of freedom, the same as the number of degrees of freedom in the rotations and translations combined for an -dimensional space.

This is the case in &quot;Projective Geometric Algebra&quot; (PGA), which is used to represent Euclidean isometries in Euclidean geometry (thereby covering the large majority of engineering applications of geometry). In this model, a degenerate dimension is added to the three Euclidean dimensions to form the algebra . With a suitable identification of subspaces to represent points, lines and planes, the versors of this algebra represent all proper Euclidean isometries, which are always screw motions in 3-dimensional space, along with all improper Euclidean isometries, which includes reflections, rotoreflections, transflections, and point reflections. PGA allows projection, meet, and angle formulas to be derived from formula_203 - with a very minor extension to the algebra it is also possible to derive distances and joins.

PGA is a widely used system that combines geometric algebra with homogeneous representations in geometry, but there exist several other such systems. The conformal model discussed below is homogeneous, as is &quot;Conic Geometric Algebra&quot;, and see &quot;Plane-based geometric algebra&quot; for discussion of homogeneous models of elliptic and hyperbolic geometry compared with the Euclidean geometry derived from PGA.

=== Conformal model ===

Working within GA, Euclidean space formula_204 (along with a conformal point at infinity) is embedded projectively in the CGA formula_51 via the identification of Euclidean points with 1D subspaces in the 4D null cone of the 5D CGA vector subspace. This allows all conformal transformations to be performed as rotations and reflections and is covariant, extending incidence relations of projective geometry to rounds objects such as circles and spheres.

Specifically, we add orthogonal basis vectors formula_206 and formula_207 such that formula_208 and formula_209 to the basis of the vector space that generates formula_49 and identify null vectors
: formula_211 as the point at the origin and
: formula_212 as a conformal point at infinity (see &quot;Compactification&quot;), giving
: formula_213

(Some authors set formula_214 and .) This procedure has some similarities to the procedure for working with homogeneous coordinates in projective geometry, and in this case allows the modeling of Euclidean transformations of formula_215 as orthogonal transformations of a subset of .

A fast changing and fluid area of GA, CGA is also being investigated for applications to relativistic physics.

=== Table of models ===
Note in this list that and can be swapped and the same name applies; for example, with &quot;relatively&quot; little change occurring, see sign convention. For example, formula_216 and formula_217 are &quot;both&quot; referred to as Spacetime Algebra.
== Geometric interpretation in the vector space model ==

=== Projection and rejection ===
For any vector formula_16 and any invertible vector ,
: formula_219
where the projection of formula_16 onto formula_221 (or the parallel part) is
: formula_222
and the rejection of formula_16 from formula_221 (or the orthogonal part) is
: formula_225

Using the concept of a -blade as representing a subspace of and every multivector ultimately being expressed in terms of vectors, this generalizes to projection of a general multivector onto any invertible -blade as
: formula_226
with the rejection being defined as
: formula_227

The projection and rejection generalize to null blades formula_131 by replacing the inverse formula_229 with the pseudoinverse formula_230 with respect to the contractive product. The outcome of the projection coincides in both cases for non-null blades. For null blades , the definition of the projection given here with the first contraction rather than the second being onto the pseudoinverse should be used, as only then is the result necessarily in the subspace represented by .
The projection generalizes through linearity to general multivectors . The projection is not linear in and does not generalize to objects that are not blades.

=== Reflection ===
Simple reflections in a hyperplane are readily expressed in the algebra through conjugation with a single vector. These serve to generate the group of general rotoreflections and rotations.

The reflection formula_231 of a vector formula_232 along a vector , or equivalently in the hyperplane orthogonal to , is the same as negating the component of a vector parallel to . The result of the reflection will be 
: formula_233

This is not the most general operation that may be regarded as a reflection when the dimension . A general reflection may be expressed as the composite of any odd number of single-axis reflections. Thus, a general reflection formula_234 of a vector formula_16 may be written
: formula_236
where
: formula_237 and formula_238

If we define the reflection along a non-null vector formula_221 of the product of vectors as the reflection of every vector in the product along the same vector, we get for any product of an odd number of vectors that, by way of example,
: formula_240
and for the product of an even number of vectors that
: formula_241

Using the concept of every multivector ultimately being expressed in terms of vectors, the reflection of a general multivector formula_76 using any reflection versor formula_243 may be written
: formula_244
where formula_245 is the automorphism of reflection through the origin of the vector space () extended through linearity to the whole algebra.

=== Rotations ===
If we have a product of vectors formula_246 then we denote the reverse as
: formula_247

As an example, assume that formula_248 we get
: formula_249

Scaling formula_250 so that formula_251 then
: formula_252
so formula_253 leaves the length of formula_254 unchanged. We can also show that
: formula_255
so the transformation formula_253 preserves both length and angle. It therefore can be identified as a rotation or rotoreflection; formula_250 is called a rotor if it is a proper rotation (as it is if it can be expressed as a product of an even number of vectors) and is an instance of what is known in GA as a &quot;versor&quot;.

There is a general method for rotating a vector involving the formation of a multivector of the form formula_258 that produces a rotation formula_259 in the plane and with the orientation defined by a -blade .

Rotors are a generalization of quaternions to -dimensional spaces.

== Examples and applications ==
=== Hypervolume of a parallelotope spanned by vectors ===
For vectors and spanning a parallelogram we have
: formula_260
with the result that is linear in the product of the &quot;altitude&quot; and the &quot;base&quot; of the parallelogram, that is, its area.

Similar interpretations are true for any number of vectors spanning an -dimensional parallelotope; the exterior product of vectors , that is , has a magnitude equal to the volume of the -parallelotope. An -vector does not necessarily have a shape of a parallelotope – this is a convenient visualization. It could be any shape, although the volume equals that of the parallelotope.

=== Intersection of a line and a plane ===
We may define the line parametrically by , where and are position vectors for points P and T and is the direction vector for the line.

Then
: formula_261 and formula_262
so
: formula_263
and
: formula_264

=== Rotating systems ===
A rotational quantity such as torque or angular momentum is described in geometric algebra as a bivector. Suppose a circular path in an arbitrary plane containing orthonormal vectors and is parameterized by angle.
: formula_265

By designating the unit bivector of this plane as the imaginary number
: formula_266
: formula_267
this path vector can be conveniently written in complex exponential form
: formula_268
and the derivative with respect to angle is
: formula_269

For example, torque is generally defined as the magnitude of the perpendicular force component times distance, or work per unit angle. Thus the torque, the rate of change of work with respect to angle, due to a force , is
: formula_270

Rotational quantities are represented in vector calculus in three dimensions using the cross product. Together with a choice of an oriented volume form , these can be related to the exterior product with its more natural geometric interpretation of such quantities as a bivectors by using the dual relationship
: formula_271

Unlike the cross product description of torque, , the geometric algebra description does not introduce a vector in the normal direction; a vector that does not exist in two and that is not unique in greater than three dimensions. The unit bivector describes the plane and the orientation of the rotation, and the sense of the rotation is relative to the angle between the vectors and .

== Geometric calculus ==
Geometric calculus extends the formalism to include differentiation and integration including differential geometry and differential forms.

Essentially, the vector derivative is defined so that the GA version of Green&#x27;s theorem is true,
: formula_272
and then one can write
: formula_273
as a geometric product, effectively generalizing Stokes&#x27; theorem (including the differential form version of it).

In 1D when is a curve with endpoints and , then
: formula_272
reduces to
: formula_275
or the fundamental theorem of integral calculus.

Also developed are the concept of vector manifold and geometric integration theory (which generalizes differential forms).

== History ==

=== Before the 20th century ===
Although the connection of geometry with algebra dates as far back at least to Euclid&#x27;s &quot;Elements&quot; in the third century B.C. (see Greek geometric algebra), GA in the sense used in this article was not developed until 1844, when it was used in a &quot;systematic way&quot; to describe the geometrical properties and &quot;transformations&quot; of a space. In that year, Hermann Grassmann introduced the idea of a geometrical algebra in full generality as a certain calculus (analogous to the propositional calculus) that encoded all of the geometrical information of a space. Grassmann&#x27;s algebraic system could be applied to a number of different kinds of spaces, the chief among them being Euclidean space, affine space, and projective space. Following Grassmann, in 1878 William Kingdon Clifford examined Grassmann&#x27;s algebraic system alongside the quaternions of William Rowan Hamilton in . From his point of view, the quaternions described certain &quot;transformations&quot; (which he called &quot;rotors&quot;), whereas Grassmann&#x27;s algebra described certain &quot;properties&quot; (or &quot;Strecken&quot; such as length, area, and volume). His contribution was to define a new product – the &quot;geometric product&quot; – on an existing Grassmann algebra, which realized the quaternions as living within that algebra. Subsequently, Rudolf Lipschitz in 1886 generalized Clifford&#x27;s interpretation of the quaternions and applied them to the geometry of rotations in dimensions. Later these developments would lead other 20th-century mathematicians to formalize and explore the properties of the Clifford algebra.

Nevertheless, another revolutionary development of the 19th-century would completely overshadow the geometric algebras: that of vector analysis, developed independently by Josiah Willard Gibbs and Oliver Heaviside. Vector analysis was motivated by James Clerk Maxwell&#x27;s studies of electromagnetism, and specifically the need to express and manipulate conveniently certain differential equations. Vector analysis had a certain intuitive appeal compared to the rigors of the new algebras. Physicists and mathematicians alike readily adopted it as their geometrical toolkit of choice, particularly following the influential 1901 textbook &quot;Vector Analysis&quot; by Edwin Bidwell Wilson, following lectures of Gibbs.

In more detail, there have been three approaches to geometric algebra: quaternionic analysis, initiated by Hamilton in 1843 and geometrized as rotors by Clifford in 1878; geometric algebra, initiated by Grassmann in 1844; and vector analysis, developed out of quaternionic analysis in the late 19th century by Gibbs and Heaviside. The legacy of quaternionic analysis in vector analysis can be seen in the use of , , to indicate the basis vectors of : it is being thought of as the purely imaginary quaternions. From the perspective of geometric algebra, the even subalgebra of the Space Time Algebra is isomorphic to the GA of 3D Euclidean space and quaternions are isomorphic to the even subalgebra of the GA of 3D Euclidean space, which unifies the three approaches.

=== 20th century and present ===
Progress on the study of Clifford algebras quietly advanced through the twentieth century, although largely due to the work of abstract algebraists such as Élie Cartan, Hermann Weyl and Claude Chevalley. The &quot;geometrical&quot; approach to geometric algebras has seen a number of 20th-century revivals. In mathematics, Emil Artin&#x27;s &quot;Geometric Algebra&quot; discusses the algebra associated with each of a number of geometries, including affine geometry, projective geometry, symplectic geometry, and orthogonal geometry. In physics, geometric algebras have been revived as a &quot;new&quot; way to do classical mechanics and electromagnetism, together with more advanced topics such as quantum mechanics and gauge theory. David Hestenes reinterpreted the Pauli and Dirac matrices as vectors in ordinary space and spacetime, respectively, and has been a primary contemporary advocate for the use of geometric algebra.

In computer graphics and robotics, geometric algebras have been revived in order to efficiently represent rotations and other transformations. For applications of GA in robotics (screw theory, kinematics and dynamics using versors), computer vision, control and neural computing (geometric learning) see Bayro (2010).

== See also ==
* Comparison of vector algebra and geometric algebra
* Clifford algebra
* Grassmann–Cayley algebra
* Spacetime algebra
* Spinor
* Quaternion
* Algebra of physical space
* Universal geometric algebra

== Notes ==
== Citations ==
== References and further reading ==

: &quot;Arranged chronologically&quot;
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* . Chapter 1 as PDF
* 
* 
* Extract online at https://davidhestenes.net/geocalc/html/UAFCG.html #5 New Tools for Computational Geometry and rejuvenation of Screw Theory
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* A Survey of Geometric Algebra and Geometric Calculus Alan Macdonald, Luther College, Iowa
* Imaginary Numbers are not Real – the Geometric Algebra of Spacetime. Introduction (Cambridge GA group)
* Geometric Algebra 2015, Masters Course in Scientific Computing, from Dr. Chris Doran (Cambridge)
* Maths for (Games) Programmers: 5 – Multivector methods – comprehensive introduction and reference for programmers, from Ian Bell
* IMPA Summer School 2010 Fernandes Oliveira Intro and Slides
* University of Fukui E.S.M. Hitzer and Japan GA publications
* Google Group for GA
* Geometric Algebra Primer Introduction to GA, Jaap Suter
* Geometric Algebra Resources curated wiki, Pablo Bleyer
* Applied Geometric Algebras in Computer Science and Engineering 2018 Early Proceedings
* bivector.net Geometric Algebra for CGI, Vision and Engineering community website
* AGACSE 2021 Videos
English translations of early books and papers
* G. Combebiac, &quot;calculus of tri-quaternions&quot; (Doctoral dissertation)
* M. Markic, &quot;Transformants: A new mathematical vehicle. A synthesis of Combebiac&#x27;s tri-quaternions and Grassmann&#x27;s geometric system. The calculus of quadri-quaternions&quot;
* C. Burali-Forti, &quot;The Grassmann method in projective geometry&quot; A compilation of three notes on the application of exterior algebra to projective geometry
* C. Burali-Forti, &quot;Introduction to Differential Geometry, following the method of H. Grassmann&quot; Early book on the application of Grassmann algebra
* H. Grassmann, &quot;Mechanics, according to the principles of the theory of extension&quot; – one of his papers on the applications of exterior algebra

Research groups
* Geometric Calculus International. Links to Research groups, Software, and Conferences, worldwide
* Cambridge Geometric Algebra group. Full-text online publications, and other material
* University of Amsterdam group
* Geometric Calculus research &amp; development (archive of Hestenes&#x27;s website at Arizona State University)
* GA-Net blog and newsletter archive. Geometric Algebra/Clifford Algebra development news
* Geometric Algebra for Perception Action Systems. Geometric Cybernetics Group (CINVESTAV, Campus Guadalajara, Mexico)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186649" start="18" end="35" title="Geometric algebra" label="geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="53" end="69" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="77" end="84" title="Algebra over a field" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13471665" start="147" end="153" title="Vector (mathematics and physics)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377336" start="325" end="336" title="multivector" label="multivector"/>
<link wikidata="Q77219" start="609" end="626" title="Hermann Grassmann" label="Hermann Grassmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196652" start="689" end="705" title="exterior algebra" label="exterior algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q323228" start="716" end="740" title="William Kingdon Clifford" label="William Kingdon Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196652" start="1007" end="1024" title="exterior algebra" label="Grassmann algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835967" start="1045" end="1063" title="quaternion algebra" label="quaternion algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755512" start="1076" end="1080" title="Duality (mathematics)" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597567" start="1137" end="1161" title="Grassmann–Cayley algebra" label="Grassmann–Cayley algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q122639567" start="1182" end="1211" title="plane-based geometric algebra" label="plane-based geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160252" start="1216" end="1243" title="conformal geometric algebra" label="conformal geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132698" start="1311" end="1331" title="Klein geometry" label="classical geometries"/>
<link wikidata="Q728435" start="1419" end="1428" title="vector subspace" label="subspaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q200802" start="1578" end="1593" title="vector calculus" label="vector calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174726" start="1718" end="1732" title="David Hestenes" label="David Hestenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q663908" start="1900" end="1908" title="Bivector" label="Bivector"/>
<link wikidata="Q621476" start="1955" end="1967" title="pseudovector" label="pseudovector"/>
<link wikidata="Q178192" start="2023" end="2036" title="cross product" label="cross product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="2122" end="2136" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377336" start="2140" end="2149" title="trivector" label="trivector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923680" start="2215" end="2220" title="Blade (geometry)" label="blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q519967" start="2261" end="2282" title="orthogonal projection" label="orthogonal projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="2486" end="2496" title="Theory of relativity" label="relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572735" start="2561" end="2578" title="spacetime algebra" label="spacetime algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893020" start="2600" end="2625" title="algebra of physical space" label="algebra of physical space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535476" start="2628" end="2646" title="Geometric calculus" label="Geometric calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="2685" end="2700" title="differentiation (mathematics)" label="differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="2705" end="2716" title="integral" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="2766" end="2782" title="complex analysis" label="complex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="2787" end="2808" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047080" start="2856" end="2873" title="differential form" label="differential form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174726" start="2930" end="2944" title="David Hestenes" label="David Hestenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106976" start="2949" end="2960" title="Chris J. L. Doran" label="Chris Doran"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3006" end="3013" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="3108" end="3117" title="classical mechanics" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="3122" end="3139" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="3141" end="3163" title="electromagnetic theory" label="electromagnetic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="3169" end="3179" title="theory of relativity" label="relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="3230" end="3247" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="3252" end="3260" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="3550" end="3555" title="Field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510587" start="3642" end="3659" title="Lorentzian metric" label="Lorentzian metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q736753" start="3692" end="3707" title="quadratic space" label="quadratic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="3715" end="3731" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q619436" start="3825" end="3841" title="Quotient associative algebra" label="quotient algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296021" start="3849" end="3863" title="tensor algebra" label="tensor algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="3960" end="3976" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="4468" end="4472" title="Real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142562" start="4609" end="4618" title="Metric signature" label="signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720939" start="5178" end="5185" title="Closure (mathematics)" label="closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q185813" start="5238" end="5254" title="identity element" label="identity element"/>
<link wikidata="Q177251" start="5259" end="5272" title="associativity" label="associativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q187959" start="5281" end="5295" title="distributivity" label="distributivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243424" start="5888" end="5906" title="idempotent element (ring theory)" label="idempotent element"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="5921" end="5933" title="zero divisor" label="zero divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q980509" start="6045" end="6054" title="embedding" label="embedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196652" start="6756" end="6772" title="exterior algebra" label="exterior algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q53875" start="7031" end="7039" title="parallel (geometry)" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="7138" end="7151" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="7354" end="7365" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q120823004" start="7457" end="7468" title="signed area" label="signed area"/>
<link wikidata="Q45867" start="7483" end="7496" title="parallelogram" label="parallelogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q178192" start="7537" end="7550" title="cross product" label="cross product"/>
<link wikidata="Q736753" start="7793" end="7803" title="nondegenerate quadratic form" label="degenerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064405" start="8251" end="8274" title="parity of a permutation" label="sign of the permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401084" start="8574" end="8593" title="alternating algebra" label="alternating algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189744" start="8692" end="8700" title="Pfaffian" label="Pfaffian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="8728" end="8739" title="combination" label="combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="8789" end="8795" title="parity (mathematics)" label="parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="8803" end="8814" title="combination" label="combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q331350" start="9100" end="9109" title="simplex" label="simplices"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="9164" end="9186" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q331350" start="9191" end="9200" title="simplex" label="simplices"/>
<link wikidata="Q339011" start="9810" end="9826" title="symmetric matrix" label="symmetric matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409400" start="9849" end="9863" title="Gramian matrix" label="Gramian matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425077" start="9886" end="9902" title="spectral theorem" label="spectral theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q332791" start="9938" end="9953" title="diagonal matrix" label="diagonal matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q333871" start="9971" end="9988" title="orthogonal matrix" label="orthogonal matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q884772" start="10642" end="10654" title="block matrix" label="block matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="10836" end="10846" title="unit vector" label="normalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752621" start="10937" end="10968" title="Sylvester&amp;#x27;s law of inertia" label="Sylvester&amp;#x27;s law of inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="11416" end="11431" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="11457" end="11466" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160252" start="11484" end="11511" title="conformal geometric algebra" label="conformal geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270905" start="11759" end="11770" title="Poincaré–Birkhoff–Witt theorem" label="PBW theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540738" start="13888" end="13912" title="Cartan–Dieudonné theorem" label="Cartan–Dieudonné theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058206" start="14801" end="14820" title="graded vector space" label="graded vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748985" start="15523" end="15535" title="pseudoscalar" label="pseudoscalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449241" start="16019" end="16035" title="filtered algebra" label="filtered algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058206" start="16590" end="16609" title="graded vector space" label="graded vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058206" start="16614" end="16633" title="graded vector space" label="graded vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058206" start="16717" end="16736" title="graded vector space" label="graded vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q15534632" start="16766" end="16780" title="graded algebra" label="graded algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977654" start="16784" end="16796" title="superalgebra" label="superalgebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977654" start="16931" end="16946" title="even subalgebra" label="even subalgebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="17014" end="17032" title="algebra homomorphism" label="algebra-isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923680" start="17480" end="17485" title="blade (geometry)" label="blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q107472979" start="17764" end="17775" title="orientation (vector space)" label="orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996684" start="18528" end="18545" title="Plücker embedding" label="Plücker embedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="19341" end="19355" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="19430" end="19444" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="20359" end="20369" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20606" end="20622" title="#Grade projection" label="grade projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q519967" start="22697" end="22707" title="projection (linear algebra)" label="projection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22869" end="22874" title="#Projection and rejection" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q752487" start="23093" end="23110" title="dual vector space" label="dual vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q864692" start="23136" end="23155" title="biorthogonal system" label="biorthogonal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="23267" end="23282" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297777" start="23790" end="23806" title="reciprocal basis" label="reciprocal basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854269" start="25224" end="25239" title="linear function" label="linear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q20294235" start="25452" end="25465" title="column matrix" label="column matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049914" start="25584" end="25605" title="matrix multiplication" label="matrix multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097714" start="25984" end="25997" title="outermorphism" label="outermorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="26103" end="26111" title="zero map" label="zero map"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977654" start="26582" end="26597" title="even subalgebra" label="even subalgebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="26634" end="26648" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="26955" end="26965" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q744960" start="27024" end="27043" title="associative algebra" label="associative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="27124" end="27138" title="Pauli matrices" label="Pauli matrices"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27200" end="27212" title="Pauli matrices#Pauli vectors" label="Pauli vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396526" start="27222" end="27226" title="dyadics" label="dyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="27459" end="27482" title="Minkowski spacetime" label="Minkowski 3+1 spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572735" start="27493" end="27510" title="spacetime algebra" label="spacetime algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893020" start="27554" end="27579" title="algebra of physical space" label="algebra of physical space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136258" start="27725" end="27735" title="paravector" label="paravector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074152" start="28157" end="28169" title="four-current" label="four-current"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="28172" end="28196" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q911268" start="28600" end="28618" title="d&amp;#x27;Alembertian" label="d&amp;#x27;Alembertian"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="28748" end="28754" title="Lorentz boost" label="Boosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151645" start="29098" end="29112" title="Dirac matrices" label="Dirac matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q877775" start="29690" end="29706" title="projective space" label="projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333813" start="30182" end="30202" title="Euclidean isometry" label="Euclidean isometries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891441" start="30578" end="30591" title="Screw theory" label="screw motions"/>
<link wikidata="Q122639567" start="31181" end="31210" title="Plane-based geometric algebra" label="Plane-based geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555165" start="31714" end="31723" title="Covariance and contravariance of vectors" label="covariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555169" start="32010" end="32022" title="null vectors" label="null vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q546145" start="32126" end="32142" title="Compactification (mathematics)" label="Compactification"/>
<link wikidata="Q528525" start="32281" end="32304" title="homogeneous coordinates" label="homogeneous coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333813" start="32369" end="32393" title="Euclidean transformation" label="Euclidean transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997740" start="32413" end="32438" title="orthogonal transformation" label="orthogonal transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829907" start="32733" end="32748" title="sign convention" label="sign convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q304490" start="34133" end="34151" title="Householder transformation" label="Simple reflections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256684" start="34292" end="34306" title="rotoreflection" label="rotoreflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q848368" start="34312" end="34321" title="rotation (mathematics)" label="rotations"/>
<link wikidata="Q782566" start="35438" end="35450" title="automorphism" label="automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203075" start="35454" end="35483" title="reflection through the origin" label="reflection through the origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370585" start="36034" end="36039" title="rotor (mathematics)" label="rotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256684" start="36051" end="36066" title="proper rotation" label="proper rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518235" start="36196" end="36202" title="versor" label="versor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201016" start="36368" end="36373" title="Plane of rotation" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36868" end="36881" title="Parallelepiped#Parallelotope" label="parallelotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="37471" end="37477" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="37481" end="37497" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200802" start="38193" end="38208" title="vector calculus" label="vector calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178192" start="38239" end="38252" title="cross product" label="cross product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622692" start="38445" end="38449" title="Hodge dual" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047080" start="39010" end="39027" title="differential form" label="differential form"/>
<link wikidata="Q321237" start="39103" end="39123" title="Green&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Green&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q467756" start="39233" end="39253" title="Stokes&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Stokes&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152794" start="39475" end="39490" title="Vector Manifold" label="vector manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q8747" start="39691" end="39697" title="Euclid" label="Euclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172891" start="39711" end="39719" title="Euclid&amp;#x27;s Elements" label="Elements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39757" end="39780" title="History of elementary algebra#Greek geometric algebra" label="Greek geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q77219" start="39996" end="40013" title="Hermann Grassmann" label="Hermann Grassmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="40118" end="40140" title="propositional calculus" label="propositional calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="40322" end="40337" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q382698" start="40339" end="40351" title="affine space" label="affine space"/>
<link wikidata="Q877775" start="40357" end="40373" title="projective space" label="projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q323228" start="40404" end="40428" title="William Kingdon Clifford" label="William Kingdon Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="40486" end="40497" title="quaternions" label="quaternions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11887" start="40501" end="40523" title="William Rowan Hamilton" label="William Rowan Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q77322" start="40980" end="40996" title="Rudolf Lipschitz" label="Rudolf Lipschitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q200802" start="41392" end="41407" title="vector analysis" label="vector analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="41436" end="41456" title="Josiah Willard Gibbs" label="Josiah Willard Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q154345" start="41461" end="41477" title="Oliver Heaviside" label="Oliver Heaviside"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="41512" end="41531" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="41550" end="41566" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="41641" end="41662" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362040" start="41910" end="41925" title="Vector Analysis" label="Vector Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q912906" start="41935" end="41955" title="Edwin Bidwell Wilson" label="Edwin Bidwell Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="42058" end="42068" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="42917" end="42933" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q274639" start="42946" end="42957" title="Élie Cartan" label="Élie Cartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q71029" start="42959" end="42971" title="Hermann Weyl" label="Hermann Weyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q634850" start="42976" end="42992" title="Claude Chevalley" label="Claude Chevalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q57283" start="43113" end="43123" title="Emil Artin" label="Emil Artin"/>
<link wikidata="Q382520" start="43241" end="43256" title="affine geometry" label="affine geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q177409" start="43258" end="43277" title="projective geometry" label="projective geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190991" start="43279" end="43298" title="symplectic geometry" label="symplectic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q162886" start="43304" end="43323" title="orthogonal geometry" label="orthogonal geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174726" start="43526" end="43540" title="David Hestenes" label="David Hestenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="43559" end="43564" title="Pauli matrices" label="Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151645" start="43569" end="43574" title="Gamma matrices" label="Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="43725" end="43742" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891441" start="43901" end="43913" title="screw theory" label="screw theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156019" start="44058" end="44108" title="Comparison of vector algebra and geometric algebra" label="Comparison of vector algebra and geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="44111" end="44127" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597567" start="44130" end="44154" title="Grassmann–Cayley algebra" label="Grassmann–Cayley algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572735" start="44157" end="44174" title="Spacetime algebra" label="Spacetime algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q604907" start="44177" end="44183" title="Spinor" label="Spinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="44186" end="44196" title="Quaternion" label="Quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893020" start="44199" end="44224" title="Algebra of physical space" label="Algebra of physical space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152794" start="44227" end="44254" title="Universal geometric algebra" label="Universal geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405625" start="45051" end="45059" title="Ian Bell (programmer)" label="Ian Bell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12942" wikidata="Q1247963" url="?curid=12942" title="Genetic">
<text>Genetic may refer to:
*Genetics, in biology, the science of genes, heredity, and the variation of organisms
**Genetic, used as an adjective, refers to genes
***Genetic disorder, any disorder caused by a genetic mutation, whether inherited or de novo
***Genetic mutation, a change in a gene
****Heredity, genes and their mutations being passed from parents to offspring
**Genetic recombination, refers to the recombining of alleles resulting in a new molecule of DNA
*Genetic relationship (linguistics), in linguistics, a relationship between two languages with a common ancestor language
*Genetic algorithm, in computer science, a kind of search technique modeled on evolutionary biology

==See also==
*Genetic memory (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1247963" start="0" end="7" title="Genetic" label="Genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="23" end="31" title="Genetics" label="Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="151" end="155" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="160" end="176" title="Genetic disorder" label="Genetic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="261" end="269" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="294" end="302" title="Heredity" label="Heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="371" end="392" title="Genetic recombination" label="Genetic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="467" end="501" title="Genetic relationship (linguistics)" label="Genetic relationship (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q187787" start="589" end="606" title="Genetic algorithm" label="Genetic algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16783747" start="703" end="734" title="Genetic memory (disambiguation)" label="Genetic memory (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12945" wikidata="Q348459" url="?curid=12945" title="George Benson">
<text>George Washington Benson (born March 22, 1943) is an American jazz fusion guitarist, singer, and songwriter. He began his professional career at the age of 19 as a jazz guitarist.

A former child prodigy, Benson first came to prominence in the 1960s, playing soul jazz with Jack McDuff and others. He then launched a successful solo career, alternating between jazz, pop, R&amp;B singing, and scat singing. His album &quot;Breezin&#x27;&quot; was certified triple-platinum, hitting No. 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; album chart in 1976. His concerts were well attended through the 1980s, and he still has a large following. Benson has won ten Grammy Awards and has been honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

== Biography ==

=== Early career ===
Benson was born and raised in the Hill District of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. At the age of seven, he first played the ukulele in a corner drug store, for which he was paid a few dollars. At age eight, he played guitar in an unlicensed nightclub on Friday and Saturday nights, but the police soon closed the club down. At age nine, he started to record. Out of the four sides he cut, two were released: &quot;She Makes Me Mad&quot; backed with &quot;It Should Have Been Me&quot;, with RCA Victor in New York. Although one source indicates this record was released under the name &quot;Little Georgie&quot;, the 45rpm label is printed with the name George Benson. The single was produced by Leroy Kirkland for RCA&#x27;s rhythm and blues label, Groove Records.

Benson attended Connelley Vocational High School on Bedford Avenue in the Hill District. However, he dropped out, choosing to focus on music. In 1987, Benson received an honorary degree from Pittsburgh Public Schools.

As a youth, Benson learned how to play straight-ahead instrumental jazz during a relationship performing for several years with organist Jack McDuff. One of his many early guitar heroes was country-jazz guitarist Hank Garland. 

At the age of 21, he recorded his first album as leader, &quot;The New Boss Guitar of George Benson&quot; (1964), featuring McDuff. Benson&#x27;s next recording was &quot;It&#x27;s Uptown&quot; (1966) with the George Benson Quartet, including Lonnie Smith on organ and Ronnie Cuber on baritone saxophone. Benson followed it up with &quot;The George Benson Cookbook&quot; (1967), also with Lonnie Smith and Ronnie Cuber on baritone and drummer Marion Booker. Miles Davis employed Benson in the mid-1960s, featuring his guitar on &quot;Paraphernalia&quot; on his 1968 Columbia release, &quot;Miles in the Sky&quot; before Benson went to Verve Records.

=== 1970s and 1980s ===

In 1970, Benson released &quot;The Other Side of Abbey Road&quot;, featuring renditions of songs from the Beatles&#x27; 1969 album &quot;Abbey Road&quot;.
Benson then signed with Creed Taylor&#x27;s jazz label CTI Records, where he recorded several albums, with jazz heavyweights guesting, to some success, mainly in the jazz field. In addition to his own albums and performances, during this time Benson was a core member of the CTI All-Stars collective both touring and recording. As well as the collective&#x27;s live albums, he also played and recorded on a number of the collective&#x27;s members&#x27; individual albums, including Freddie Hubbard and Stanley Turrentine, notably on the latter&#x27;s acclaimed album &quot;Sugar&quot; (1970). Benson played on Hubbard&#x27;s 1971 album &quot;First Light&quot;, which won a Grammy Award for Best Jazz Performance by a Group at the 15th Annual Grammy Awards, as well as five other Hubbard studio albums.

Benson released a version of &quot;White Rabbit&quot; on the album of the same name in 1972, originally written and recorded by San Francisco rock group Great Society, and made famous by Jefferson Airplane. His 1974 release, &quot;Bad Benson&quot;, climbed to the top spot in the &quot;Billboard&quot; jazz chart, while the 1976 follow-ups, &quot;Good King Bad&quot; (No. 51 Pop album) and &quot;Benson &amp; Farrell&quot; (with Joe Farrell), both reached the jazz top-three sellers.

By the mid-to-late 1970s, as he recorded for Warner Bros. Records, a whole new audience began to discover Benson. On 1976&#x27;s &quot;Breezin&#x27;&quot;, Benson sang a lead vocal on the track &quot;This Masquerade&quot;, a song written by Leon Russell. Benson&#x27;s version (notable also for the lush, romantic piano intro and solo by Jorge Dalto), became a huge pop hit and won a Grammy Award for Record of the Year. (He had sung vocals infrequently on albums earlier in his career, notably his rendition of &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; on &quot;The Other Side of Abbey Road&quot;.) The rest of the album is instrumental, including his rendition of the 1975 José Feliciano composition &quot;Affirmation&quot;.

In 1976, Benson embarked on a tour called George &amp; Minnie Live! with soul singer Minnie Riperton; she had recently been diagnosed with terminal breast cancer and would die in 1979. In addition, Benson appeared as a guitarist and backup vocalist on Stevie Wonder&#x27;s song &quot;Another Star&quot; from Wonder&#x27;s album &quot;Songs in the Key of Life&quot; (1976).

He also recorded the original version of &quot;The Greatest Love of All&quot; for the 1977 Muhammad Ali biopic, &quot;The Greatest&quot;, which was later covered by Whitney Houston as &quot;Greatest Love of All.&quot; During this time Benson recorded with the German conductor Claus Ogerman. The live take of &quot;On Broadway,&quot; recorded a few months later from the 1978 release &quot;Weekend in L.A.&quot;, also won a Grammy.
The Qwest record label (a subsidiary of Warner Bros., run by Quincy Jones) released Benson&#x27;s breakthrough pop album &quot;Give Me the Night&quot;, produced by Jones. Benson made it into the pop and R&amp;B top ten with the song &quot;Give Me the Night&quot; (written by former Heatwave keyboardist Rod Temperton). He had many hit singles such as &quot;Love All the Hurt Away&quot;, &quot;Turn Your Love Around&quot;, &quot;Inside Love&quot;, &quot;Lady Love Me&quot;, &quot;20/20&quot;, &quot;Shiver&quot;, and &quot;Kisses in the Moonlight&quot;. More importantly, Jones encouraged Benson to search his roots for further vocal inspiration, and he rediscovered his love for Nat King Cole, Ray Charles and Donny Hathaway in the process, influencing a string of further vocal albums into the 1990s. Despite returning to his jazz and guitar playing most recently, this theme was reflected again much later in Benson&#x27;s 2000 release &quot;Absolute Benson&quot;, featuring a cover of one of Hathaway&#x27;s most notable songs, &quot;The Ghetto&quot;. Benson accumulated three other platinum LPs and two gold albums.

=== 1990s to present ===
In 1990, Benson was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Music from the Berklee College of Music.

To commemorate the long relationship between Benson and Ibanez and to celebrate 30 years of collaboration on the GB Signature Models, Ibanez created the GB30TH, a limited-edition model with a gold-foil finish inspired by the traditional Japanese Garahaku art form.

In 2009, Benson was recognized by the National Endowment of the Arts as a Jazz Master, the United States highest honor in jazz. Benson performed at the 49th issue of the Ohrid Summer Festival in North Macedonia on July 25, 2009, and his tribute show to Nat King Cole, &quot;An Unforgettable Tribute to Nat King Cole&quot;, as part of the Istanbul International Jazz Festival in Turkey on July 27. 

In late 2009, Benson finished recording an album entitled &quot;Songs and Stories&quot; with Marcus Miller, producer John Burk, and session musicians David Paich and Steve Lukather. As part of the promotion for the album, Benson appeared or performed on &quot;The Tavis Smiley Show&quot;, &quot;Jimmy Kimmel Live!&quot; and &quot;Late Night with Jimmy Fallon&quot;.

He performed at the 2011 Java Jazz Festival during March 4–6. On October 4, Benson released the album &quot;Guitar Man&quot;, revisiting his 1960s/early-1970s guitar-playing roots with a 12-song collection of covers of both jazz and pop standards produced by John Burk.

In June 2013, Benson released his fourth album for Concord, &quot;&quot;, which included Wynton Marsalis, Idina Menzel, Till Brönner, and Judith Hill. In September, he returned to perform at Rock in Rio festival, in Rio de Janeiro, 35 years after his first performance at this festival, which was then the inaugural one.

In July 2016, Benson participated as a mentor in the Sky Arts programme &quot;Guitar Star&quot; in the search for the UK and Republic of Ireland&#x27;s most talented guitarist.

In May 2018, Benson was featured on the Gorillaz single &quot;Humility&quot;.

On July 12, 2018, it was announced that Benson had signed to Mascot Label Group.

Benson stopped touring internationally at the start of 2024 due to ill health, cancelling a series of UK concerts that summer.

Benson released a new album, &quot;Dreams Do Come True: When George Benson Meets Robert Farnon&quot; on July 19, 2024. The album was an abandoned project based on recordings with arranger and conductor Robert Farnon backed by the London Symphony Orchestra from 1989 that were thought to have been lost. Upon location of the masters, Benson played them for his current label, Rhino Entertainment, who encouraged Benson to complete the project. Were the album released when it was recorded it would have predated most of the wave of Great American Songbook albums released by popular artists at the end of the 20th century and well into the 21st century. Benson also announced plans for a four-night festival called &quot;Breezin&#x27; with the Stars&quot; planned for January 2025.

== Personal life ==
Benson has been married to Johnnie Lee since 1965 and has seven children. Benson describes his music as focusing more on love and romance, due to his commitment to his family and religious practices, with Benson being a Jehovah&#x27;s Witness. Benson has been a resident of Englewood, New Jersey.

== Discography ==
== Awards ==

=== Grammy Awards ===
List of Grammy Awards received by George Benson
== References ==
== External links ==
*
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q348459" start="0" end="24" title="George Benson" label="George Washington Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="62" end="73" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="164" end="168" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q205178" start="190" end="203" title="child prodigy" label="child prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615483" start="259" end="268" title="soul jazz" label="soul jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677123" start="274" end="285" title="Jack McDuff" label="Jack McDuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="372" end="379" title="rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q623202" start="393" end="405" title="scat singing" label="scat singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455605" start="423" end="436" title="Breezin&amp;#x27;" label="Breezin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="464" end="472" title="music recording sales certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="495" end="516" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="644" end="656" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="686" end="690" title="List of stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame#B" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="698" end="720" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762101" start="795" end="808" title="Hill District" label="Hill District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="812" end="822" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="824" end="836" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="879" end="886" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="1245" end="1255" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247109" start="1450" end="1464" title="Leroy Kirkland" label="Leroy Kirkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q194958" start="1504" end="1518" title="Groove Records" label="Groove Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199373" start="1712" end="1737" title="Pittsburgh Public Schools" label="Pittsburgh Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677123" start="1877" end="1888" title="Jack McDuff" label="Jack McDuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q704578" start="1953" end="1965" title="Hank Garland" label="Hank Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753527" start="2032" end="2068" title="The New Boss Guitar of George Benson" label="The New Boss Guitar of George Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015006" start="2140" end="2156" title="It&amp;#x27;s Uptown" label="It&amp;#x27;s Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253980" start="2212" end="2224" title="Lonnie Smith (organist)" label="Lonnie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386889" start="2238" end="2250" title="Ronnie Cuber" label="Ronnie Cuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q808218" start="2254" end="2272" title="baritone saxophone" label="baritone saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521013" start="2307" end="2333" title="The George Benson Cookbook" label="The George Benson Cookbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="2427" end="2438" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="2535" end="2543" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761463" start="2559" end="2575" title="Miles in the Sky (album)" label="Miles in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124849" start="2604" end="2617" title="Verve Records" label="Verve Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988589" start="2676" end="2704" title="The Other Side of Abbey Road" label="The Other Side of Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="2747" end="2758" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q173643" start="2782" end="2792" title="Abbey Road" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139476" start="2824" end="2836" title="Creed Taylor" label="Creed Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q507942" start="2855" end="2866" title="CTI Records" label="CTI Records"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3075" end="3088" title="CTI All-Stars" label="CTI All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q346762" start="3282" end="3297" title="Freddie Hubbard" label="Freddie Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q638824" start="3302" end="3320" title="Stanley Turrentine" label="Stanley Turrentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622732" start="3373" end="3378" title="Sugar (Stanley Turrentine album)" label="Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453197" start="3442" end="3453" title="First Light (Freddie Hubbard album)" label="First Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335973" start="3473" end="3522" title="Grammy Award for Best Jazz Performance by a Group" label="Grammy Award for Best Jazz Performance by a Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q638060" start="3530" end="3555" title="15th Annual Grammy Awards" label="15th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138361" start="3638" end="3650" title="White Rabbit (song)" label="White Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995244" start="3664" end="3686" title="White Rabbit (George Benson album)" label="album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q738782" start="3756" end="3769" title="The Great Society (band)" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q488260" start="3790" end="3808" title="Jefferson Airplane" label="Jefferson Airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840167" start="3834" end="3844" title="Bad Benson" label="Bad Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="3889" end="3898" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582697" start="3950" end="3963" title="Good King Bad" label="Good King Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890234" start="3999" end="4019" title="Benson &amp;amp; Farrell" label="Benson &amp;amp; Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="4133" end="4153" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455605" start="4223" end="4236" title="Breezin&amp;#x27;" label="Breezin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786135" start="4288" end="4303" title="This Masquerade" label="This Masquerade"/>
<link wikidata="Q319374" start="4329" end="4341" title="Leon Russell" label="Leon Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11338066" start="4426" end="4437" title="Jorge Dalto" label="Jorge Dalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q843219" start="4472" end="4507" title="Grammy Award for Record of the Year" label="Grammy Award for Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q210401" start="4606" end="4624" title="Here Comes the Sun" label="Here Comes the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988589" start="4640" end="4668" title="The Other Side of Abbey Road" label="The Other Side of Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q315784" start="4752" end="4766" title="José Feliciano" label="José Feliciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606172" start="4785" end="4796" title="Affirmation (George Benson song)" label="Affirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q232176" start="4890" end="4905" title="Minnie Riperton" label="Minnie Riperton"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="5057" end="5070" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770360" start="5089" end="5101" title="Another Star" label="Another Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q845040" start="5139" end="5163" title="Songs in the Key of Life" label="Songs in the Key of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q787102" start="5226" end="5250" title="The Greatest Love of All" label="The Greatest Love of All"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="5270" end="5282" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q788767" start="5297" end="5309" title="The Greatest (1977 film)" label="The Greatest"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="5344" end="5359" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q686022" start="5456" end="5469" title="Claus Ogerman" label="Claus Ogerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090922" start="5494" end="5505" title="On Broadway (song)" label="On Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018754" start="5569" end="5584" title="Weekend in L.A." label="Weekend in L.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="5672" end="5684" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282669" start="5738" end="5755" title="Give Me the Night (album)" label="Give Me the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565739" start="5850" end="5867" title="Give Me the Night (George Benson song)" label="Give Me the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592619" start="5893" end="5901" title="Heatwave (band)" label="Heatwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q931723" start="5914" end="5927" title="Rod Temperton" label="Rod Temperton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855737" start="6004" end="6025" title="Turn Your Love Around" label="Turn Your Love Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470351" start="6064" end="6076" title="Lady Love Me (One More Time)" label="Lady Love Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499378" start="6109" end="6115" title="Shiver (George Benson song)" label="Shiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q137042" start="6290" end="6303" title="Nat King Cole" label="Nat King Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="6305" end="6316" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q507864" start="6321" end="6335" title="Donny Hathaway" label="Donny Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603825" start="6555" end="6570" title="Absolute Benson" label="Absolute Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736251" start="6648" end="6658" title="The Ghetto (Donny Hathaway song)" label="The Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="6825" end="6849" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q320458" start="6908" end="6914" title="Ibanez" label="Ibanez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="7156" end="7186" title="National Endowment of the Arts" label="National Endowment of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q488296" start="7192" end="7203" title="NEA Jazz Masters" label="Jazz Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081148" start="7288" end="7309" title="Ohrid Summer Festival" label="Ohrid Summer Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="7313" end="7328" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q137042" start="7371" end="7384" title="Nat King Cole" label="Nat King Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810420" start="7456" end="7492" title="Istanbul International Jazz Festival" label="Istanbul International Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561374" start="7581" end="7598" title="Songs and Stories" label="Songs and Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q323467" start="7610" end="7623" title="Marcus Miller" label="Marcus Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q466980" start="7667" end="7678" title="David Paich" label="David Paich"/>
<link wikidata="Q318483" start="7683" end="7697" title="Steve Lukather" label="Steve Lukather"/>
<link wikidata="Q164382" start="7777" end="7798" title="The Tavis Smiley Show" label="The Tavis Smiley Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315167" start="7812" end="7830" title="Jimmy Kimmel Live!" label="Jimmy Kimmel Live!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817561" start="7847" end="7875" title="Late Night with Jimmy Fallon" label="Late Night with Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124476" start="7909" end="7927" title="Java Jazz Festival" label="Java Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616757" start="7992" end="8002" title="Guitar Man (George Benson album)" label="Guitar Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q273076" start="8244" end="8259" title="Wynton Marsalis" label="Wynton Marsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q157400" start="8261" end="8273" title="Idina Menzel" label="Idina Menzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q386267" start="8275" end="8287" title="Till Brönner" label="Till Brönner"/>
<link wikidata="Q516110" start="8293" end="8304" title="Judith Hill" label="Judith Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133749" start="8346" end="8357" title="Rock in Rio" label="Rock in Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q899487" start="8530" end="8538" title="Sky Arts" label="Sky Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856917" start="8555" end="8566" title="Guitar Star" label="Guitar Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="8602" end="8621" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189991" start="8695" end="8703" title="Gorillaz" label="Gorillaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q54869118" start="8717" end="8725" title="Humility (song)" label="Humility"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356823" start="8795" end="8813" title="Mascot Label Group" label="Mascot Label Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q433579" start="9146" end="9159" title="Robert Farnon" label="Robert Farnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="9174" end="9199" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="9319" end="9338" title="Rhino Entertainment" label="Rhino Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9467" end="9471" title="Great_American_Songbook#Revivals" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151397" start="9475" end="9498" title="Great American Songbook" label="Great American Songbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="9966" end="9988" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q986210" start="10020" end="10041" title="Englewood, New Jersey" label="Englewood, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="10106" end="10118" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12946" wikidata="Q2585814" url="?curid=12946" title="Grigory Barenblatt">
<text>Grigory Isaakovich Barenblatt (; 10 July 1927 – 22 June 2018) was a Russian mathematician.

==Education==
Barenblatt graduated in 1950 from Moscow State University, Department of Mechanics and Mathematics. He received his Ph.D. in 1953 from Moscow State University under the supervision of A. N. Kolmogorov.

==Career and research==
Barenblatt also received a D.Sc. from Moscow State University in 1957. He was an emeritus Professor in Residence at the Department of Mathematics of the University of California, Berkeley and Mathematician at Department of Mathematics, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. He was G. I. Taylor Professor of Fluid Mechanics at the University of Cambridge from 1992 to 1994 and he was Emeritus G. I. Taylor Professor of Fluid Mechanics. His areas of research were:

# Fracture mechanics
# The theory of fluid and gas flows in porous media
# The mechanics of a non-classical deformable solids
# Turbulence
# Self-similarities, nonlinear waves and intermediate asymptotics.

==Awards and honors==

* 1975 – Foreign Honorary Member, American Academy of Arts and Sciences
* 1984 – Foreign Member, Danish Center of Applied Mathematics &amp; Mechanics
* 1988 – Foreign Member, Polish Society of Theoretical &amp; Applied Mechanics
* 1989 – Doctor of Technology Honoris Causa at the Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
* 1992 – Foreign Associate, U.S. National Academy of Engineering
* 1993 – Fellow, Cambridge Philosophical Society
* 1993 – Member, Academia Europaea
* 1994 – Fellow, Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge; (since 1999, Honorary Fellow)
* 1995 – Lagrange Medal, Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei
* 1995 – Modesto Panetti Prize and Medal
* 1996 - Visiting Miller Professorship - University of California Berkeley
* 1997 – Foreign Associate, U.S. National Academy of Sciences
* 1999 – G. I. Taylor Medal, U.S. Society of Engineering Science
* 1999 – J. C. Maxwell Medal and Prize, International Congress for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
* 2000 – Foreign Member, Royal Society of London
* 2005 – Timoshenko Medal, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, &quot;for seminal contributions to nearly every area of solid and fluid mechanics, including fracture mechanics, turbulence, stratified flows, flames, flow in porous media, and the theory and application of intermediate asymptotics.&quot;
==References==
==External links==
* Applied mechanics: an age old science perpetually in rebirth (pdf). The Timoshenko Medal acceptance speech by Grigory Barenblatt (to be published by ASME in summer 2006).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2585814" start="0" end="29" title="Grigory Barenblatt" label="Grigory Isaakovich Barenblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="76" end="89" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="140" end="163" title="Moscow State University" label="Moscow State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="290" end="306" title="A. N. Kolmogorov" label="A. N. Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="486" end="520" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="569" end="606" title="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512277" start="615" end="656" title="G. I. Taylor Professor of Fluid Mechanics" label="G. I. Taylor Professor of Fluid Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="664" end="687" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q957852" start="800" end="818" title="Fracture mechanics" label="Fracture mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="835" end="840" title="fluid" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="845" end="848" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="849" end="853" title="Fluid dynamics" label="flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="858" end="870" title="porosity" label="porous media"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="877" end="886" title="mechanics" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="917" end="922" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190132" start="926" end="936" title="Turbulence" label="Turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q262372" start="939" end="956" title="Self-similarity" label="Self-similarities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="958" end="972" title="nonlinear wave" label="nonlinear wave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="978" end="1002" title="intermediate asymptotics" label="intermediate asymptotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="1062" end="1099" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="1390" end="1421" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025493" start="1439" end="1470" title="Cambridge Philosophical Society" label="Cambridge Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166301" start="1707" end="1713" title="Miller Institute" label="Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="1797" end="1825" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q699541" start="1835" end="1847" title="G. I. Taylor" label="G. I. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="1900" end="1913" title="J. C. Maxwell" label="J. C. Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="2018" end="2041" title="Royal Society of London" label="Royal Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326291" start="2051" end="2067" title="Timoshenko Medal" label="Timoshenko Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466950" start="2069" end="2109" title="American Society of Mechanical Engineers" label="American Society of Mechanical Engineers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12947" wikidata="Q177691" url="?curid=12947" title="Grammatical tense">
<text>In grammar, tense is a category that expresses time reference. Tenses are usually manifested by the use of specific forms of verbs, particularly in their conjugation patterns.

The main tenses found in many languages include the past, present, and future. Some languages have only two distinct tenses, such as past and nonpast, or future and nonfuture. There are also tenseless languages, like most of the Chinese languages, though they can possess a future and nonfuture system typical of Sino-Tibetan languages. In recent work Maria Bittner and Judith Tonhauser have described the different ways in which tenseless languages nonetheless mark time. On the other hand, some languages make finer tense distinctions, such as remote vs recent past, or near vs remote future.

Tenses generally express time relative to the moment of speaking. In some contexts, however, their meaning may be relativized to a point in the past or future which is established in the discourse (the moment being spoken about). This is called &quot;relative&quot; (as opposed to &quot;absolute&quot;) tense. Some languages have different verb forms or constructions which manifest relative tense, such as pluperfect (&quot;past-in-the-past&quot;) and &quot;future-in-the-past&quot;.

Expressions of tense are often closely connected with expressions of the category of aspect; sometimes what are traditionally called tenses (in languages such as Latin) may in modern analysis be regarded as combinations of tense with aspect. Verbs are also often conjugated for mood, and since in many cases the three categories are not manifested separately, some languages may be described in terms of a combined tense–aspect–mood (TAM) system.

==Etymology==
The English noun &quot;tense&quot; comes from Old French &quot;time&quot; (spelled in modern French through deliberate archaization), from Latin , &quot;time&quot;. It is not related to the adjective &quot;tense&quot;, which comes from Latin , the perfect passive participle of , &quot;stretch&quot;.

==Uses of the term==
In modern linguistic theory, tense is understood as a category that expresses (grammaticalizes) time reference; namely one which, using grammatical means, places a state or action in time. Nonetheless, in many descriptions of languages, particularly in traditional European grammar, the term &quot;tense&quot; is applied to verb forms or constructions that express not merely position in time, but also additional properties of the state or action – particularly aspectual or modal properties.

The category of aspect expresses how a state or action relates to time – whether it is seen as a complete event, an ongoing or repeated situation, etc. Many languages make a distinction between perfective aspect (denoting complete events) and imperfective aspect (denoting ongoing or repeated situations); some also have other aspects, such as a perfect aspect, denoting a state following a prior event. Some of the traditional &quot;tenses&quot; express time reference together with aspectual information. In Latin and French, for example, the imperfect denotes past time in combination with imperfective aspect, while other verb forms (the Latin perfect, and the French or ) are used for past time reference with perfective aspect.

The category of mood is used to express modality, which includes such properties as uncertainty, evidentiality, and obligation. Commonly encountered moods include the indicative, subjunctive, and conditional. Mood can be bound up with tense, aspect, or both, in particular verb forms. Hence, certain languages are sometimes analysed as having a single tense–aspect–mood (TAM) system, without separate manifestation of the three categories.
The term &quot;tense&quot;, then, particularly in less formal contexts, is sometimes used to denote any combination of tense proper, aspect, and mood. As regards English, there are many verb forms and constructions which combine time reference with continuous and/or perfect aspect, and with indicative, subjunctive or conditional mood. Particularly in some English language teaching materials, some or all of these forms can be referred to simply as tenses (see below).

Particular tense forms need not always carry their basic time-referential meaning in every case. For instance, the historical present is a use of the present tense to refer to past events. The phenomenon of &quot;fake tense&quot; is common crosslinguistically as a means of marking counterfactuality in conditionals and wishes.

==Possible tenses==

Not all languages have tense: tenseless languages include Chinese and Dyirbal. Some languages have all three basic tenses (the past, present, and future), while others have only two: some have past and nonpast tenses, the latter covering both present and future times (as in Arabic, Japanese, and, in some analyses, English), whereas others such as Greenlandic, Quechua, and Nivkh have future and nonfuture. Some languages have four or more tenses, making finer distinctions either in the past (e.g. remote vs. recent past) or in the future (e.g. near vs. remote future). The six-tense language Kalaw Lagaw Ya of Australia has the remote past, the recent past, the today past, the present, the today/near future and the remote future. Some languages, like the Amazonian Cubeo language, have a historical past tense, used for events perceived as historical.

Tenses that refer specifically to &quot;today&quot; are called hodiernal tenses; these can be either past or future. Apart from Kalaw Lagaw Ya, another language which features such tenses is Mwera, a Bantu language of Tanzania. It is also suggested that in 17th-century French, the &quot;passé composé&quot; served as a hodiernal past. Tenses that contrast with hodiernals, by referring to the past before today or the future after today, are called pre-hodiernal and post-hodiernal respectively. Some languages also have a crastinal tense, a future tense referring specifically to tomorrow (found in some Bantu languages); or a hesternal tense, a past tense referring specifically to yesterday (although this name is also sometimes used to mean pre-hodiernal). A tense for after tomorrow is thus called post-crastinal, and one for before yesterday is called pre-hesternal.

Another tense found in some languages, including Luganda, is the persistive tense, used to indicate that a state or ongoing action is still the case (or, in the negative, is no longer the case). Luganda also has tenses meaning &quot;so far&quot; and &quot;not yet&quot;.

Some languages have special tense forms that are used to express relative tense. Tenses that refer to the past relative to the time under consideration are called &quot;anterior&quot;; these include the pluperfect (for the past relative to a past time) and the future perfect (for the past relative to a future time). Similarly, &quot;posterior&quot; tenses refer to the future relative to the time under consideration, as with the English &quot;future-in-the-past&quot;: &quot;(he said that) he would go.&quot; Relative tense forms are also sometimes analysed as combinations of tense with aspect: the perfect aspect in the anterior case, or the prospective aspect in the posterior case.

Some languages, such as Nez perce or Cavineña also have periodic tense markers that encode that the action occurs in a recurrent temporal period of the day (&quot;in the morning&quot;, &quot;during the day&quot;, &quot;at night&quot;, &quot;until dawn&quot; etc) or of the year (&quot;in winter&quot;).

Some languages have cyclic tense systems. This is a form of temporal marking where tense is given relative to a reference point or reference span. In Burarra, for example, events that occurred earlier on the day of speaking are marked with the same verb forms as events that happened in the far past, while events that happened yesterday (compared to the moment of speech) are marked with the same forms as events in the present. This can be thought of as a system where events are marked as prior or contemporaneous to points of reference on a timeline.

==Tense marking==

===Morphology of tense===

Tense is normally indicated by the use of a particular verb form – either an inflected form of the main verb, or a multi-word construction, or both in combination. Inflection may involve the use of affixes, such as the &quot;-ed&quot; ending that marks the past tense of English regular verbs, but can also entail stem modifications, such as ablaut, as found as in the strong verbs in English and other Germanic languages, or reduplication. Multi-word tense constructions often involve auxiliary verbs or clitics. Examples which combine both types of tense marking include the French &quot;passé composé&quot;, which has an auxiliary verb together with the inflected past participle form of the main verb; and the Irish past tense, where the proclitic &quot;do&quot; (in various surface forms) appears in conjunction with the affixed or ablaut-modified past tense form of the main verb.

As has already been mentioned, indications of tense are often bound up with indications of other verbal categories, such as aspect and mood. The conjugation patterns of verbs often also reflect agreement with categories pertaining to the subject, such as person, number and gender. It is consequently not always possible to identify elements that mark any specific category, such as tense, separately from the others.

Languages that do not have grammatical tense, such as most Sinitic languages, express time reference chiefly by lexical means – through adverbials, time phrases, and so on. (The same is done in tensed languages, to supplement or reinforce the time information conveyed by the choice of tense.) Time information is also sometimes conveyed as a secondary feature by markers of other categories, as with the aspect markers &quot;le&quot; and &quot;guò&quot;, which in most cases place an action in past time. However, much time information is conveyed implicitly by context – it is therefore not always necessary, when translating from a tensed to a tenseless language, say, to express explicitly in the target language all of the information conveyed by the tenses in the source.

====Nominal Tense====
A few languages have been shown to mark tense information (as well as aspect and mood) on nouns. This may be called nominal tense, or more broadly nominal TAM which includes nominal marking of aspect and mood as well.

===Syntax of tense===
The syntactic properties of tense have figured prominently in formal analyses of how tense-marking interacts with word order. Some languages (such as French) allow an adverb (Adv) to intervene between a tense-marked verb (V) and its direct object (O); in other words, they permit [Verb-Adverb-Object] ordering. In contrast, other languages (such as English) do not allow the adverb to intervene between the verb and its direct object, and require [Adverb-Verb-Object] ordering.

Tense in syntax is represented by the category label T, which is the head of a TP (tense phrase).

==Tenseless language==
In linguistics, a tenseless language is a language that does not have a grammatical category of tense. Tenseless languages can and do refer to time, but they do so using lexical items such as adverbs or verbs, or by using combinations of aspect, mood, and words that establish time reference. Examples of tenseless languages are Burmese, Dyirbal, most varieties of Chinese, Malay (including Indonesian), Thai, Maya (linguistic nomenclature: &quot;Yukatek Maya&quot;), Vietnamese and in some analyses Greenlandic (Kalaallisut) and Guaraní.

==In particular languages==

The study of modern languages has been greatly influenced by the grammar of the Classical languages, since early grammarians, often monks, had no other reference point to describe their language. Latin terminology is often used to describe modern languages, sometimes with a change of meaning, as with the application of &quot;perfect&quot; to forms in English that do not necessarily have perfective meaning, or the words &quot;Imperfekt&quot; and &quot;Perfekt&quot; to German past tense forms that mostly lack any relationship to the aspects implied by those terms.

=== Latin ===

Latin is traditionally described as having six verb paradigms for tense (the Latin for &quot;tense&quot; being &quot;tempus&quot;, plural &quot;tempora&quot;):
* Present &quot;(praesēns)&quot;
* Future &quot;(futūrum)&quot;
* Imperfect &quot;(praeteritum imperfectum)&quot;

* Perfect &quot;(praesēns perfectum)&quot;
* Future perfect &quot;(futūrum perfectum)&quot;
* Pluperfect &quot;(plūs quam perfectum, praeteritum perfectum)&quot;

Imperfect tense verbs represent a past process combined with so called imperfective aspect, that is, they often stand for an ongoing past action or state at a past point in time (see secondary present) or represent habitual actions (see Latin tenses with modality) (e.g. &#x27;he was eating&#x27;, &#x27;he used to eat&#x27;). The perfect tense combines the meanings of a simple past (&#x27;he ate&#x27;) with that of an English perfect tense (&#x27;he has eaten&#x27;), which in ancient Greek are two different tenses (aorist and perfect).

The pluperfect, the perfect and the future perfect may also realise relative tenses, standing for events that are past at the time of another event (see secondary past): for instance, , , may stand for respectively &quot;, &quot; and &quot;.

Latin verbs are inflected for tense and aspect together with mood (indicative, subjunctive, infinitive, and imperative) and voice (active or passive). Most verbs can be built by selecting a verb stem and adapting them to endings. Endings may vary according to the speech role, the number and the gender of the subject or an object. Sometimes, verb groups function as a unit and supplement inflection for tense (see Latin periphrases). For details on verb structure, see Latin tenses and Latin conjugation.

=== Ancient Greek ===

The paradigms for tenses in Ancient Greek are similar to the ones in Latin, but with a three-way aspect contrast in the past: the aorist, the perfect and the imperfect. Both aorist and imperfect verbs can represent a past event: through contrast, the imperfect verb often implies a longer duration (e.g. &#x27;they urged him&#x27; vs. &#x27;they persuaded him&#x27;). The aorist participle represents the first event of a two-event sequence and the present participle represents an ongoing event at the time of another event. Perfect verbs stood for past actions if the result is still present (e.g. &#x27;I have found it&#x27;) or for present states resulting from a past event (e.g. &#x27;I remember&#x27;).

===English===
English has only two morphological tenses: the present (or non-past), as in &quot;he goes, and the past (or preterite), as in &quot;he went. The non-past usually references the present, but sometimes references the future (as in &quot;the bus leaves tomorrow&quot;). In special uses such as the historical present it can talk about the past as well. These morphological tenses are marked either with a suffix (&quot;walk(s)&quot; ~ &quot;walked&quot;) or with ablaut (&quot;sing(s)&quot; ~ &quot;sang&quot;).

In some contexts, particularly in English language teaching, various tense–aspect combinations are referred to loosely as tenses. Similarly, the term &quot;future tense&quot; is sometimes loosely applied to cases where modals such as &quot;will&quot; are used to talk about future points in time.

===Other Indo-European languages===
Proto-Indo-European verbs had present, perfect (stative), imperfect and aorist forms – these can be considered as representing two tenses (present and past) with different aspects. Most languages in the Indo-European family have developed systems either with two morphological tenses (present or &quot;non-past&quot;, and past) or with three (present, past and future). The tenses often form part of entangled tense–aspect–mood conjugation systems. Additional tenses, tense–aspect combinations, etc. can be provided by compound constructions containing auxiliary verbs.

The Germanic languages (which include English) have present (non-past) and past tenses formed morphologically, with future and other additional forms made using auxiliaries. In standard German, the compound past &quot;(Perfekt)&quot; has replaced the simple morphological past in most contexts.

The Romance languages (descendants of Latin) have past, present and future morphological tenses, with additional aspectual distinction in the past. French is an example of a language where, as in German, the simple morphological perfective past &quot;(passé simple)&quot; has mostly given way to a compound form &quot;(passé composé)&quot;.

Irish, a Celtic language, has past, present and future tenses (see Irish conjugation). The past contrasts perfective and imperfective aspect, and some verbs retain such a contrast in the present. Classical Irish had a three-way aspectual contrast of simple–perfective–imperfective in the past and present tenses. Modern Scottish Gaelic on the other hand only has past, non-past and &#x27;indefinite&#x27;, and, in the case of the verb &#x27;be&#x27; (including its use as an auxiliary), also present tense.

Persian, an Indo-Iranian language, has past and non-past forms, with additional aspectual distinctions. Future can be expressed using an auxiliary, but almost never in non-formal context. Colloquially the perfect suffix &quot;-e&quot; can be added to past tenses to indicate that an action is speculative or reported (e.g. &quot;it seems that he was doing&quot;, &quot;they say that he was doing&quot;). A similar feature is found in Turkish. (For details, see Persian verbs.)

Hindustani (Hindi and Urdu), an Indo-Aryan language, has indicative perfect past and indicative future forms, while the indicative present and indicative imperfect past conjugations exist only for the verb &quot;honā&quot; (to be). The indicative future is constructed using the future subjunctive conjugations (which used to be the indicative present conjugations in older forms of Hind-Urdu) by adding a future future suffix -&quot;gā&quot; that declines for gender and the number of the noun that the pronoun refers to. The forms of &quot;gā&quot; are derived from the perfective participle forms of the verb &quot;to go,&quot; &quot;jāna&quot;. The conjugations of the indicative perfect past and the indicative imperfect past are derived from participles (just like the past tense formation in Slavic languages) and hence they agree with the grammatical number and the gender of noun which the pronoun refers to and not the pronoun itself. The perfect past doubles as the perfective aspect participle and the imperfect past conjugations act as the copula to mark imperfect past when used with the aspectual participles. Hindi-Urdu has an overtly marked tense-aspect-mood system. Periphrastic Hindi-Urdu verb forms (aspectual verb forms) consist of two elements, the first of these two elements is the aspect marker and the second element (the copula) is the common tense-mood marker. Hindi-Urdu has 3 grammatical aspectsː &quot;Habitual&quot;, &quot;Perfective&quot;, and &quot;Progressive&quot;; and 5 grammatical moodsː &quot;Indicative&quot;, &quot;Presumptive&quot;, &quot;Subjunctive&quot;, &quot;Contrafactual&quot;, and &quot;Imperative&quot;. (Seeː &quot;Hindi verbs&quot;)

In the Slavic languages, verbs are intrinsically perfective or imperfective. In Russian and some other languages in the group, perfective verbs have past and &quot;future tenses&quot;, while imperfective verbs have past, present and &quot;future&quot;, the imperfective &quot;future&quot; being a compound tense in most cases. The &quot;future tense&quot; of perfective verbs is formed in the same way as the present tense of imperfective verbs. However, in South Slavic languages, there may be a greater variety of forms – Bulgarian, for example, has present, past (both &quot;imperfect&quot; and &quot;aorist&quot;) and &quot;future tenses&quot;, for both perfective and imperfective verbs, as well as perfect forms made with an auxiliary (see Bulgarian verbs). However it doesn&#x27;t have real future tense, because the future tense is formed by the shortened version of the present of the verb hteti (ще) and it just adds present tense forms of person suffixes: -m (I), -š (you), -ø (he,she,it), -me (we), -te (you, plural), -t (they).

===Other languages===
Finnish and Hungarian, both members of the Uralic language family, have morphological present (non-past) and past tenses. The Hungarian verb &quot;van&quot; (&quot;to be&quot;) also has a future form.

Turkish verbs conjugate for past, present and future, with a variety of aspects and moods.

Arabic verbs have past and non-past; future can be indicated by a prefix.

Korean verbs have a variety of affixed forms which can be described as representing present, past and future tenses, although they can alternatively be considered to be aspectual. Similarly, Japanese verbs are described as having present and past tenses, although they may be analysed as aspects. Some Wu Chinese languages, such as Shanghainese, use grammatical particles to mark some tenses. Other Chinese languages and many other East Asian languages generally lack inflection and are considered to be tenseless languages, although they often have aspect markers which convey certain information about time reference.

For examples of languages with a greater variety of tenses, see the section on possible tenses, above. Fuller information on tense formation and usage in particular languages can be found in the articles on those languages and their grammars.

=== Austronesian languages ===

==== Rapa ====
Rapa is the French Polynesian language of the island of Rapa Iti. Verbs in the indigenous Old Rapa occur with a marker known as TAM which stands for tense, aspect, or mood which can be followed by directional particles or deictic particles. Of the markers there are three tense markers called: Imperfective, Progressive, and Perfective. Which simply mean, Before, Currently, and After. However, specific TAM markers and the type of deictic or directional particle that follows determine and denote different types of meanings in terms of tenses.

Imperfective: denotes actions that have not occurred yet but will occur and expressed by TAM e.


Progressive: Also expressed by TAM e and denotes actions that are currently happening when used with deictic na, and denotes actions that was just witnessed but still currently happening when used with deictic ra.




Perfective: denotes actions that have already occurred or have finished and is marked by TAM ka.


In Old Rapa there are also other types of tense markers known as Past, Imperative, and Subjunctive.

Past

TAM i marks past action. It is rarely used as a matrix TAM and is more frequently observed in past embedded clauses

Imperative

The imperative is marked in Old Rapa by TAM a. A second person subject is implied by the direct command of the imperative.

For a more polite form rather than a straightforward command imperative TAM a is used with adverbial kānei. Kānei is only shown to be used in imperative structures and was translated by the French as &quot;please&quot;.

It is also used in a more impersonal form. For example, how you would speak toward a pesky neighbor.
Subjunctive

The subjunctive in Old Rapa is marked by kia and can also be used in expressions of desire

==== Tokelau ====
The Tokelauan language is a tenseless language. The language uses the same words for all three tenses; the phrase E liliu mai au i te Aho Tōnai literally translates to Come back / me / on Saturday, but the translation becomes &#x27;I am coming back on Saturday&#x27;.

==== Wuvulu-Aua ====
Wuvulu-Aua does not have an explicit tense, but rather tense is conveyed by mood, aspect markers, and time phrases. Wuvulu speakers use a realis mood to convey past tense as speakers can be certain about events that have occurred. In some cases, realis mood is used to convey present tense — often to indicate a state of being. Wuvulu speakers use an irrealis mood to convey future tense.
Tense in Wuvulu-Aua may also be implied by using time adverbials and aspectual markings. Wuvulu contains three verbal markers to indicate sequence of events. The preverbal adverbial &quot;loʔo&quot; &#x27;first&#x27; indicates the verb occurs before any other. The postverbal morpheme &quot;liai&quot; and &quot;linia&quot; are the respective intransitive and transitive suffixes indicating a repeated action. The postverbal morpheme &quot;li&quot; and &quot;liria&quot; are the respective intransitive and transitive suffixes indicating a completed action.

=== Mortlockese ===
Mortlockese uses tense markers such as &quot;mii&quot; and to denote the present tense state of a subject, &quot;aa&quot; to denote a present tense state that an object has changed to from a different, past state, &quot;kɞ&quot; to describe something that has already been completed, &quot;pɞ&quot; and &quot;lɛ&quot; to denote future tense, &quot;pʷapʷ&quot; to denote a possible action or state in future tense, and &quot;sæn/mwo&quot; for something that has not happened yet. Each of these markers is used in conjunction with the subject proclitics except for the markers &quot;aa&quot; and &quot;mii&quot;. Additionally, the marker &quot;mii&quot; can be used with any type of intransitive verb.

==See also==
*Sequence of tenses
*Spatial tense

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==
* Combinations of Tense, Aspect, and Mood in Greek
* Grammatical Features Inventory


&lt;section begin=&quot;list-of-glossing-abbreviations&quot;/&gt;
DEIC:deictic
DIR:directional
&lt;section end=&quot;list-of-glossing-abbreviations&quot;/&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="3" end="10" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="12" end="17" title="Grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q980357" start="23" end="31" title="grammatical category" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="125" end="129" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="154" end="165" title="grammatical conjugation" label="conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994301" start="229" end="233" title="past tense" label="past"/>
<link wikidata="Q192613" start="235" end="242" title="present tense" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="248" end="254" title="future tense" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q16916993" start="319" end="326" title="nonpast" label="nonpast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049318" start="342" end="351" title="Nonfuture tense" label="nonfuture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="406" end="423" title="Varieties of Chinese" label="Chinese languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049318" start="462" end="471" title="Nonfuture tense" label="nonfuture"/>
<link wikidata="Q62860859" start="529" end="542" title="Maria Bittner" label="Maria Bittner"/>
<link wikidata="Q22915117" start="547" end="563" title="Judith Tonhauser" label="Judith Tonhauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="819" end="837" title="TUTT (linguistics)" label="moment of speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924418" start="1018" end="1038" title="Relative and absolute tense" label="&amp;quot;relative&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q623742" start="1180" end="1190" title="pluperfect" label="pluperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274060" start="1232" end="1250" title="future-in-the-past" label="future-in-the-past"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="1344" end="1350" title="grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1421" end="1426" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="1537" end="1541" title="grammatical mood" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751097" start="1674" end="1691" title="tense–aspect–mood" label="tense–aspect–mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="1767" end="1777" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1860" end="1865" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1969" end="1995" title="Latin conjugation#Participles" label="perfect passive participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358208" start="2123" end="2138" title="Grammaticalization" label="grammaticalizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="2180" end="2191" title="grammar" label="grammatical"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="2555" end="2561" title="Grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424306" start="2733" end="2750" title="perfective aspect" label="perfective aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q371427" start="2782" end="2801" title="imperfective aspect" label="imperfective aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="2885" end="2899" title="perfect aspect" label="perfect aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q27716" start="3049" end="3054" title="Latin grammar" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11923" start="3059" end="3065" title="French grammar" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q108524486" start="3084" end="3093" title="imperfect" label="imperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="3290" end="3294" title="Grammatical mood" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243600" start="3314" end="3322" title="Linguistic modality" label="modality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223979" start="3371" end="3384" title="evidentiality" label="evidentiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11997264" start="3441" end="3451" title="indicative mood" label="indicative"/>
<link wikidata="Q473746" start="3453" end="3464" title="subjunctive mood" label="subjunctive"/>
<link wikidata="Q625581" start="3470" end="3481" title="conditional mood" label="conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751097" start="3626" end="3643" title="tense–aspect–mood" label="tense–aspect–mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3876" end="3883" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="3900" end="3928" title="Uses of English verb forms" label="verb forms and constructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="3963" end="3973" title="continuous aspect" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691272" start="4072" end="4097" title="English language teaching" label="English language teaching"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4177" end="4182" title="#English" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621027" start="4301" end="4319" title="historical present" label="historical present"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4399" end="4409" title="Counterfactual conditional#The grammar of counterfactuality" label="fake tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q456748" start="4489" end="4501" title="Conditional sentence" label="conditionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="4566" end="4584" title="tenseless language" label="tenseless language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="4594" end="4601" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35465" start="4606" end="4613" title="Dyirbal language" label="Dyirbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994301" start="4663" end="4667" title="past tense" label="past"/>
<link wikidata="Q192613" start="4669" end="4676" title="present tense" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="4682" end="4688" title="future tense" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q16916993" start="4738" end="4745" title="nonpast" label="nonpast"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="4811" end="4817" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="4819" end="4827" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4852" end="4859" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q25355" start="4885" end="4896" title="Greenlandic language" label="Greenlandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="4898" end="4905" title="Quechua languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q36464" start="4911" end="4916" title="Nivkh languages" label="Nivkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049318" start="4933" end="4942" title="Nonfuture tense" label="nonfuture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591262" start="5131" end="5145" title="Kalaw Lagaw Ya" label="Kalaw Lagaw Ya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006705" start="5306" end="5320" title="Cubeo language" label="Cubeo language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876223" start="5457" end="5472" title="hodiernal tense" label="hodiernal tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944725" start="5585" end="5590" title="Mwera language" label="Mwera"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="5594" end="5608" title="Bantu language" label="Bantu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360204" start="5682" end="5695" title="passé composé" label="passé composé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182530" start="5918" end="5933" title="crastinal tense" label="crastinal tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q11513930" start="6023" end="6038" title="hesternal tense" label="hesternal tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q33368" start="6318" end="6325" title="Luganda" label="Luganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924418" start="6606" end="6620" title="relative tense" label="relative tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q623742" start="6744" end="6754" title="pluperfect" label="pluperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234617" start="6802" end="6816" title="future perfect" label="future perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274060" start="6987" end="7005" title="future-in-the-past" label="future-in-the-past"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="7144" end="7158" title="perfect aspect" label="perfect aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250831" start="7188" end="7206" title="prospective aspect" label="prospective aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339226" start="7255" end="7264" title="Nez Perce language" label="Nez perce"/>
<link wikidata="Q524102" start="7268" end="7276" title="Cavineña language" label="Cavineña"/>
<link wikidata="Q130286927" start="7287" end="7301" title="periodic tense" label="periodic tense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7555" end="7567" title="cyclic tense" label="cyclic tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998124" start="7685" end="7692" title="Burarra language" label="Burarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="8214" end="8223" title="inflection" label="inflected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108642" start="8252" end="8275" title="periphrasis" label="multi-word construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="8335" end="8340" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q561029" start="8408" end="8429" title="English verbs" label="English regular verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q210523" start="8451" end="8455" title="word stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125709" start="8479" end="8485" title="ablaut" label="ablaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129241" start="8506" end="8517" title="Germanic strong verb" label="strong verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q221446" start="8563" end="8576" title="reduplication" label="reduplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="8623" end="8637" title="auxiliary verb" label="auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q213458" start="8642" end="8649" title="clitics" label="clitics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360204" start="8727" end="8740" title="passé composé" label="passé composé"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="8804" end="8819" title="past participle" label="past participle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8851" end="8867" title="Irish grammar#Verbs" label="Irish past tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751097" start="9149" end="9164" title="tense-aspect-mood" label="aspect and mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="9170" end="9181" title="grammatical conjugation" label="conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="9219" end="9228" title="agreement (linguistics)" label="agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="9263" end="9270" title="subject (grammar)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="9280" end="9286" title="grammatical person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="9288" end="9294" title="grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="9299" end="9305" title="grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="9503" end="9520" title="Chinese language" label="Sinitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q789016" start="9556" end="9563" title="Lexical (semiotics)" label="lexical"/>
<link wikidata="Q380012" start="9580" end="9589" title="adverbial" label="adverbial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9849" end="9863" title="Chinese grammar#Aspects" label="aspect markers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="10060" end="10071" title="translation" label="translating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="10335" end="10339" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048568" start="10392" end="10403" title="nominal TAM" label="nominal TAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="10438" end="10444" title="Grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="10449" end="10453" title="Grammatical mood" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="11230" end="11234" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="11325" end="11331" title="grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="11333" end="11337" title="mood (linguistics)" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="11416" end="11423" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35465" start="11425" end="11432" title="Dyirbal language" label="Dyirbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="11439" end="11448" title="Varieties of Chinese" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="11452" end="11459" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="11461" end="11466" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="11478" end="11488" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="11491" end="11495" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="11555" end="11565" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25355" start="11587" end="11598" title="Greenlandic language" label="Greenlandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="11617" end="11624" title="Guaraní language" label="Guaraní"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776031" start="11695" end="11713" title="History of English grammars" label="greatly influenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139262" start="12128" end="12151" title="German verbs" label="German past tense forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="12241" end="12246" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192613" start="12403" end="12410" title="Present tense" label="Present"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="12436" end="12442" title="Future tense" label="Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q108524486" start="12467" end="12476" title="Imperfect" label="Imperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="12518" end="12525" title="Perfect (grammar)" label="Perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234617" start="12561" end="12575" title="Future perfect" label="Future perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q623742" start="12610" end="12620" title="Pluperfect" label="Pluperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q371427" start="12750" end="12769" title="imperfective aspect" label="imperfective aspect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12862" end="12879" title="Latin tenses (semantics)#Secondary present" label="secondary present"/>
<link wikidata="Q115828212" start="12916" end="12942" title="Latin tenses with modality" label="Latin tenses with modality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924418" start="13289" end="13303" title="relative tense" label="relative tense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13374" end="13388" title="Latin tenses (semantics)#Secondary past" label="secondary past"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="13525" end="13529" title="grammatical mood" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="13588" end="13593" title="grammatical voice" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q115825794" start="13879" end="13896" title="Latin periphrases" label="Latin periphrases"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085360" start="13934" end="13946" title="Latin tenses" label="Latin tenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246315" start="13951" end="13968" title="Latin conjugation" label="Latin conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14012" end="14035" title="Ancient Greek verbs#Tenses" label="tenses in Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778748" start="14124" end="14130" title="Aorist tense" label="aorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="14740" end="14753" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q192613" start="14766" end="14773" title="present tense" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="Q16916993" start="14778" end="14786" title="non-past tense" label="non-past"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994301" start="14818" end="14822" title="past tense" label="past"/>
<link wikidata="Q442485" start="14827" end="14836" title="preterite" label="preterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621027" start="15014" end="15032" title="historical present" label="historical present"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="15121" end="15127" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125709" start="15179" end="15185" title="ablaut" label="ablaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691272" start="15263" end="15288" title="English language teaching" label="English language teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006565" start="15563" end="15588" title="Proto-Indo-European verbs" label="Proto-Indo-European verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562262" start="15611" end="15618" title="stative verb" label="stative"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="15735" end="15742" title="grammatical aspect" label="aspects"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="15766" end="15779" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751097" start="15973" end="15990" title="tense–aspect–mood" label="tense–aspect–mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="16138" end="16156" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="16320" end="16326" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139262" start="16353" end="16360" title="German verbs" label="Perfekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="16434" end="16451" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="16578" end="16584" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081589" start="16682" end="16694" title="passé simple" label="passé simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360204" start="16749" end="16762" title="passé composé" label="passé composé"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="16772" end="16777" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="16781" end="16796" title="Celtic language" label="Celtic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071423" start="16839" end="16856" title="Irish conjugation" label="Irish conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q102252955" start="16968" end="16983" title="Classical Irish" label="Classical Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="17092" end="17107" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="17280" end="17287" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33514" start="17292" end="17313" title="Indo-Iranian language" label="Indo-Iranian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170265" start="17741" end="17754" title="Persian verbs" label="Persian verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188307" start="17758" end="17768" title="Hindustani grammar" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="17770" end="17775" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="17780" end="17784" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="17790" end="17809" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q473746" start="18037" end="18055" title="Subjunctive mood" label="future subjunctive"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="18219" end="18225" title="Grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="18234" end="18240" title="Grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="18557" end="18573" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="18605" end="18623" title="grammatical number" label="grammatical number"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="18632" end="18638" title="Grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751097" start="18916" end="18933" title="Tense–aspect–mood" label="tense-aspect-mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108642" start="18942" end="18954" title="Periphrasis" label="Periphrastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636904" start="19185" end="19205" title="Habitual aspect" label="&amp;quot;Habitual&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424306" start="19207" end="19229" title="Perfective aspect" label="&amp;quot;Perfective&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="19235" end="19258" title="Continuous and progressive aspects" label="&amp;quot;Progressive&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11997264" start="19291" end="19301" title="Realis mood" label="Indicative"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="19315" end="19326" title="Grammatical mood" label="Presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q473746" start="19340" end="19351" title="Subjunctive mood" label="Subjunctive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783264" start="19365" end="19378" title="Counterfactual conditional" label="Contrafactual"/>
<link wikidata="Q22716" start="19396" end="19406" title="Imperative mood" label="Imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q87712823" start="19426" end="19437" title="Hindi verbs" label="Hindi verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="19453" end="19469" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19481" end="19494" title="Grammatical aspect#Slavic languages" label="intrinsically"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="19526" end="19533" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q146665" start="19904" end="19926" title="South Slavic languages" label="South Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="19970" end="19979" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="20150" end="20157" title="perfect aspect" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962268" start="20192" end="20207" title="Bulgarian verbs" label="Bulgarian verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="20510" end="20517" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="20522" end="20531" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="20553" end="20559" title="Uralic languages" label="Uralic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324368" start="20636" end="20650" title="Hungarian verbs" label="Hungarian verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q897661" start="20712" end="20725" title="Turkish grammar" label="Turkish verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783443" start="20804" end="20816" title="Arabic verbs" label="Arabic verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555745" start="20879" end="20891" title="Korean verbs" label="Korean verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q656627" start="21070" end="21084" title="Japanese verbs" label="Japanese verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34290" start="21181" end="21191" title="Wu Chinese" label="Wu Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36718" start="21211" end="21223" title="Shanghainese" label="Shanghainese"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="21229" end="21249" title="grammatical particle" label="grammatical particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="21278" end="21295" title="Chinese languages" label="Chinese languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="21383" end="21401" title="tenseless language" label="tenseless language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21579" end="21594" title="#Possible tenses" label="possible tenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q36417" start="21791" end="21795" title="Rapa language" label="Rapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q114832" start="21847" end="21855" title="Rapa Iti" label="Rapa Iti"/>
<link wikidata="Q340015" start="22013" end="22020" title="Deixis" label="deictic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34097" start="23562" end="23580" title="Tokelauan language" label="Tokelauan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062746" start="23848" end="23858" title="Wuvulu-Aua language" label="Wuvulu-Aua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324598" start="24816" end="24827" title="Mortlockese" label="Mortlockese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127176" start="25531" end="25549" title="Sequence of tenses" label="Sequence of tenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574084" start="25551" end="25564" title="Spatial tense" label="Spatial tense"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12948" wikidata="Q208084" url="?curid=12948" title="Grammatical aspect">
<text>In linguistics, aspect is a grammatical category that expresses how a verbal action, event, or state, extends over time. For instance, perfective aspect is used in referring to an event conceived as bounded and unitary, without reference to any flow of time during the event (&quot;I helped him&quot;). Imperfective aspect is used for situations conceived as existing continuously or habitually as time flows (&quot;I was helping him&quot;; &quot;I used to help people&quot;).

Further distinctions can be made, for example, to distinguish states and ongoing actions (continuous and progressive aspects) from repetitive actions (habitual aspect).

Certain aspectual distinctions express a relation between the time of the event and the time of reference. This is the case with the perfect aspect, which indicates that an event occurred prior to (but has continuing relevance at) the time of reference: &quot;I have eaten&quot;; &quot;I had eaten&quot;; &quot;I will have eaten&quot;.

Different languages make different grammatical aspectual distinctions; some (such as Standard German; see below) do not make any. The marking of aspect is often conflated with the marking of tense and mood (see tense–aspect–mood). Aspectual distinctions may be restricted to certain tenses: in Latin and the Romance languages, for example, the perfective–imperfective distinction is marked in the past tense, by the division between preterites and imperfects. Explicit consideration of aspect as a category first arose out of study of the Slavic languages; here verbs often occur in pairs, with two related verbs being used respectively for imperfective and perfective meanings.

The concept of grammatical aspect (or verbal aspect) should not be confused with perfect and imperfect &quot;verb forms&quot;; the meanings of the latter terms are somewhat different, and in some languages, the common names used for verb forms may not follow the actual aspects precisely.

==Basic concept==

===History===
The Indian linguist Yaska () dealt with grammatical aspect, distinguishing actions that are processes (&quot;bhāva&quot;), from those where the action is considered as a completed whole (&quot;mūrta&quot;). This is the key distinction between the imperfective and perfective. Yaska also applied this distinction to a verb versus an action nominal.

Grammarians of the Greek and Latin languages also showed an interest in aspect, but the idea did not enter into the modern Western grammatical tradition until the 19th century via the study of the grammar of the Slavic languages. The earliest use of the term recorded in the Oxford English Dictionary dates from 1853.

===Modern usage===
Aspect is often confused with the closely related concept of tense, because they both convey information about time. While tense relates the time of referent to some other time, commonly the speech event, aspect conveys other temporal information, such as duration, completion, or frequency, as it relates to the time of action. Thus tense refers to &quot;temporally when&quot; while aspect refers to &quot;temporally how&quot;. Aspect can be said to describe the texture of the time in which a situation occurs, such as a single point of time, a continuous range of time, a sequence of discrete points in time, etc., whereas tense indicates its location in time.

For example, consider the following sentences: &quot;I eat&quot;, &quot;I am eating&quot;, &quot;I have eaten&quot;, and &quot;I have been eating&quot;. All are in the present tense, indicated by the present-tense verb of each sentence (&quot;eat&quot;, &quot;am&quot;, and &quot;have&quot;). Yet since they differ in aspect each conveys different information or points of view as to how the action pertains to the present.

Grammatical aspect is a &quot;formal&quot; property of a language, distinguished through overt inflection, derivational affixes, or independent words that serve as grammatically required markers of those aspects. For example, the Kʼicheʼ language spoken in Guatemala has the inflectional prefixes &quot;k&quot;- and &quot;x&quot;- to mark incompletive and completive aspect; Mandarin Chinese has the aspect markers -&quot;le&quot; 了, -&quot;zhe&quot; 着, &quot;zài&quot;- 在, and -&quot;guò&quot; 过 to mark the perfective, durative stative, durative progressive, and experiential aspects, and also marks aspect with adverbs; and English marks the continuous aspect with the verb &quot;to be&quot; coupled with present participle and the perfect with the verb &quot;to have&quot; coupled with past participle. Even languages that do not mark aspect morphologically or through auxiliary verbs, however, can convey such distinctions by the use of adverbs or other syntactic constructions.

Grammatical aspect is distinguished from lexical aspect or &quot;Aktionsart&quot;, which is an inherent feature of verbs or verb phrases and is determined by the nature of the situation that the verb describes.

==Common aspectual distinctions==

The most fundamental aspectual distinction, represented in many languages, is between perfective aspect and imperfective aspect. This is the basic aspectual distinction in the Slavic languages.

It semantically corresponds to the distinction between the morphological forms known respectively as the aorist and imperfect in Greek, the preterite and imperfect in Spanish, the simple past () and imperfect in French, and the perfect and imperfect in Latin (from the Latin , meaning &quot;completed&quot;).

Essentially, the perfective aspect looks at an event as a complete action, while the imperfective aspect views an event as the process of unfolding or a repeated or habitual event (thus corresponding to the progressive/continuous aspect for events of short-term duration and to habitual aspect for longer terms).

For events of short durations in the past, the distinction often coincides with the distinction in the English language between the simple past &quot;X-ed,&quot; as compared to the progressive &quot;was X-ing&quot;. Compare &quot;I wrote the letters this morning&quot; (i.e. finished writing the letters: an action completed) and &quot;I was writing the letters this morning&quot; (the letters may still be unfinished).

In describing longer time periods, English needs context to maintain the distinction between the habitual (&quot;I called him often in the past&quot; – a habit that has no point of completion) and perfective (&quot;I called him once&quot; – an action completed), although the construct &quot;used to&quot; marks both habitual aspect and past tense and can be used if the aspectual distinction otherwise is not clear.

Sometimes, English has a lexical distinction where other languages may use the distinction in grammatical aspect. For example, the English verbs &quot;to know&quot; (the state of knowing) and &quot;to find out&quot; (knowing viewed as a &quot;completed action&quot;) correspond to the imperfect and perfect forms of the equivalent verbs in French and Spanish, and . This is also true when the sense of verb &quot;to know&quot; is &quot;to know somebody&quot;, in this case opposed in aspect to the verb &quot;to meet&quot; (or even to the construction &quot;to get to know&quot;). These correspond to imperfect and perfect forms of in Spanish, and in French. In German, on the other hand, the distinction is also lexical (as in English) through verbs and , although the semantic relation between both forms is much more straightforward since means &quot;to know&quot; and means &quot;to learn&quot;.

==Aspect vs. tense==
The Germanic languages combine the concept of aspect with the concept of tense. Although English largely separates tense and aspect formally, its aspects (neutral, progressive, perfect, progressive perfect, and [in the past tense] habitual) do not correspond very closely to the distinction of perfective vs. imperfective that is found in most languages with aspect. Furthermore, the separation of tense and aspect in English is not maintained rigidly. One instance of this is the alternation, in some forms of English, between sentences such as &quot;Have you eaten?&quot; and &quot;Did you eat?&quot;.

In European languages, rather than locating an event time, the way tense does, aspect describes &quot;the internal temporal constituency of a situation&quot;, or in other words, aspect is a way &quot;of conceiving the flow of the process itself&quot;. English aspectual distinctions in the past tense include &quot;I went, I used to go, I was going, I had gone&quot;; in the present tense &quot;I lose, I am losing, I have lost, I have been losing, I am going to lose&quot;; and with the future modal &quot;I will see, I will be seeing, I will have seen, I am going to see&quot;. What distinguishes these aspects within each tense is not (necessarily) when the event occurs, but how the time in which it occurs is viewed: as complete, ongoing, consequential, planned, etc.

In most dialects of Ancient Greek, aspect is indicated uniquely by verbal morphology. For example, the very frequently used aorist, though a functional preterite in the indicative mood, conveys historic or &#x27;immediate&#x27; aspect in the subjunctive and optative. The perfect in all moods is used as an aspectual marker, conveying the sense of a resultant state. E.g. – I see (present); – I saw (aorist); – I am in a state of having seen = I know (perfect). Turkish has a same/similar aspect, such as in Görmüş bulunuyorum/durumdayım, where görmüş means &quot;having seen&quot; and bulunuyorum/durumdayım means &quot;I am in the state&quot;. 

In many Sino-Tibetan languages, such as Mandarin, verbs lack grammatical markers of tense, but are rich in aspect (Heine, Kuteva 2010, p. 10). Markers of aspect are attached to verbs to indicate aspect. Event time is inferred through use of these aspectual markers, along with optional inclusion of adverbs.

==Lexical vs. grammatical aspect==

There is a distinction between grammatical aspect, as described here, and lexical aspect. Other terms for the contrast &quot;lexical vs. grammatical&quot; include: &quot;situation vs. viewpoint&quot; and &quot;inner vs. outer&quot;. Lexical aspect, also known as Aktionsart, is an inherent property of a verb or verb-complement phrase, and is not marked formally. The distinctions made as part of lexical aspect are different from those of grammatical aspect. Typical distinctions are between states (&quot;I owned&quot;), activities (&quot;I shopped&quot;), accomplishments (&quot;I painted a picture&quot;), achievements (&quot;I bought&quot;), and punctual, or semelfactive, events (&quot;I sneezed&quot;). These distinctions are often relevant syntactically. For example, states and activities, but not usually achievements, can be used in English with a prepositional &quot;for&quot;-phrase describing a time duration: &quot;I had a car for five hours&quot;, &quot;I shopped for five hours&quot;, but not &quot;*I bought a car for five hours&quot;. Lexical aspect is sometimes called &quot;Aktionsart&quot;, especially by German and Slavic linguists. Lexical or situation aspect is marked in Athabaskan languages.

One of the factors in situation aspect is telicity. Telicity might be considered a kind of lexical aspect, except that it is typically not a property of a verb in isolation, but rather a property of an entire verb &quot;phrase&quot;. Achievements, accomplishments and semelfactives have telic situation aspect, while states and activities have atelic situation aspect.

The other factor in situation aspect is duration, which is also a property of a verb phrase. Accomplishments, states, and activities have duration, while achievements and semelfactives do not.

==Indicating aspect==
In some languages, aspect and time are very clearly separated, making them much more distinct to their speakers. There are a number of languages that mark aspect much more saliently than time. Prominent in this category are Chinese and American Sign Language, which both differentiate many aspects but rely exclusively on optional time-indicating terms to pinpoint an action with respect to time. In other language groups, for example in most modern Indo-European languages (except Slavic languages and some Indo-Aryan languages like Hindi), aspect has become almost entirely conflated, in the verbal morphological system, with time.

In Russian, aspect is more salient than tense in narrative. Russian, like other Slavic languages, uses different lexical entries for the different aspects, whereas other languages mark them morphologically, and still others with auxiliaries (e.g., English).

In Hindi, the aspect marker is overtly separated from the tense/mood marker. Periphrastic Hindi verb forms consist of two elements. The first of these two elements is the aspect marker and the second element (the copula) is the common tense/mood marker.

In literary Arabic ( &quot;al-fuṣḥā&quot;) the verb has two aspect-tenses: perfective (past), and imperfective (non-past). There is some disagreement among grammarians whether to view the distinction as a distinction in aspect, or tense, or both. The past verb ( &quot;al-fiʿl al-māḍī&quot;) denotes an event ( &quot;ḥadaṯ&quot;) completed in the past, but it says nothing about the relation of this past event to present status. For example, &quot;waṣala&quot;, &quot;arrived&quot;, indicates that arrival occurred in the past without saying anything about the present status of the arriver – maybe they stuck around, maybe they turned around and left, etc. – nor about the aspect of the past event except insofar as completeness can be considered aspectual. This past verb is clearly similar if not identical to the Greek aorist, which is considered a tense but is more of an aspect marker. In the Arabic, aorist aspect is the logical consequence of past tense. By contrast, the &quot;Verb of Similarity&quot; ( &quot;al-fiʿl al-muḍāriʿ&quot;), so called because of its resemblance to the active participial noun, is considered to denote an event in the present or future without committing to a specific aspectual sense beyond the incompleteness implied by the tense: (&quot;yaḍribu&quot;, he strikes/is striking/will strike/etc.). Those are the only two &quot;tenses&quot; in Arabic (not counting &quot;amr&quot;, command or imperative, which is traditionally considered as denoting future events.) To explicitly mark aspect, Arabic uses a variety of lexical and syntactic devices.

Contemporary Arabic dialects are another matter. One major change from al-fuṣḥā is the use of a prefix particle ( &quot;bi&quot; in Egyptian and Levantine dialects—though it may have a slightly different range of functions in each dialect) to explicitly mark progressive, continuous, or habitual aspect: , &quot;bi-yiktib&quot;, he is now writing, writes all the time, etc.

Aspect can mark the stage of an action. The prospective aspect is a combination of tense and aspect that indicates the action is in preparation to take place. The inceptive aspect identifies the beginning stage of an action (e.g. Esperanto uses &quot;&quot;, e.g. &quot;Mi ekmanĝas&quot;, &quot;I am beginning to eat&quot;.) and inchoative and ingressive aspects identify a change of state (&quot;The flowers started blooming&quot;) or the start of an action (&quot;He started running&quot;). Aspects of stage continue through progressive, pausative, resumptive, cessive, and terminative.

Important qualifications:

*Although the perfective is often thought of as representing a &quot;momentary action&quot;, this is not strictly correct. It can equally well be used for an action that took time, as long as it is &quot;conceived of&quot; as a unit, with a clearly defined start and end, such as &quot;Last summer I visited France&quot;.
*Grammatical aspect represents a formal distinction encoded in the grammar of a language. Although languages that are described as having imperfective and perfective aspects agree in most cases in their use of these aspects, they may not agree in every situation. For example:
**Some languages have additional grammatical aspects. Spanish and Ancient Greek, for example, have a perfect (not the same as the perfective), which refers to a state resulting from a previous action (also described as a previous action with relevance to a particular time, or a previous action viewed from the perspective of a later time). This corresponds (roughly) to the &quot;have X-ed&quot; construction in English, as in &quot;I have recently eaten&quot;. Languages that lack this aspect (such as Portuguese, which is closely related to Spanish) often use the past perfective to render the present perfect (compare the roughly synonymous English sentences &quot;Have you eaten yet?&quot; and &quot;Did you eat yet?&quot;).
**In some languages, the formal representation of aspect is optional, and can be omitted when the aspect is clear from context or does not need to be emphasized. This is the case, for example, in Mandarin Chinese, with the perfective suffix &quot;le&quot; and (especially) the imperfective &quot;zhe&quot;.
**For some verbs in some languages, the difference between perfective and imperfective conveys an additional meaning difference; in such cases, the two aspects are typically translated using separate verbs in English. In Greek, for example, the imperfective sometimes adds the notion of &quot;try to do something&quot; (the so-called &quot;conative imperfect&quot;); hence, the same verb, in the imperfective (present or imperfect) and aorist, respectively, is used to convey &quot;look&quot; and &quot;see&quot;, &quot;search&quot; and &quot;find&quot;, &quot;listen&quot; and &quot;hear&quot;. (For example, ἠκούομεν (&quot;ēkouomen&quot;, &quot;we listened&quot;) vs. ἠκούσαμεν (&quot;ēkousamen&quot;, &quot;we heard&quot;).) Spanish has similar pairs for certain verbs, such as (imperfect and preterite, respectively) &quot;sabía&quot; (&quot;I knew&quot;) vs. &quot;supe&quot; (&quot;I found out&quot;), &quot;podía&quot; (&quot;I was able to&quot;) vs. &quot;pude&quot; (&quot;I succeeded (in doing something)&quot;), &quot;quería&quot; (&quot;I wanted to&quot;) vs. &quot;quise&quot; (&quot;I tried to&quot;), and &quot;no quería&quot; (&quot;I did not want to&quot;) vs. &quot;no quise&quot; (&quot;I refused (to do something)&quot;). Such differences are often highly language-specific.

==By language==

===Germanic languages===

====English====

The English tense–aspect system has two morphologically distinct tenses, past and non-past, the latter of which is also known as the &quot;present-future&quot; or, more commonly and less formally, simply the &quot;present&quot;. No marker of a distinct future tense exists on the verb in English; the futurity of an event may be expressed through the use of the auxiliary verbs &quot;will&quot; and &quot;shall&quot;, by a non-past form plus an adverb, as in &quot;tomorrow we go to New York City&quot;, or by some other means. Past is distinguished from non-past, in contrast, with internal modifications of the verb. These two tenses may be modified further for progressive aspect (also called &quot;continuous&quot; aspect), for the perfect, or for both. These two aspectual forms are also referred to as BE +ING and HAVE +EN, respectively, which avoids what may be unfamiliar terminology.

Aspects of the present tense:
* Present simple (not progressive, not perfect): &quot;I eat&quot;
* Present progressive (progressive, not perfect): &quot;I am eating&quot;
* Present perfect (not progressive, perfect): &quot;I have eaten&quot;
* Present perfect progressive (progressive, perfect): &quot;I have been eating&quot;
(While many elementary discussions of English grammar classify the present perfect as a past tense, it relates the action to the present time. One cannot say of someone now deceased that they &quot;have eaten&quot; or &quot;have been eating&quot;. The present auxiliary implies that they are in some way &quot;present&quot; (alive), even when the action denoted is completed (perfect) or partially completed (progressive perfect).)

Aspects of the past tense:
* Past simple (not progressive, not perfect): &quot;I ate&quot;
* Past progressive (progressive, not perfect): &quot;I was eating&quot;
* Past perfect (not progressive, perfect): &quot;I had eaten&quot;
* Past perfect progressive (progressive, perfect): &quot;I had been eating&quot;

Aspects can also be marked on non-finite forms of the verb: &quot;(to) be eating&quot; (infinitive with progressive aspect), &quot;(to) have eaten&quot; (infinitive with perfect aspect), &quot;having eaten&quot; (present participle or gerund with perfect aspect), etc. The perfect infinitive can further be governed by modal verbs to express various meanings, mostly combining modality with past reference: &quot;I should have eaten&quot; etc. In particular, the modals &quot;will&quot; and &quot;shall&quot; and their subjunctive forms &quot;would&quot; and &quot;should&quot; are used to combine future or hypothetical reference with aspectual meaning: 
* Simple future, simple conditional: &quot;I will eat&quot;, &quot;I would eat&quot;
* Future progressive, conditional progressive: &quot;I will be eating&quot;, &quot;I would be eating&quot;
* Future perfect, conditional perfect: &quot;I will have eaten&quot;, &quot;I would have eaten&quot;
* Future perfect progressive, conditional perfect progressive: &quot;I will have been eating&quot;, &quot;I would have been eating&quot;

The uses of the progressive and perfect aspects are quite complex. They may refer to the viewpoint of the speaker:

:I was walking down the road when I met Michael Jackson&#x27;s lawyer. (Speaker viewpoint in middle of action)
:I have traveled widely, but I have never been to Moscow. (Speaker viewpoint at end of action)

But they can have other illocutionary forces or additional modal components:

:You are being stupid now. (You are doing it deliberately)
:You are not having chocolate with your sausages! (I forbid it)
:I am having lunch with Mike tomorrow. (It is decided)

English expresses some other aspectual distinctions with other constructions. &quot;Used to&quot; + VERB is a past habitual, as in &quot;I used to go to school,&quot; and &quot;going to / gonna&quot; + VERB is a prospective, a future situation highlighting current intention or expectation, as in &quot;I&#x27;m going to go to school next year.&quot;

==== African American Vernacular English ====
The aspectual systems of certain dialects of English, such as African-American Vernacular English (see for example habitual be), and of creoles based on English vocabulary, such as Hawaiian Creole English, are quite different from those of standard English, and often reflect a more elaborate paradigm of aspectual distinctions (often at the expense of tense). The following table, appearing originally in Green (2002) shows the possible aspectual distinctions in AAVE in their prototypical, negative and stressed/emphatic affirmative forms:
==== German vernacular and colloquial ====

Although Standard German does not have aspects, many Upper German and all West Central German dialects, and some more vernacular forms of German do make an aspectual distinction which partly corresponds with the English continuous form: alongside the standard present tense &quot;Ich esse&quot; (&#x27;I eat&#x27;) and past &quot;Ich aß&quot; (&#x27;I ate&#x27;) there is the form &quot;Ich bin/war am essen/Essen&quot; (&#x27;I am/was at the eating&#x27;; capitalization varies). This is formed by the conjugated auxiliary verb &quot;sein&quot; (&quot;to be&quot;) followed by the preposition and article &quot;am&quot; (=&quot;an dem&quot;) and the infinitive, which German uses in many constructions as a verbal noun.

In the Tyrolean and other Bavarian regiolect the prefix *da can be found, which form perfective aspects. &quot;I hu&#x27;s gleant&quot; (Ich habe es gelernt = I learnt it) vs. &quot;I hu&#x27;s daleant&quot; (*Ich habe es DAlernt = I succeeded in learning).

==== Dutch ====
In Dutch (a West Germanic language), two types of continuous form are used. Both types are considered Standard Dutch.

The first type is very similar to the non-standard German type. It is formed by the conjugated auxiliary verb &quot;zijn&quot; (&quot;to be&quot;), followed by &quot;aan het&quot; and the gerund (which in Dutch matches the infinitive). For example:

* Present progressive: &quot;Ik ben aan het werken&quot; (&quot;I am working&quot;)
* Past progressive: &quot;Ik was aan het werken&quot; (&quot;I was working&quot;)
* Future progressive: &quot;Ik zal aan het werken zijn&quot; (&quot;I will be working&quot;)

The second type is formed by one of the conjugated auxiliary verbs &quot;liggen&quot; (&quot;to lie&quot;), &quot;zitten&quot; (&quot;to sit&quot;), &quot;hangen&quot; (&quot;to hang&quot;), &quot;staan&quot; (&quot;to stand&quot;) or &quot;lopen&quot; (&quot;to walk&quot;), followed by the preposition &quot;te&quot; and the infinitive. The conjugated verbs indicate the stance of the subject performing or undergoing the action.

* Present progressive: &quot;Ik zit te eten&quot; (&quot;I am eating [while sitting]&quot;), &quot;De was hangt te drogen&quot; (&quot;The laundry is drying [while hanging]&quot;)
* Past progressive: &quot;Ik lag te lezen&quot; (&quot;I was reading [while lying]&quot;), &quot;Ik stond te kijken&quot; (&quot;I was watching [while standing]&quot;)
* Future progressive: &quot;Ik zal zitten te werken&quot; (&quot;I will be working [while sitting]&quot;)

Sometimes the meaning of the auxiliary verb is diminished to &#x27;being engaged in&#x27;. Take for instance these examples:

* &quot;De leraar zit steeds te zeggen dat we moeten luisteren&quot; (&quot;The teacher keeps telling us to listen&quot;)
* &quot;Iedereen loopt te beweren dat het goed was&quot; (&quot;Everyone keeps on saying that it was good&quot;)
* &quot;Zit niet zo te zeuren&quot; (&quot;Stop whining&quot;)

In these cases, there is generally an undertone of irritation.

===Slavic languages===

The Slavic languages make a clear distinction between perfective and imperfective aspects; it was in relation to these languages that the modern concept of aspect originally developed.

In Slavic languages, a given verb is, in itself, either perfective or imperfective. Consequently, each language contains many pairs of verbs, corresponding to each other in meaning, except that one expresses perfective aspect and the other imperfective. (This may be considered a form of lexical aspect.) Perfective verbs are commonly formed from imperfective ones by the addition of a prefix, or else the imperfective verb is formed from the perfective one by modification of the stem or ending. Suppletion also plays a small role. Perfective verbs cannot generally be used with the meaning of a present tense – their present-tense forms in fact have future reference. An example of such a pair of verbs, from Polish, is given below:
*Infinitive (and dictionary form): &quot;pisać&quot; (&quot;to write&quot;, imperfective); &quot;napisać&quot; (&quot;to write&quot;, perfective)
*Present/simple future tense: &quot;pisze&quot; (&quot;writes&quot;); &quot;napisze&quot; (&quot;will write&quot;, perfective)
*Compound future tense (imperfective only): &quot;będzie pisać&quot; (&quot;will write, will be writing&quot;)
*Past tense: &quot;pisał&quot; (&quot;was writing, used to write, wrote&quot;, imperfective); &quot;napisał&quot; (&quot;wrote&quot;, perfective)

In at least the East Slavic and West Slavic languages, there is a three-way aspect differentiation for verbs of motion with the determinate imperfective, indeterminate imperfective, and perfective. The two forms of imperfective can be used in all three tenses (past, present, and future), but the perfective can only be used with past and future. The indeterminate imperfective expresses habitual aspect (or motion in no single direction), while the determinate imperfective expresses progressive aspect. The difference corresponds closely to that between the English &quot;I (regularly) go to school&quot; and &quot;I am going to school (now)&quot;. The three-way difference is given below for the Russian basic (unprefixed) verbs of motion.

When prefixes are attached to Russian verbs of motion they become more or less normal imperfective/perfective pairs, with the indeterminate imperfective becoming the prefixed imperfective and the determinate imperfective becoming the prefixed perfective. For example, prefix &quot;при-&quot; &quot;pri-&quot; + indeterminate &quot;ходи́ть&quot; &quot;khodít″&quot; = &quot;приходи́ть&quot; &quot;prikhodít″&quot; (to arrive (on foot), impf.); and prefix &quot;при-&quot; &quot;pri-&quot; + determinate &quot;идти́&quot; &quot;idtí&quot; = &quot;прийти&quot; &quot;prijtí&quot; (to arrive (on foot), pf.).

===Romance languages===
Modern Romance languages merge the concepts of aspect and tense but consistently distinguish perfective and imperfective aspects in the past tense. This derives directly from the way the Latin language used to render both aspects and &quot;consecutio temporum&quot;.

==== Italian ====
Italian language example using the verb &quot;mangiare&quot; (&quot;to eat&quot;):

The &quot;imperfetto&quot;/&quot;trapassato prossimo&quot; contrasts with the &quot;passato remoto&quot;/&quot;trapassato remoto&quot; in that &quot;imperfetto&quot; renders an imperfective (continuous) past while &quot;passato remoto&quot; expresses an aorist (punctual/historical) past.

Other aspects in Italian are rendered with other periphrases, like prospective (&quot;io sto per mangiare&quot; &quot;I&#x27;m about to eat&quot;, &quot;io starò per mangiare&quot; &quot;I shall be about to eat&quot;), or continuous/progressive (&quot;io sto mangiando&quot; &quot;I&#x27;m eating&quot;, &quot;io starò mangiando&quot; &quot;I shall be eating&quot;).

=== Hindi ===

Hindi has three aspects, habitual aspect, perfective aspect and the progressive aspect. Each of these three aspects are formed from their participles. The aspects of Hindi when conjugated into their personal forms can be put into five grammatical moods: indicative, presumptive, subjunctive, contrafactual, and imperative. In Hindi, the aspect marker is overtly separated from the tense/mood marker. Periphrastic Hindi verb forms consist of two elements. The first of these two elements is the aspect marker. The second element (the copula) is the common tense/mood marker.

There are a couple of verbs which can be used as the copula to the aspectual participles: होना (honā) [to be, happen], रहना (rêhnā) [to stay, remain], आना (ānā) [to come], and जाना (jānā) [to go]. Each of these copulas provide a unique nuance to the aspect. The default (unmarked) copula is होना (honā) [to be]. These copulas can themselves be conjugated into an aspectual participle and used with another copula, hence forming subaspects. (Seeː Hindi verbs) 
===Finnic languages===
Finnish and Estonian, among others, have a grammatical aspect contrast of telicity between telic and atelic. Telic sentences signal that the intended goal of an action is achieved. Atelic sentences do not signal whether any such goal has been achieved. The aspect is indicated by the case of the object: accusative is telic and partitive is atelic. For example, the (implicit) purpose of shooting is to kill, such that:
* &quot;Ammuin karhun&quot; -- &quot;I shot the bear (succeeded; it is done)&quot; i.e., &quot;I shot the bear dead&quot;.
* &quot;Ammuin karhua&quot; -- &quot;I shot at the bear&quot; i.e. the bear may have survived.
In rare cases corresponding telic and atelic forms can be unrelated by meaning.

Derivational suffixes exist for various aspects. Examples:
*&quot;-ahta-&quot; (&quot;once&quot;), as in &quot;huudahtaa&quot; (&quot;to yell once&quot;) (used for emotive verbs like &quot;laugh&quot;, &quot;smile&quot;, &quot;growl&quot;, &quot;bark&quot;; is not used for verbs like &quot;shoot&quot;, &quot;say&quot;, &quot;drink&quot;)
*&quot;-ele-&quot; &quot;repeatedly&quot; as in &quot;ammuskella&quot; &quot;to go shooting around&quot;

There are derivational suffixes for verbs, which carry frequentative, momentane, causative, and inchoative aspect meanings. Also, pairs of verbs differing only in transitivity exist.

===Austronesian languages===

==== Reo Rapa ====

The Rapa language (Reo Rapa) is a mixed language that grew out of Tahitian and Old Rapa among monolingual inhabitants of Rapa Iti. Old Rapa words are still used for grammar and sentence structure, but most common words were replaced by Tahitian words. Rapa is similar to English as they both have specific tense words such as &quot;did&quot; or &quot;do&quot;.

*Past negative: &quot;ki’ere&quot; /kiʔere/ 
*Non-past negative (Regular negative) &quot;kāre&quot; /kaːre/ 
====Hawaiian====
The Hawaiian language conveys aspect as follows:

*The unmarked verb, frequently used, can indicate habitual aspect or perfective aspect in the past.
*&quot;ke&quot; + verb + &quot;nei&quot; is frequently used and conveys the progressive aspect in the present.
*&quot;e&quot; + verb + &quot;ana&quot; conveys the progressive aspect in any tense.
*&quot;ua&quot; + verb conveys the perfective aspect but is frequently omitted.

====Wuvulu====

Wuvulu language is a minority language in Pacific. The Wuvulu verbal aspect is hard to organize because of its number of morpheme combinations and the interaction of semantics between morphemes. Perfective, imperfective negation, simultaneous and habitual are four aspects markers in Wuvulu language.

* Perfective: The perfective marker &quot;-li&quot; indicates the action is done before other action. 

* Imperfect negation: The marker &quot;ta-&quot; indicates the action has not done and also doesn&#x27;t show anything about the action will be done in the future. 
* Simultaneous: The marker &quot;fi&quot; indicates the two actions are done at the same time or one action occurs while other action is in progress.
* Habitual: The marker fane- can indicate a habitual activity, which means &quot;keep doing something&quot; in English. Example: 
====Tokelauan====

There are three types of aspects one must consider when analyzing the Tokelauan language: inherent aspect, situation aspect, and viewpoint aspect.

The inherent aspect describes the purpose of a verb and what separates verbs from one another. According to Vendler, inherent aspect can be categorized into four different types: activities, achievements, accomplishments, and states. Simple activities include verbs such as pull, jump, and punch. Some achievements are continue and win. Drive-a-car is an accomplishment while hate is an example of a state. Another way to recognize a state inherent aspect is to note whether or not it changes. For example, if someone were to hate vegetables because they are allergic, this state of hate is unchanging and thus, a state inherent aspect. On the other hand, an achievement, unlike a state, only lasts for a short amount of time. Achievement is the highpoint of an action.

Another type of aspect is situation aspect. Situation aspect is described to be what one is experiencing in his or her life through that circumstance. Therefore, it is his or her understanding of the situation. Situation aspect are abstract terms that are not physically tangible. They are also used based upon one&#x27;s point of view. For example, a professor may say that a student who comes a minute before each class starts is a punctual student. Based upon the professor&#x27;s judgment of what punctuality is, he or she may make that assumption of the situation with the student. Situation aspect is firstly divided into states and occurrences, then later subdivided under occurrences into processes and events, and lastly, under events, there are accomplishments and achievements.

The third type of aspect is viewpoint aspect. Viewpoint aspect can be likened to situation aspect such that they both take into consideration one&#x27;s inferences. However, viewpoint aspect diverges from situation aspect because it is where one decides to view or see such event. A perfect example is the glass metaphor: Is the glass half full or is it half empty. The choice of being half full represents an optimistic viewpoint while the choice of being half empty represents a pessimistic viewpoint. Not only does viewpoint aspect separate into negative and positive, but rather different point of views. Having two people describe a painting can bring about two different viewpoints. One may describe a situation aspect as a perfect or imperfect. A perfect situation aspect entails an event with no reference to time, while an imperfect situation aspect makes a reference to time with the observation.

==== Torau ====
Aspect in Torau is marked with post-verbal particles or clitics. While the system for marking the imperfective aspect is complex and highly developed, it is unclear if Torau marks the perfective and neutral viewpoints. The imperfective clitics index one of the core arguments, usually the nominative subject, and follow the rightmost element in a syntactic structure larger than the word. The two distinct forms for marking the imperfective aspect are &quot;(i)sa-&quot; and &quot;e-&quot;. While more work needs to be done on this language, the preliminary hypothesis is that &quot;(i)sa-&quot; encodes the stative imperfective and &quot;e-&quot; encodes the active imperfective. Reduplication always cooccurs with &quot;e-&quot;, but it usually does not with &quot;(i)sa-.&quot; This example below shows these two imperfective aspect markers giving different meanings to similar sentences.

In Torau, the suffix -&quot;to&quot;, which must attach to a preverbal particle, may indicate similar meaning to the perfective aspect. In realis clauses, this suffix conveys an event that is entirely in the past and no longer occurring. When &quot;-to&quot; is used in irrealis clauses, the speaker conveys that the event will definitely occur (Palmer, 2007). Although this suffix is not explicitly stated as a perfective viewpoint marker, the meaning that it contributes is very similar to the perfective viewpoint.

====Malay/Indonesian====

Like many Austronesian languages, the verbs of the Malay language follow a system of affixes to express changes in meaning. To express the aspects, Malay uses a number of auxiliary verbs:

:*&quot;sudah&quot;: perfective, &#x27;saya sudah makan&#x27; = &#x27;I have [already] eaten&#x27;
:*&quot;baru&quot;: near perfective, &#x27;saya baru makan&#x27; = &#x27;I have just eaten&#x27;
:*&quot;belum&quot;: imperfective, &#x27;saya belum makan&#x27; = &#x27;I have not eaten&#x27;
:*&quot;sedang&quot;: progressive not implicating an end
:*&quot;masih&quot;: progressive implicating an end
:*&quot;pernah&quot;: semelfactive

====Philippine languages====
Like many Austronesian languages, the verbs of the Philippine languages follow a complex system of affixes to express subtle changes in meaning. However, the verbs in this family of languages are conjugated to express the aspects and not the tenses. Though many of the Philippine languages do not have a fully codified grammar, most of them follow the verb aspects that are demonstrated by Filipino or Tagalog.

===Creole languages===
Creole languages typically use the unmarked verb for timeless habitual aspect, or for stative aspect, or for perfective aspect in the past. Invariant pre-verbal markers are often used. Non-stative verbs typically can optionally be marked for the progressive, habitual, completive, or irrealis aspect. The progressive in English-based Atlantic Creoles often uses &quot;de&quot; (from English &quot;be&quot;). Jamaican Creole uses &quot;a&quot; (from English &quot;are&quot;) or &quot;de&quot; for the present progressive and a combination of the past time marker (&quot;did&quot;, &quot;behn&quot;, &quot;ehn&quot; or &quot;wehn&quot;) and the progressive marker (&quot;a&quot; or &quot;de&quot;) for the past progressive (e.g. &quot;did a&quot; or &quot;wehn de&quot;). Haitian Creole uses the progressive marker &quot;ap&quot;. Some Atlantic Creoles use one marker for both the habitual and progressive aspects. In Tok Pisin, the optional progressive marker follows the verb. Completive markers tend to come from superstrate words like &quot;done&quot; or &quot;finish&quot;, and some creoles model the future/irrealis marker on the superstrate word for &quot;go&quot;.

===American Sign Language===
American Sign Language (ASL) is similar to many other sign languages in that it has no grammatical tense but many verbal aspects produced by modifying the base verb sign.

An example is illustrated with the verb . The basic form of this sign is produced with the initial posture of the index finger on the chin, followed by a movement of the hand and finger tip toward the indirect object (the recipient of the telling). Inflected into the unrealized inceptive aspect (&quot;to be just about to tell&quot;), the sign begins with the hand moving from in front of the trunk in an arc to the initial posture of the base sign (i.e., index finger touching the chin) while inhaling through the mouth, dropping the jaw, and directing eye gaze toward the verb&#x27;s object. The posture is then held rather than moved toward the indirect object. During the hold, the signer also stops the breath by closing the glottis. Other verbs (such as &quot;look at&quot;, &quot;wash the dishes&quot;, &quot;yell&quot;, &quot;flirt&quot;) are inflected into the unrealized inceptive aspect similarly: The hands used in the base sign move in an arc from in front of the trunk to the initial posture of the underlying verb sign while inhaling, dropping the jaw, and directing eye gaze toward the verb&#x27;s object (if any), but subsequent movements and postures are dropped as the posture and breath are held.

Other aspects in ASL include the following: stative, inchoative (&quot;to begin to...&quot;), predispositional (&quot;to tend to...&quot;), susceptative (&quot;to... easily&quot;), frequentative (&quot;to... often&quot;), protractive (&quot;to... continuously&quot;), incessant (&quot;to... incessantly&quot;), durative (&quot;to... for a long time&quot;), iterative (&quot;to... over and over again&quot;), intensive (&quot;to... very much&quot;), resultative (&quot;to... completely&quot;), approximative (&quot;to... somewhat&quot;), semblitive (&quot;to appear to...&quot;), increasing (&quot;to... more and more&quot;). Some aspects combine with others to create yet finer distinctions.

Aspect is unusual in ASL in that transitive verbs derived for aspect lose their grammatical transitivity. They remain semantically transitive, typically assuming an object made prominent using a topic marker or mentioned in a previous sentence. See Syntax in ASL for details.

==Terms for various aspects==
The following aspectual terms are found in the literature. Approximate English equivalents are given.
* Perfective: &#x27;I struck the bell&#x27; (an event viewed in its entirety, without reference to its temporal structure during its occurrence)
* Momentane: &#x27;The mouse squeaked once&#x27; (contrasted to &#x27;The mouse squeaked / was squeaking&#x27;)
* Perfect (a common conflation of aspect and tense): &#x27;I have arrived&#x27; (brings attention to the consequences of a situation in the past)
** Recent perfect, also known as &quot;after perfect&quot;: &#x27;I just ate&#x27; or &#x27;I am after eating&#x27; (Hiberno-English)
* Discontinuous past: In English a sentence such as &quot;I put it on the table&quot; is neutral in implication (the object could still be on the table or not), but in some languages such as Chichewa the equivalent tense carries an implication that the object is no longer there. It is thus the opposite of the perfect aspect.
* Prospective (a conflation of aspect and tense): &#x27;He is about to fall&#x27;, &#x27;I am going to cry&quot; (brings attention to the anticipation of a future situation)
* Imperfective (an activity with ongoing nature: combines the meanings of both the continuous and the habitual aspects): &#x27;I was walking to work&#x27; (continuous) or &#x27;I walked (used to walk, would walk) to work every day&#x27; (habitual).
** Habitual: &#x27;I used to walk home from work&#x27;, &#x27;I would walk home from work every day&#x27;, &#x27;I walk home from work every day&#x27; (a subtype of imperfective)
** Continuous: &#x27;I am eating&#x27; or &#x27;I know&#x27; (situation is described as ongoing and either evolving or unevolving; a subtype of imperfective)
*** Progressive: &#x27;I am eating&#x27; (action is described as ongoing and evolving; a subtype of continuous)
*** Stative: &#x27;I know French&#x27; (situation is described as ongoing but not evolving; a subtype of continuous)
* Gnomic/generic: &#x27;Fish swim and birds fly&#x27; (general truths)
* Episodic: &#x27;The bird flew&#x27; (non-gnomic)
* Continuative aspect: &#x27;I am still eating&#x27;
* Inceptive/ingressive: &#x27;I started to run&#x27; (beginning of a new action: dynamic)
* Inchoative: &#x27;The flowers started to bloom&#x27; (beginning of a new state: static)
* Terminative/cessative: &#x27;I finished eating/reading&#x27;
* Defective: &#x27;I almost fell&#x27;
* Pausative: &#x27;I stopped working for a while&#x27;
* Resumptive: &#x27;I resumed sleeping&#x27;
* Punctual: &#x27;I slept&#x27;
* Durative/Delimitative: &#x27;I slept for a while&#x27;
* Protractive: &#x27;The argument went on and on&#x27;
* Iterative: &#x27;I read the same books again and again&#x27;
* Frequentative: &#x27;It sparkled&#x27;, contrasted with &#x27;It sparked&#x27;. Or, &#x27;I run around&#x27;, vs. &#x27;I run&#x27;
* Experiential: &#x27;I have gone to school many times&#x27; (see for example Chinese aspects)
* Intentional: &#x27;I listened carefully&#x27;
* Accidental: &#x27;I accidentally knocked over the chair&#x27;
* Intensive: &#x27;It glared&#x27;
* Attenuative: &#x27;It glimmered&#x27;
* Segmentative: &#x27;It is coming out in successive multitudes&#x27;

== See also ==
* Aktionsart
* Ancient Greek grammar: Dependence of moods and tenses
* Aspect in Standard Chinese
* Grammatical conjugation
* Grammatical tense
* Grammatical mood
* Nominal TAM (tense–aspect–mood)
* Tense–aspect–mood

== Notes ==
==Other references==
*&quot;Routledge Dictionary of Language and Linguistics&quot; (), by Hadumod Bussmann, edited by Gregory P. Trauth and Kerstin Kazzazi, Routledge, London 1996. Translation of German &quot;Lexikon der Sprachwissenschaft&quot; Kröner Verlag, Stuttgart 1990.
* Morfofonologian harjoituksia , Lauri Carlson
*Berdinetto, P. M., &amp; Delfitto, D. (2000). &quot;Aspect vs. Actionality: Some reasons for keeping them apart&quot;. In O. Dahl (Ed.), &quot;Tense and Aspect in the Languages of Europe&quot; (pp. 189–226). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
*Binnick, R. I. (1991). &quot;Time and the verb: A guide to tense and aspect&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press.
*Binnick, R. I. (2006). &quot;Aspect and Aspectuality&quot;. In B. Aarts &amp; A. M. S. McMahon (Eds.), &quot;The Handbook of English Linguistics&quot; (pp. 244–268). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
*Comrie, B. (1976). &quot;Aspect: An introduction to the study of verbal aspect and related problems&quot;. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.
*Frawley, W. (1992). &quot;Linguistic semantics&quot;. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
*Kabakciev, K. (2000). &quot;Aspect in English: a &quot;common-sense&quot; view of the interplay between verbal and nominal referents&quot; (Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy). Springer. Retrieved 2016-05-18.
*MacDonald, J. E. (2008). &quot;The syntactic nature of inner aspect: A minimalist perspective&quot;. Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins Pub. Co.
*Maslov, I. S. (1998). &quot;Vid glagol&#x27;nyj&quot; [&quot;Aspect of the verb&quot;]. In V. N. Yartseva (Ed.), &quot;Jazykoznanie: Bol&#x27;shoj entsyklopedicheskij slovar″&quot; (pp. 83–84). Moscow: Bol&#x27;shaja Rossijskaja Entsyklopedija.
*Richardson, K. (2007). &quot;Case and aspect in Slavic&quot;. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.
*Sasse, H.-J. (2006). &quot;Aspect and Aktionsart&quot;. In E. K. Brown (Ed.), &quot;Encyclopedia of language and linguistics&quot; (Vol. 1, pp. 535–538). Boston: Elsevier.
*Smith, Carlota S. (1991). &quot;The parameter of aspect&quot;. Dordrecht; Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
*Travis, Lisa deMena (2010). &quot;Inner aspect&quot;, Dordrecht, Springer..
*Verkuyl, H. (1972). &quot;On the Compositional Nature of the Aspects&quot;, Reidel, Dordrecht.
*Verkuyl, H. (1993). &quot;A Theory of Aspectuality: the interaction between temporal and atemporal structure&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Verkuyl, H. (2005). &quot;How (in-)sensitive is tense to aspectual information?&quot; In B. Hollebrandse, A. van Hout &amp; C. Vet (Eds.), &quot;Crosslinguistic views on tense, aspect and modality&quot; (pp. 145–169). Amsterdam: Rodopi.
*Zalizniak, A. A., &amp; Shmelev, A. D. (2000). &quot;Vvedenie v russkuiu aspektologiiu&quot; [&quot;Introduction to Russian aspectology&quot;]. Moskva: IAzyki russkoi kul’tury.

== External links ==
* Robert Binnick, Annotated tense/aspect bibliography (around 9000 entries)
* TAMPA: Aspect Explained
* Anna Kibort, Aspekt 
* Anna Katarzyna Młynarczyk: Aspectual Pairing in Polish, a pdf version of the book
* Grammar Tutorials - a column overview of the English tenses
* Greek tenses
* Verb Aspect</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="3" end="14" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="16" end="22" title="Grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q980357" start="28" end="48" title="grammatical category" label="grammatical category"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="70" end="76" title="verb" label="verbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424306" start="135" end="152" title="perfective aspect" label="perfective aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866773" start="199" end="206" title="boundedness (linguistics)" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q371427" start="303" end="322" title="Imperfective aspect" label="Imperfective aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562262" start="540" end="546" title="stative verb" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="568" end="602" title="continuous and progressive aspects" label="continuous and progressive aspects"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636904" start="629" end="644" title="habitual aspect" label="habitual aspect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="781" end="795" title="Perfect (grammar)#Perfect as aspect" label="perfect aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="1070" end="1085" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1091" end="1096" title="#German vernacular and colloquial" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="1176" end="1181" title="grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="1186" end="1190" title="grammatical mood" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751097" start="1196" end="1213" title="tense–aspect–mood" label="tense–aspect–mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1279" end="1284" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="1293" end="1310" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994301" start="1382" end="1392" title="past tense" label="past tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q442485" start="1418" end="1427" title="preterite" label="preterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q108524486" start="1433" end="1442" title="imperfect" label="imperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="1524" end="1540" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="1703" end="1716" title="Grammatical aspect" label="verbal aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="1746" end="1753" title="perfect (grammar)" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q108524486" start="1758" end="1767" title="imperfect" label="imperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q993504" start="2008" end="2013" title="Yaska" label="Yaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="2549" end="2565" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="2612" end="2637" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="2736" end="2741" title="Grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826351" start="2824" end="2832" title="referent" label="referent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192613" start="3508" end="3521" title="present tense" label="present tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="3822" end="3830" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="3860" end="3870" title="inflection" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q631256" start="3952" end="3958" title="marker (linguistics)" label="marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q36494" start="3995" end="4011" title="Kʼicheʼ language" label="Kʼicheʼ language"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="4140" end="4156" title="Standard Mandarin" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q380057" start="4379" end="4385" title="adverb" label="adverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="4410" end="4427" title="continuous aspect" label="continuous aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="4473" end="4491" title="present participle" label="present participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="4500" end="4507" title="perfect (grammar)" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="4555" end="4570" title="past participle" label="past participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="4611" end="4626" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="morphologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="4638" end="4652" title="auxiliary verb" label="auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="4724" end="4733" title="Syntax" label="syntactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975539" start="4791" end="4805" title="lexical aspect" label="lexical aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="5251" end="5270" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="morphological forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q216497" start="5297" end="5303" title="aorist" label="aorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="5321" end="5326" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392475" start="5372" end="5383" title="simple past" label="simple past"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="7581" end="7599" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="7650" end="7655" title="grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q371427" start="7871" end="7898" title="perfective and imperfective" label="perfective vs. imperfective"/>
<link wikidata="Q216497" start="9080" end="9086" title="aorist" label="aorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q442485" start="9108" end="9117" title="preterite" label="preterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="9644" end="9652" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975539" start="10023" end="10037" title="lexical aspect" label="lexical aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449203" start="10613" end="10625" title="semelfactive" label="semelfactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975539" start="11044" end="11054" title="Lexical aspect" label="Aktionsart"/>
<link wikidata="Q156864" start="11087" end="11093" title="Slavist" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27475" start="11146" end="11166" title="Athabaskan languages" label="Athabaskan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336024" start="11211" end="11219" title="telicity" label="telicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449203" start="11437" end="11449" title="semelfactive" label="semelfactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="11991" end="12013" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="12205" end="12228" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="12237" end="12253" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188307" start="12289" end="12294" title="Hindustani grammar" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="12393" end="12400" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="12580" end="12595" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="12619" end="12630" title="auxiliary verb" label="auxiliaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188307" start="12652" end="12657" title="Hindustani grammar" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108642" start="12726" end="12738" title="Periphrasis" label="Periphrastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="12907" end="12922" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="literary Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250831" start="14910" end="14928" title="prospective aspect" label="prospective aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="15096" end="15105" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="16183" end="16190" title="perfect (grammar)" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18480" end="18507" title="Uses of English verb forms#Tenses, aspects and moods" label="English tense–aspect system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18549" end="18553" title="Past tense#English" label="past"/>
<link wikidata="Q16916993" start="18558" end="18566" title="Nonpast tense" label="non-past"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="18838" end="18852" title="auxiliary verb" label="auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397625" start="18860" end="18864" title="will future" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397625" start="18881" end="18886" title="shall" label="shall"/>
<link wikidata="Q380057" start="18921" end="18927" title="adverb" label="adverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="19140" end="19158" title="progressive aspect" label="progressive aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="19212" end="19219" title="perfect (grammar)" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910936" start="19402" end="19416" title="Present simple" label="Present simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240943" start="19469" end="19488" title="Present progressive" label="Present progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240211" start="19543" end="19558" title="Present perfect" label="Present perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="19614" end="19641" title="Present perfect progressive" label="Present perfect progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392475" start="20159" end="20170" title="Past simple" label="Past simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="20223" end="20239" title="Past progressive" label="Past progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q623742" start="20295" end="20307" title="Past perfect" label="Past perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="20362" end="20386" title="Past perfect progressive" label="Past perfect progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050494" start="20472" end="20482" title="non-finite verb" label="non-finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="20530" end="20540" title="infinitive" label="infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="20655" end="20673" title="present participle" label="present participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="20677" end="20683" title="gerund" label="gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624317" start="20761" end="20772" title="English modal verbs" label="modal verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="21100" end="21113" title="Simple future" label="Simple future"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="21115" end="21133" title="simple conditional" label="simple conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="21185" end="21203" title="Future progressive" label="Future progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="21205" end="21228" title="conditional progressive" label="conditional progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234617" start="21292" end="21306" title="Future perfect" label="Future perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q25619773" start="21308" end="21327" title="conditional perfect" label="conditional perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="21393" end="21419" title="Future perfect progressive" label="Future perfect progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="21421" end="21452" title="conditional perfect progressive" label="conditional perfect progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="21806" end="21812" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599204" start="21876" end="21896" title="illocutionary act" label="illocutionary forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991062" start="22193" end="22200" title="Used to" label="Used to"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636904" start="22224" end="22232" title="Habitual aspect" label="habitual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577745" start="22286" end="22294" title="going to" label="going to"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250831" start="22321" end="22332" title="prospective aspect" label="prospective"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002" start="22569" end="22604" title="African-American Vernacular English" label="African-American Vernacular English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636907" start="22622" end="22633" title="habitual be" label="habitual be"/>
<link wikidata="Q31989" start="22643" end="22650" title="English-based creole language" label="creoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35602" start="22688" end="22711" title="Hawaiian Creole English" label="Hawaiian Creole English"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="23012" end="23020" title="Stress (linguistics)" label="stressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="23102" end="23117" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q263522" start="23146" end="23158" title="Upper German" label="Upper German"/>
<link wikidata="Q690982" start="23167" end="23186" title="West Central German" label="West Central German"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="23313" end="23328" title="continuous aspect" label="continuous form"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="24093" end="24098" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="24102" end="24124" title="West Germanic languages" label="West Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="24140" end="24155" title="continuous aspect" label="continuous form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="24397" end="24403" title="gerund" label="gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240943" start="24461" end="24480" title="Present progressive" label="Present progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="24545" end="24561" title="Past progressive" label="Past progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="24627" end="24645" title="Future progressive" label="Future progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240943" start="25154" end="25173" title="Present progressive" label="Present progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="25334" end="25350" title="Past progressive" label="Past progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957025" start="25502" end="25520" title="Future progressive" label="Future progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="26124" end="26140" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975539" start="26594" end="26608" title="lexical aspect" label="lexical aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q324982" start="26803" end="26813" title="Suppletion" label="Suppletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="27017" end="27023" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18514" start="27058" end="27073" title="dictionary form" label="dictionary form"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636904" start="27960" end="27975" title="habitual aspect" label="habitual aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="28057" end="28075" title="progressive aspect" label="progressive aspect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28271" end="28313" title="Russian grammar#Verbs of motion" label="Russian basic (unprefixed) verbs of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="28321" end="28327" title="prefix" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="29133" end="29147" title="Latin language" label="Latin language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127176" start="29186" end="29205" title="consecutio temporum" label="consecutio temporum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250831" start="29673" end="29684" title="prospective aspect" label="prospective"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="29828" end="29838" title="Continuous aspect" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="29839" end="29850" title="Progressive aspect" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="29989" end="29994" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636904" start="30014" end="30029" title="habitual aspect" label="habitual aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424306" start="30031" end="30048" title="perfective aspect" label="perfective aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="30057" end="30075" title="Continuous and progressive aspects" label="progressive aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11997264" start="30243" end="30253" title="Realis mood" label="indicative"/>
<link wikidata="Q362703" start="30255" end="30266" title="Irrealis mood" label="presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q473746" start="30268" end="30279" title="Subjunctive mood" label="subjunctive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783264" start="30281" end="30294" title="Counterfactual conditional" label="contrafactual"/>
<link wikidata="Q22716" start="30300" end="30310" title="Imperative mood" label="imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108642" start="30389" end="30401" title="Periphrasis" label="Periphrastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87712823" start="31010" end="31021" title="Hindi verbs" label="Hindi verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="31047" end="31054" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="31059" end="31067" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336024" start="31121" end="31129" title="telicity" label="telicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079319" start="31331" end="31335" title="List of grammatical cases" label="case"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="31351" end="31361" title="accusative" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q26197344" start="31375" end="31384" title="partitive" label="partitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q467562" start="32267" end="32280" title="frequentative" label="frequentative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897160" start="32282" end="32291" title="momentane" label="momentane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737190" start="32293" end="32302" title="causative" label="causative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423398" start="32308" end="32318" title="inchoative" label="inchoative"/>
<link wikidata="Q830012" start="32375" end="32387" title="transitivity (grammatical category)" label="transitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36417" start="32450" end="32463" title="Rapa language" label="Rapa language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34128" start="32512" end="32520" title="Tahitian language" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q114832" start="32567" end="32575" title="Rapa Iti" label="Rapa Iti"/>
<link wikidata="Q34128" start="32682" end="32690" title="Tahitian language" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="32717" end="32724" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="32938" end="32955" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245088" start="36278" end="36320" title="Is the glass half empty or half full?" label="Is the glass half full or is it half empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="38328" end="38350" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="38369" end="38383" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="38489" end="38504" title="auxiliary verbs" label="auxiliary verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424306" start="38528" end="38538" title="perfective aspect" label="perfective"/>
<link wikidata="Q371427" start="38724" end="38736" title="imperfective aspect" label="imperfective"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="38820" end="38831" title="Continuous and progressive aspects" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449203" start="38929" end="38941" title="semelfactive" label="semelfactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="38982" end="39004" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q947858" start="39023" end="39043" title="Philippine languages" label="Philippine languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q947858" start="39241" end="39261" title="Philippine languages" label="Philippine languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="39362" end="39370" title="Filipino language" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="39374" end="39381" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="39407" end="39422" title="Creole language" label="Creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q756829" start="39741" end="39756" title="Atlantic Creole" label="Atlantic Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q35939" start="39815" end="39830" title="Jamaican Creole" label="Jamaican Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="40177" end="40191" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="40323" end="40332" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="40608" end="40630" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42941" end="42954" title="American Sign Language grammar#DP syntax" label="Syntax in ASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424306" start="43103" end="43113" title="Perfective aspect" label="Perfective"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897160" start="43248" end="43257" title="Momentane" label="Momentane"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="43360" end="43367" title="Perfect (grammar)" label="Perfect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43507" end="43521" title="Recent perfect" label="Recent perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q665624" start="43621" end="43636" title="Hiberno-English" label="Hiberno-English"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304599" start="43640" end="43658" title="Discontinuous past" label="Discontinuous past"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="43829" end="43837" title="Chewa language" label="Chichewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250831" start="43967" end="43978" title="Prospective aspect" label="Prospective"/>
<link wikidata="Q371427" start="44141" end="44153" title="Imperfective aspect" label="Imperfective"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636904" start="44391" end="44399" title="Habitual aspect" label="Habitual"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="44570" end="44580" title="Continuous aspect" label="Continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="44729" end="44740" title="Progressive aspect" label="Progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562262" start="44841" end="44848" title="Stative verb" label="Stative"/>
<link wikidata="Q502430" start="44956" end="44970" title="Gnomic aspect" label="Gnomic/generic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45027" end="45035" title="Episodic aspect" label="Episodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130104" start="45078" end="45097" title="Continuative aspect" label="Continuative aspect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45131" end="45151" title="Inceptive aspect" label="Inceptive/ingressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423398" start="45221" end="45231" title="Inchoative" label="Inchoative"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027342" start="45311" end="45332" title="Terminative aspect" label="Terminative/cessative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45374" end="45383" title="Defective aspect" label="Defective"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45413" end="45422" title="Pausative aspect" label="Pausative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45468" end="45478" title="Resumptive aspect" label="Resumptive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45513" end="45521" title="Punctual aspect" label="Punctual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184260" start="45545" end="45566" title="Delimitative aspect" label="Durative/Delimitative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45602" end="45613" title="Protractive aspect" label="Protractive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866772" start="45657" end="45666" title="Iterative aspect" label="Iterative"/>
<link wikidata="Q467562" start="45720" end="45733" title="Frequentative" label="Frequentative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45930" end="45945" title="Chinese grammar#Aspects" label="Chinese aspects"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45949" end="45960" title="Intentional aspect" label="Intentional"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45997" end="46007" title="Accidental aspect" label="Accidental"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965321" start="46061" end="46070" title="Intensive" label="Intensive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46096" end="46107" title="Attenuative aspect" label="Attenuative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46136" end="46148" title="Segmentative aspect" label="Segmentative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975539" start="46222" end="46232" title="Lexical aspect" label="Aktionsart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46235" end="46288" title="Ancient Greek grammar#Dependence of moods and tenses" label="Ancient Greek grammar: Dependence of moods and tenses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46291" end="46317" title="Chinese grammar#Aspects" label="Aspect in Standard Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="46320" end="46343" title="Grammatical conjugation" label="Grammatical conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="46346" end="46363" title="Grammatical tense" label="Grammatical tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="46366" end="46382" title="Grammatical mood" label="Grammatical mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048568" start="46385" end="46396" title="Nominal TAM" label="Nominal TAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751097" start="46419" end="46436" title="Tense–aspect–mood" label="Tense–aspect–mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="46711" end="46720" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q50414322" start="48476" end="48493" title="Carlota S. Smith" label="Smith, Carlota S."/>
</links>
</doc>
