<doc id="14653" wikidata="Q794" url="?curid=14653" title="Iran">
<text>Iran, officially the Islamic Republic of Iran (IRI) and also known as Persia, is a country in West Asia. It borders Turkey to the northwest and Iraq to the west, Azerbaijan, Armenia, the Caspian Sea, and Turkmenistan to the north, Afghanistan to the east, Pakistan to the southeast, the Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf to the south. With a multi-ethnic population of about 86 million in an area of , Iran ranks 17th globally in both geographic size and population. It is the sixth-largest country entirely in Asia and one of the world&#x27;s most mountainous countries. Officially an Islamic republic, Iran has a Muslim-majority population. The country is divided into five regions with 31 provinces. Tehran is the nation&#x27;s capital, largest city and financial centre.

A cradle of civilisation, Iran has been inhabited since the Lower Palaeolithic. The large part of Iran was first unified as a political entity by the Medes under Cyaxares in the seventh century BC, and reached its territorial height in the sixth century BC, when Cyrus the Great founded the Achaemenid Empire, one of the largest in ancient history. Alexander the Great conquered the empire in the fourth century BC. An Iranian rebellion established the Parthian Empire in the third century BC and liberated the country, which was succeeded by the Sasanian Empire in the third century AD. Ancient Iran saw some of the earliest developments of writing, agriculture, urbanisation, religion and central government. The Sasanian era is considered a golden age in the history of Iranian civilisation. Muslims conquered the region in the seventh century AD, leading to Iran&#x27;s Islamisation. The literature, philosophy, mathematics, medicine, astronomy and art which had blossomed during the Sasanian era were renewed during the Islamic Golden Age and Persian Renaissance, when a series of Iranian Muslim dynasties ended Arab rule, revived the Persian language and ruled the country until the Seljuk and Mongol conquests of the 11th to 14th centuries.

In the 16th century, the native Safavids re-established a unified Iranian state with Twelver Shi&#x27;ism as the official religion. During the Afsharid Empire in the 18th century, Iran was a leading world power, but this was no longer the case after the Qajars took power in the 1790s. The early 20th century saw the Persian Constitutional Revolution and the establishment of the Pahlavi dynasty by Reza Shah the Great, who ousted the last Qajar shah in 1925. Attempts by Mohammad Mosaddegh to nationalise the oil industry led to an Anglo-American coup in 1953. After the Iranian Revolution, the monarchy was overthrown in 1979 and the Islamic Republic of Iran was established by Ruhollah Khomeini, who became the country&#x27;s first Supreme Leader. In 1980, Iraq invaded Iran, sparking the eight-year-long Iran–Iraq War, which ended in stalemate.

Iran is officially governed as a unitary Islamic republic with a presidential system, with ultimate authority vested in a Supreme Leader. The government is authoritarian and has attracted widespread criticism for its significant violations of human rights and civil liberties. Iran is a major regional power, due to its large reserves of fossil fuels, including the world&#x27;s second largest natural gas supply, third largest proven oil reserves, its geopolitically significant location, military capabilities, cultural hegemony, regional influence, and role as the world&#x27;s focal point of Shia Islam. The Iranian economy is the world&#x27;s 23rd-largest by PPP. Iran is a founding member of the United Nations, OIC, OPEC, and ECO as well as a current member of the NAM, SCO, and BRICS. Iran is home to 28 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the 10th highest in the world, and ranks 5th in Intangible Cultural Heritage, or human treasures.

== Etymology ==
The term &quot;Iran&quot; derives from Middle Persian , first attested in a 3rd-century inscription at Naqsh-e Rostam, with the accompanying Parthian inscription using , in reference to the Iranians. and are oblique plural forms of gentilic nouns &quot;ēr-&quot; (Middle Persian) and &quot;ary-&quot; (Parthian), deriving from Proto-Iranian language &quot;*arya-&quot; (meaning &#x27;Aryan&#x27;, i.e. of the Iranians), recognised as a derivative of Proto-Indo-European language &#x27;, meaning . According to Iranian mythology, the name comes from Iraj, a legendary king.

Iran was referred to as &quot;Persia&quot; by the West, due to Greek historians who referred to all of Iran as , meaning &#x27;the land of the Persians&#x27;. &quot;Persia&quot; is the Fars province in southwest Iran, the 4th largest province, also known as &quot;Pârs&quot;. The Persian &quot;Fârs&quot; (فارس), derived from the earlier form &quot;Pârs&quot; (پارس), which is in turn derived from &quot;Pârsâ&quot; (Old Persian: 𐎱𐎠𐎼𐎿). Due to Fars&#x27; historical importance, &quot;Persia&quot; originated from this territory through Greek in around 550 BC, and Westerners referred to the entire country as &quot;Persia&quot;, until 1935, when Reza Shah requested the international community to use its native and original name, &quot;Iran&quot;; Iranians called their nation &quot;Iran&quot; since at least 1000 BC. Today, both &quot;Iran&quot; and &quot;Persia&quot; are used culturally, while &quot;Iran&quot; remains mandatory in official use.

The Persian pronunciation of &quot;Iran&quot; is . Commonwealth English pronunciations of &quot;Iran&quot; are listed in the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; as and , while American English dictionaries provide pronunciations which map to , or . The &quot;Cambridge Dictionary&quot; lists as the British pronunciation and as the American pronunciation. Voice of America&#x27;s pronunciation guide provides .

== History ==


Iran is home to one of the world&#x27;s oldest continuous major civilisations, with historical and urban settlements dating back to 4000 BC. The western part of the Iranian plateau participated in the traditional ancient Near East with Elam (3200–539 BC), and later with other peoples such as the Kassites, Mannaeans, and Gutians. Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel called the Persians the &quot;first Historical People&quot;. The Iranian Empire began in the Iron Age with the rise of the Medes, who unified Iran as a nation and empire in 625 BC. The Achaemenid Empire (550–330 BC), founded by Cyrus the Great, was the largest empire the world had seen, spanning from the Balkans to North Africa and Central Asia. They were succeeded by the Seleucid, Parthian, and Sasanian Empires, who governed Iran for almost 1,000 years, making Iran a leading power once again. Persia&#x27;s arch-rival during this time was the Roman Empire and its successor, the Byzantine Empire.

Iran endured invasions by the Macedonians, Arabs, Turks, and Mongols. Despite these invasions, Iran continually reasserted its national identity and developed as a distinct political and cultural entity. The Muslim conquest of Persia (632–654) ended the Sasanian Empire and marked a turning point in Iranian history, leading to the Islamisation of Iran from the eighth to tenth centuries and the decline of Zoroastrianism. However, the achievements of prior Persian civilisations were absorbed into the new Islamic polity. Iran suffered invasions by nomadic tribes during the Late Middle Ages and early modern period, negatively impacting the region. Iran was reunified as an independent state in 1501 by the Safavid dynasty, which established Shia Islam as the empire&#x27;s official religion, marking another turning point in the history of Islam. Iran functioned again as a leading world power, especially in rivalry with the Ottoman Empire. In the 19th century, Iran lost significant territories in the Caucasus to the Russian Empire following the Russo-Persian Wars.

Iran remained a monarchy until the 1979 Iranian Revolution, when it officially became an Islamic republic on 1 April 1979. Since then, Iran has experienced significant political, social, and economic changes. The establishment of the &quot;Islamic Republic of Iran&quot; led to the restructuring of its political system, with Ayatollah Khomeini as the Supreme Leader. Iran&#x27;s foreign relations have been shaped by the Iran–Iraq War (1980–1988), ongoing tensions with the United States, and its nuclear programme, which has been a point of contention in international diplomacy.

=== Since the 1990s ===
In 1989, Akbar Rafsanjani concentrated on a pro-business policy of rebuilding the economy without breaking with the ideology of the revolution. He supported a free market domestically, favouring privatisation of state industries and a moderate position internationally. In 1997, Rafsanjani was succeeded by moderate reformist Mohammad Khatami, whose government advocated freedom of expression, constructive diplomatic relations with Asia and the European Union, and an economic policy that supported a free market and foreign investment.

The 2005 presidential election brought conservative populist and nationalist candidate Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to power. He was known for his hardline views, nuclearisation, and hostility towards Israel, Saudi Arabia, the UK, the US and other states. He was the first president to be summoned by the parliament to answer questions regarding his presidency. In 2013, centrist and reformist Hassan Rouhani was elected president. In domestic policy, he encouraged personal freedom, free access to information, and improved women&#x27;s rights. He improved Iran&#x27;s diplomatic relations through exchanging conciliatory letters. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) was reached in Vienna in 2015, between Iran, the P5+1 (UN Security Council + Germany) and the EU. The negotiations centred around ending the economic sanctions in exchange for Iran&#x27;s restriction in producing enriched uranium. In 2018, however, the US under Trump Administration withdrew from the deal and new sanctions were imposed. This nulled the economic provisions, left the agreement in jeopardy, and brought Iran to nuclear threshold status. In 2020, IRGC general, Qasem Soleimani, the 2nd-most powerful person in Iran, was assassinated by the US, heightening tensions between them. Iran retaliated against US airbases in Iraq, the largest ballistic missile attack ever on Americans; 110 sustained brain injuries.

Hardliner Ebrahim Raisi ran for president again in 2021, succeeding Hassan Rouhani. During Raisi&#x27;s term, Iran intensified uranium enrichment, hindered international inspections, joined SCO and BRICS, supported Russia in its invasion of Ukraine and restored diplomatic relations with Saudi Arabia. In April 2024, Israel&#x27;s airstrike on an Iranian consulate, killed an IRGC commander. Iran retaliated with UAVs, cruise and ballistic missiles; 9 hit Israel. Western and Jordanian military helped Israel down some Iranian drones. It was the largest drone strike in history, biggest missile attack in Iranian history, its first ever direct attack on Israel and the first time since 1991, Israel was directly attacked by a state force. This occurred during heightened tensions amid the Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip. In May 2024, President Raisi was killed in a helicopter crash, and Iran held a presidential election in June, when reformist and former Minister of Health, Masoud Pezeshkian, was elected to office. On 1 October 2024, Iran launched about 180 ballistic missiles at Israel in retaliation for assassinations of Ismail Haniyeh, Hassan Nasrallah and Abbas Nilforoushan. On 27 October, Israel responded to that attack by strikes on a missile defence system in the Iranian region of Isfahan.

== Geography ==
Iran has an area of . It is the sixth-largest country entirely in Asia and the second-largest in West Asia. It lies between latitudes 24° and 40° N, and longitudes 44° and 64° E. It is bordered to the northwest by Armenia (), the Azeri exclave of Nakhchivan (), and the Republic of Azerbaijan (); to the north by the Caspian Sea; to the northeast by Turkmenistan (); to the east by Afghanistan () and Pakistan (); to the south by the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman; and to the west by Iraq () and Turkey ().

Iran is in a seismically active area. On average, an earthquake of magnitude seven on the Richter scale occurs once every ten years. Most earthquakes are shallow-focus and can be very devastating, such as the 2003 Bam earthquake.

Iran consists of the Iranian Plateau. It is one of the world&#x27;s most mountainous countries; its landscape is dominated by rugged mountain ranges that separate basins or plateaus. The populous west part is the most mountainous, with ranges such as the Caucasus, Zagros, and Alborz, the last containing Mount Damavand, Iran&#x27;s highest point, at , which is the highest volcano in Asia. Iran&#x27;s mountains have impacted its politics and economics for centuries.

The north part is covered by the lush lowland Caspian Hyrcanian forests, near the southern shores of the Caspian Sea. The east part consists mostly of desert basins, such as the Kavir Desert, which is the country&#x27;s largest desert, and the Lut Desert, as well as salt lakes. The Lut Desert is the hottest recorded spot on the Earth&#x27;s surface, with 70.7 °C recorded in 2005. The only large plains are found along the coast of the Caspian and at the north end of the Persian Gulf, where the country borders the mouth of the Arvand river. Smaller, discontinuous plains are found along the remaining coast of the Persian Gulf, the Strait of Hormuz, and Gulf of Oman.

=== Islands ===
Iranian islands are mainly located in the Persian Gulf. Iran has 102 islands in Urmia Lake, 427 in Aras River, several in Anzali Lagoon, Ashurade Island in the Caspian Sea, Sheytan Island in the Oman Sea and other inland islands. Iran has an uninhabited island at the far end of the Gulf of Oman, near Pakistan. A few islands can be visited by tourists. Most are owned by the military or used for wildlife protection, and entry is prohibited or requires a permit.

Iran took control of Bumusa, and the Greater and Lesser Tunbs in 1971, in the Strait of Hormuz between the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman. Despite the islands being small and having little natural resources or population, they are highly valuable for their strategic location. Although the United Arab Emirates claims sovereignty, it has consistently been met with a strong response from Iran, based on their historical and cultural background. Iran has full control over the islands.

Kish island, as a free trade zone, is touted as a consumer&#x27;s paradise, with malls, shopping centres, tourist attractions, and luxury hotels. Qeshm is the largest island in Iran, and a UNESCO Global Geopark since 2016. Its salt cave, Namakdan, is the largest in the world, and one of the world&#x27;s longest caves.

=== Climate ===

Iran&#x27;s climate is diverse, ranging from arid and semi-arid, to subtropical along the Caspian coast and northern forests. On the north edge of the country, temperatures rarely fall below freezing and the area remains humid. Summer temperatures rarely exceed . Annual precipitation is in the east part of the plain and more than in the west part. The UN Resident Coordinator for Iran, has said that &quot;Water scarcity poses the most severe human security challenge in Iran today&quot;.

To the west, settlements in the Zagros basin experience lower temperatures, severe winters with freezing average daily temperatures and heavy snowfall. The east and central basins are arid, with less than of rain and have occasional deserts. Average summer temperatures rarely exceed . The southern coastal plains of the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman have mild winters, and very humid and hot summers. The annual precipitation ranges from .

=== Biodiversity ===
More than one-tenth of the country is forested. About 120 million hectares of forests and fields are government-owned for national exploitation. Iran&#x27;s forests can be divided into five vegetation regions: Hyrcanian region which forms the green belt of the north side of the country; the Turan region, which are mainly scattered in the centre of Iran; Zagros region, which mainly contains oak forests in the west; the Persian Gulf region, which is scattered in the southern coastal belt; the Arasbarani region, which contains rare and unique species. More than 8,200 plant species are grown. The land covered by natural flora is four times that of Europe&#x27;s. There are over 200 protected areas to preserve biodiversity and wildlife, with over 30 being national parks.

Iran&#x27;s living fauna includes 34 bat species, Indian grey mongoose, small Indian mongoose, golden jackal, Indian wolf, foxes, striped hyena, leopard, Eurasian lynx, brown bear and Asian black bear. Ungulate species include wild boar, urial, Armenian mouflon, red deer, and goitered gazelle. One of the most famous animals is the critically endangered Asiatic cheetah, which survives only in Iran. Iran lost all its Asiatic lions and the extinct Caspian tigers by the early 20th century. Domestic ungulates are represented by sheep, goat, cattle, horse, water buffalo, donkey and camel. Bird species like pheasant, partridge, stork, eagles and falcons are native.

== Government and politics ==
=== Supreme Leader ===
The Supreme Leader, &quot;Rahbar&quot;, Leader of the Revolution or Supreme Leadership Authority, is the head of state and responsible for supervision of policy. The president has limited power compared to the Rahbar. Key ministers are selected with the Rahbar&#x27;s agreement and they have the ultimate say on foreign policy. The Rahbar is directly involved in ministerial appointments for Defence, Intelligence and Foreign Affairs, as well as other top ministries after submission of candidates from the president.

Regional policy is directly controlled by the Rahbar, with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs&#x27; task limited to protocol and ceremonial occasions. Ambassadors to Arab countries, for example, are chosen by the Quds Force, which directly reports to the Rahbar. The Rahbar can order laws to be amended. Setad was estimated at $95 billion in 2013 by Reuters, accounts of which are secret even to the parliament.

The Rahbar is the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces, controls military intelligence and security operations, and has sole power to declare war or peace. The heads of the judiciary, state radio and television networks, commanders of the police and military, and the members of the Guardian Council are all appointed by the Rahbar.

The Assembly of Experts is responsible for electing the Rahbar, and has the power to dismiss him on the basis of qualifications and popular esteem. To date, the Assembly of Experts has not challenged any of the Rahbar&#x27;s decisions nor attempted to dismiss him. The previous head of the judicial system, Sadeq Larijani, appointed by the Rahbar, said that it is illegal for the Assembly of Experts to supervise the Rahbar. Many believe the Assembly of Experts has become a ceremonial body without any real power. In February 2025,  the New York Times reported that according to Karim Sadjadpour, an expert on Iran at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, there exist in the Islamic Republic of Iran two parallel regimes. One which is ruled by the military and intelligence forces, who report to the Rahbar, and &quot;who oversee the nuclear program and regional proxies and are tasked with repression, hostage taking and assassinations”. The other ruled by diplomats and politicians &quot;who are authorized to speak to Western media and officials&quot; and have minimal knowledge of Iran&#x27;s nuclear program.

The political system is based on the country&#x27;s constitution. Iran ranked 154th in the 2022 &quot;The Economist Democracy Index&quot;. Juan José Linz wrote in 2000 that &quot;the Iranian regime combines the ideological bent of totalitarianism with the limited pluralism of authoritarianism&quot;.

=== President ===
The President is head of government and the second highest-ranking authority, after the Supreme Leader. The President is elected by universal suffrage for 4 years. Before elections, nominees to become a presidential candidate must be approved by the Guardian Council. The Council&#x27;s members are chosen by the Leader, with the Leader having the power to dismiss the president. The President can only be re-elected for one term. The president is the deputy commander-in-chief of the Army, the head of Supreme National Security Council, and has the power to declare a state of emergency after passage by the parliament.

The President is responsible for the implementation of the constitution, and for the exercise of executive powers in implementing the decrees and general policies as outlined by the Rahbar, except for matters directly related to the Rahbar, who has the final say. The President functions as the executive of affairs such as signing treaties and other international agreements, and administering national planning, budget, and state employment affairs, all as approved by the Rahbar.

The President appoints ministers, subject to the approval of the Parliament, and the Rahbar, who can dismiss or reinstate any minister. The President supervises the Council of Ministers, coordinates government decisions, and selects government policies to be placed before the legislature. Eight Vice Presidents serve under the President, as well as a cabinet of 22 ministers, all appointed by the president.

=== Guardian Council ===

Presidential and parliamentary candidates must be approved by the 12-member Guardian Council (all members of which are appointed by the Leader) or the Leader, before running to ensure their allegiance. The Leader rarely does the vetting, but has the power to do so, in which case additional approval of the Guardian Council is not needed. The Leader can revert the decisions of the Guardian Council.

The constitution gives the council three mandates: veto power over legislation passed by the parliament, supervision of elections and approving or disqualifying candidates seeking to run in local, parliamentary, presidential, or Assembly of Experts elections. The council can nullify a law based on two accounts: being against Sharia (Islamic law), or being against the constitution.

=== Supreme National Security Council ===

The Supreme National Security Council (SNSC) is at the top of the foreign policy decisions process. The council was formed during the 1989 Iranian constitutional referendum for the protection and support of national interests, the revolution, territorial integrity and national sovereignty. It is mandated by Article 176 of the Constitution to be presided over by the President.

The Leader selects the secretary of the Supreme Council, and the decisions of the council are effective after the confirmation by the Leader. The SNSC formulates nuclear policy, and would become effective if they are confirmed by the Leader.

=== Legislature ===
The legislature, known as the Islamic Consultative Assembly (ICA), Iranian Parliament or &quot;Majles&quot;, is a unicameral body comprising 290 members elected for four-years. It drafts legislation, ratifies international treaties, and approves the national budget. All parliamentary candidates and legislation from the assembly must be approved by the Guardian Council. The Guardian Council can and has dismissed elected members of the parliament. The parliament has no legal status without the Guardian Council, and the Council holds absolute veto power over legislation.

The Expediency Discernment Council has the authority to mediate disputes between Parliament and the Guardian Council, and serves as an advisory body to the Supreme Leader, making it one of the most powerful governing bodies in Iran.

The Parliament has 207 constituencies, including the 5 reserved seats for religious minorities. The remaining 202 are territorial, each covering one or more of Iran&#x27;s counties.

=== Law ===

Iran uses the Sharia law as its legal system, with elements of Civil law. The Supreme Leader appoints the head of the Supreme Court and chief public prosecutor. There are several types of courts, including public courts that deal with civil and criminal cases, and revolutionary courts which deal with certain offences, such as crimes against national security. The decisions of the revolutionary courts are final and cannot be appealed.

The Chief Justice is the head of the judicial system and responsible for its administration and supervision. He is the highest judge of the Supreme Court of Iran. The Chief Justice nominates candidates to serve as minister of justice, and the President selects one. The Chief Justice can serve for two five-year terms.

The Special Clerical Court handles crimes allegedly committed by clerics, although it has taken on cases involving laypeople. The Special Clerical Court functions independently of the regular judicial framework and is accountable only to the Rahbar. The Court&#x27;s rulings are final and cannot be appealed. The Assembly of Experts, which meets for one week annually, comprises 86 &quot;virtuous and learned&quot; clerics elected by adult suffrage for 8-year terms.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Iran is subdivided into thirty-one provinces ( &quot;ostân&quot;), each governed from a local centre, usually the largest local city, which is called the capital (Persian: , &quot;markaz&quot;) of that province. The provincial authority is headed by a governor-general ( &quot;ostândâr&quot;), who is appointed by the Minister of the Interior subject to approval of the cabinet.


=== Foreign relations ===
Iran maintains diplomatic relations with 165 countries, but not the United States and Israel—a state which Iran derecognised in 1979.

Iran has an adversarial relationship with Saudi Arabia due to different political and ideologies. Iran and Turkey have been involved in modern proxy conflicts such as in Syria, Libya, and the South Caucasus. However, they have shared common interests, such as the issue of Kurdish separatism and the Qatar diplomatic crisis. Iran has a close and strong relationship with Tajikistan. Iran has deep economic relations and alliance with Iraq, Lebanon and Syria, with Syria often described as Iran&#x27;s &quot;closest ally&quot;.

Russia is a key trading partner, especially in regard to its excess oil reserves. Both share a close economic and military alliance, and are subject to heavy sanctions by Western nations. Iran is the only country in Western Asia that has been invited to join the CSTO, the Russia-based international treaty organisation that parallels NATO.

Relations between Iran and China are strong economically; they have developed a friendly, economic and strategic relationship. In 2021, Iran and China signed a 25-year cooperation agreement that will strengthen the relations between the two countries and would include &quot;political, strategic and economic&quot; components. Iran-China relations dates back to at least 200 BC and possibly earlier. Iran is one of the few countries in the world that has a good relationship with both North and South Korea.

In December 2025, the fall of the Assad regime in Syria, a close ally of Iran, was a severe setback for the political influence of Iran in the region.
Iran is a member of dozens of international organisations, including the G-15, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, IDA, NAM, IDB, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, OIC, OPEC, WHO, and the UN, and currently has observer status at the WTO.

=== Military ===


The military is organised under a unified structure, the Islamic Republic of Iran Armed Forces, comprising the Islamic Republic of Iran Army, which includes the Ground Forces, Air Defence Force, Air Force, and Navy; the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, which consists of the Ground Forces, Aerospace Force, Navy, Quds Force, and Basij; and the Law Enforcement Command (Faraja), which serves an analogous function to a gendarme. While the IRIAF protects the country&#x27;s sovereignty in a traditional capacity, the IRGC is mandated to ensure the integrity of the Republic, against foreign interference, coups, and internal riots. Since 1925, it is mandatory for all male citizen aged 18 to serve around 14 months in the IRIAF or IRGC.

Iran has over 610,000 active troops and around 350,000 reservists, totalling over 1 million military personnel, one of the world&#x27;s highest percentage of citizens with military training. The Basij&quot;,&quot; a paramilitary volunteer militia within the IRGC, has over 20 million members, 600,000 available for immediate call-up, 300,000 reservists, and a million that could be mobilised when necessary. Faraja, the Iranian uniformed police force, has over 260,000 active personnel. Most statistical organisations do not include the Basij and Faraja in their ratings report.

Excluding the Basij and Faraja, Iran has been identified as a major military power, owing it to the size and capabilities of its armed forces. It possesses the world&#x27;s 14th strongest military. It ranks 13th globally in terms of overall military strength, 7th in the number of active military personnel, and 9th in the size of both its ground force and armoured force. Iran&#x27;s armed forces are the largest in West Asia and comprise the greatest Army Aviation fleet in the Middle East. Iran is among the top 15 countries in terms of military budget. In 2021, its military spending increased for the first time in four years, to $24.6 billion, 2.3% of the national GDP. Funding for the IRGC accounted for 34% of Iran&#x27;s total military spending in 2021.

Since the Revolution, to overcome foreign embargoes, Iran has developed a domestic military industry capable of producing indigenous tanks, armoured personnel carriers, missiles, submarines, missile destroyer, radar systems, helicopters, naval vessels, and fighter planes. Official announcements have highlighted the development of advanced weaponry, particularly in rocketry. Consequently, Iran has the largest and most diverse ballistic missile arsenal in the Middle East and is only the 5th country in the world with hypersonic missile technology. It is the world&#x27;s 6th missile power. Iran designs and produces a variety of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and is considered a global leader and superpower in drone warfare and technology. It is one of the world&#x27;s five countries with cyberwarfare capabilities and is identified as &quot;one of the most active players in the international cyber arena&quot;. Iran is an key exporter of arms since 2000s.

Following Russia&#x27;s purchase of Iranian drones during the invasion of Ukraine, in November 2023, the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force (IRIAF) finalized arrangements to acquire Russian Sukhoi Su-35 fighter jets, Mil Mi-28 attack helicopters, air defence and missile systems. The Iranian Navy has had joint exercises with Russia and China.

=== Nuclear programme ===
Iran&#x27;s nuclear programme dates back to the 1950s. Iran revived it after the Revolution, and its extensive nuclear fuel cycle, including enrichment capabilities, became the subject of intense international negotiations and sanctions. Many countries have expressed concern Iran could divert civilian nuclear technology into a weapons programme. In 2015, Iran and the P5+1 agreed to the Joint Comprehensive Plan on Action (JCPOA), aiming to end economic sanctions in exchange for restriction in producing enriched uranium.

In 2018, however, the US withdrew from the deal under the Trump administration, and reimposed sanctions. This was met with resistance by Iran and other members of the P5+1. A year later, Iran began decreasing its compliance. By 2020, Iran announced it would no longer observe any limit set by the agreement. Progress since then has brought Iran to the nuclear threshold status. , Iran had uranium enriched to up to 60% fissile content, close to weapon grade. Some analysts already regard Iran as a de facto nuclear power.

=== Regional influence ===
Iran&#x27;s significant influence and foothold, sometimes characterised as the &quot;Dawn of A New Persian Empire.&quot; Some analysts associate the Iranian influence to the nation&#x27;s proud national legacy, empire and history.

Since the Revolution, Iran has grown its influence across and beyond the region. It has built military forces with a wide network of state and none-state actors, starting with Hezbollah in Lebanon in 1982. The IRGC has been key to Iranian influence, through its Quds Force. The instability in Lebanon (from the 1980s), Iraq (from 2003) and Yemen (from 2014) has allowed Iran to build strong alliances and footholds beyond its borders. Iran has a prominent influence in the social services, education, economy and politics of Lebanon, and Lebanon provides Iran access to the Mediterranean Sea. Hezbollah&#x27;s strategic successes against Israel, such as its symbolic victory during the 2006 Israel–Hezbollah War, elevated Iran&#x27;s influence in the Levant and strengthened its appeal across the Muslim World.

Since the US invasion of Iraq in 2003 and the arrival of ISIS in the mid-2010s, Iran has financed and trained militia groups in Iraq. Since the Iran-Iraq war in 1980s and the fall of Saddam Hussein, Iran has shaped Iraq&#x27;s politics. Following Iraq&#x27;s struggle against ISIS in 2014, companies linked to the IRGC such as Khatam al-Anbiya, started to build roads, power plants, hotels and businesses in Iraq, creating an economic corridor worth around $9 billion before COVID-19. This is expected to grow to $20 billion.

During Yemen&#x27;s civil war, Iran provided military support to the Houthis, a Zaydi Shiite movement fighting Yemen&#x27;s Sunni government since 2004. They gained significant power in recent years. Iran has considerable influence in Afghanistan and Pakistan through militant groups such as Liwa Fatemiyoun and Liwa Zainebiyoun.

In Syria, Iran has supported President Bashar al-Assad; the two countries are long-standing allies. Iran has provided significant military and economic support to Assad&#x27;s government, so has a considerable foothold in Syria. Iran has long supported the anti-Israel fronts in North Africa in countries like Algeria and Tunisia, embracing Hamas in part to help undermine the popularity of the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO). Iran&#x27;s support of Hamas emerged more clearly in later years. According to US intelligence, Iran does not have full control over these state and non-state groups.

=== Human rights and censorship ===
The Iranian government has been denounced by various international organisations and governments for violating human rights. The government has frequently persecuted and arrested critics of the government. Iranian law does not recognise sexual orientations. Sexual activity between members of the same sex is illegal and is punishable by death. Capital punishment is a legal punishment, and according to the BBC, Iran &quot;carries out more executions than any other country, except China&quot;. UN Special Rapporteur Javaid Rehman has reported discrimination against several ethnic minorities in Iran. A group of UN experts in 2022 urged Iran to stop &quot;systematic persecution&quot; of religious minorities, adding that members of the Baháʼí Faith were arrested, barred from universities, or had their homes demolished.

Censorship in Iran is ranked among the most extreme worldwide. Iran has strict internet censorship, with the government persistently blocking social media and other sites. Since January 2021, Iranian authorities have blocked a list of social media platforms; Instagram, WhatsApp, Facebook, Telegram, Twitter and YouTube.

The 2006 election results were widely disputed, resulting in protests. The 2017–18 Iranian protests swept across the country in response to the economic and political situation. It was formally confirmed that thousands of protesters were arrested. The 2019–20 Iranian protests started on 15 November in Ahvaz, and spread across the country after the government announced increases in fuel prices of up to 300%. A week-long total Internet shutdown marked one of the most severe Internet blackouts in any country, and the bloodiest governmental crackdown of the protestors. Tens of thousands were arrested and hundreds were killed within a few days according to multiple international observers, including Amnesty International.

Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752, was a scheduled international civilian passenger flight from Tehran to Kyiv, operated by Ukraine International Airlines. On 8 January 2020, the Boeing 737–800 flying the route was shot down by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) shortly after takeoff, killing all 176 occupants on board and leading to protests. An international investigation led to the government admitting to the shootdown, calling it a &quot;human error&quot;. Another Protests against the government began on 16 September 2022 after a woman named Mahsa Amini died in police custody following her arrest by the Guidance Patrol, known commonly as the &quot;morality police&quot;.

== Economy ==
, Iran has the world&#x27;s 19th largest economy (by PPP). It is a mixture of central planning, state ownership of oil and other large enterprises, village agriculture, and small-scale private trading and service ventures. Services contribute the largest percentage of GDP, followed by industry (mining and manufacturing) and agriculture. The economy is characterised by its hydrocarbon sector, in addition to manufacturing and financial services. With 10% of the world&#x27;s oil reserves and 15% of gas reserves, Iran is an energy superpower. Over 40 industries are directly involved in the Tehran Stock Exchange.

Tehran is the economic powerhouse of Iran. About 30% of Iran&#x27;s public-sector workforce and 45% of its large industrial firms are located there, and half those firms&#x27; employees work for government. The Central Bank of Iran is responsible for developing and maintaining the currency: the Iranian rial. The government does not recognise trade unions other than the Islamic labour councils, which are subject to the approval of employers and the security services. Unemployment was 9% in 2022.
Budget deficits have been a chronic problem, mostly due to large state subsidies, that include foodstuffs and especially petrol, totalling $100 billion in 2022 for energy alone. In 2010, the economic reform plan was to cut subsidies gradually and replace them with targeted social assistance. The objective is to move towards free market prices and increase productivity and social justice. The administration continues reform, and indicates it will diversify the oil-reliant economy. Iran has developed a biotechnology, nanotechnology, and pharmaceutical industry. The government is privatising industries.

Iran has leading manufacturing industries in automobile manufacture, transportation, construction materials, home appliances, food and agricultural goods, armaments, pharmaceuticals, information technology, and petrochemicals in the Middle East. Iran is among the world&#x27;s top five producers of apricots, cherries, cucumbers and gherkins, dates, figs, pistachios, quinces, walnuts, Kiwifruit and watermelons. International sanctions against Iran have damaged the economy. Iran is one of three countries that have not ratified the Paris Agreement to limit climate change, although academics say it would be good for the country.

=== Tourism ===

Tourism had been rapidly growing before the COVID-19 pandemic, reaching nearly 9 million foreign visitors in 2019, the world&#x27;s third fastest-growing tourism destination. In 2022 it expanded its share to 5% of the economy. Iran&#x27;s tourism experienced a growth of 43% in 2023, attracting 6 million foreign tourists. The government ended visa requirements for 60 countries in 2023.

98% of visits are for leisure, while 2% are for business, indicating the country&#x27;s appeal as a tourist destination. Alongside the capital, the most popular tourist destinations are Isfahan, Shiraz and Mashhad. Iran is emerging as a preferred destination for medical tourism. Travellers from other West Asian countries grew 31% in the first seven months of 2023, surpassing Bahrain, Kuwait, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia. Domestic tourism is one of the world&#x27;s largests; Iranian tourists spent $33bn in 2021. Iran projects investment of $32 billion in the tourism sector by 2026.

=== Agriculture and fishery ===
Roughly one-third of Iran&#x27;s total surface area is suited for farmland. Only 12% of the total land area is under cultivation, but less than one-third of the cultivated area is irrigated; the rest is devoted to dryland farming. Some 92% of agricultural products depend on water. The western and northwestern portions of the country have the most fertile soils. Iran&#x27;s food security index stands at around 96 percent. 3% of the total land area is used for grazing and fodder production. Most of the grazing is done on mostly semi-dry rangeland in mountain areas and on areas surrounding the large deserts of Central Iran. Progressive government efforts and incentives during the 1990s, improved agricultural productivity, helping Iran toward its goal of reestablishing national self-sufficiency in food production.

Access to the Caspian Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Oman, and many river basins provides Iran the potential to develop excellent fisheries. The government assumed control of commercial fishing in 1952. Expansion of the fishery infrastructure enabled the country to harvest an estimated 700,000 tons of fish annually from the southern waters. Since the Revolution, increased attention has been focused on producing fish from inland waters. Between 1976 and 2004, the combined take from inland waters by the state and private sectors increased from 1,100 tons to 110,175 tons. Iran is the world&#x27;s largest producer and exporter of caviar, exporting more than 300 tonnes annually.

=== Industry and services ===
Iran is globally ranked 16th in car manufacturing, ahead of the UK, Italy, and Russia. It has outputted 1.188 million cars in 2023, a 12% growth compared to the previous years. Iran has exported various cars to countries such as Venezuela, Russia and Belarus. From 2008 to 2009, Iran leaped to 28th place from 69th in annual industrial production growth rate. Iranian contractors have been awarded several foreign tender contracts in different fields of construction of dams, bridges, roads, buildings, railroads, power generation, and gas, oil and petrochemical industries. As of 2011, some 66 Iranian industrial companies are carrying out projects in 27 countries. Iran exported over $20 billion worth of technical and engineering services over 2001–2011. The availability of local raw materials, rich mineral reserves, experienced manpower have all played crucial role in winning the bids.

45% of large industrial firms are located in Tehran, and almost half of their workers work for government. The Iranian retail industry is largely in the hands of cooperatives, many of them government-sponsored, and of independent retailers in the bazaars. The bulk of food sales occur at street markets, where the Chief Statistics Bureau sets the prices. Iran&#x27;s main exports are to Iraq, Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Oman, Syria, Germany, Spain, the Netherlands, France, Canada, Venezuela, Japan, South Korea and Turkey. Iran&#x27;s automotive industry is the second most active industry of the country, after its oil and gas industry. Iran Khodro is the largest car manufacturer in the Middle East, and ITMCO is the biggest tractor manufacturer. Iran is the 12th largest automaker in the world. Construction is one of the most important sectors in Iran accounting for 20–50% of the total private investment.

Iran is one of the most important mineral producers in the world, ranked among 15 major mineral-rich countries. Iran has become self-sufficient in designing, building and operating dams and power plants. Iran is one of the six countries in the world that manufacture gas- and steam-powered turbines.

=== Transport ===
In 2011 Iran had of roads, of which 73% were paved. In 2008 there were nearly 100 passenger cars for every 1,000 inhabitants.
Tehran Metro is the largest in the Middle East, it carries more than 3 million passengers daily and in 2018, 820 million trips. Trains operate on of track. The country&#x27;s major port of entry is Bandar Abbas on the Strait of Hormuz. Imported goods are distributed through the country by trucks and freight trains. The Tehran–Bandar Abbas railroad connects Bandar-Abbas to the railroad system of Central Asia, via Tehran and Mashhad. Other major ports include Bandar e-Anzali and Bandar e-Torkeman on the Caspian Sea and Khorramshahr and Bandar-e Emam Khomeyni on the Persian Gulf.

Dozens of cities have airports that serve passenger and cargo planes. Iran Air, the national airline, operates domestic and international flights. All large cities have mass transit systems using buses, and private companies provide bus services between cities. Over a million people work in transport, accounting for 9% of GDP.

=== Energy===
Iran is an energy superpower and petroleum plays a key part. , Iran produced 4% of the world&#x27;s crude oil ( per day), which generates US$36bn of export revenue and is the main source of foreign currency. Oil and gas reserves are estimated at 1.2 trn barrels; Iran holds 10% of world oil reserves and 15% for gas. It ranks 3rd in oil reserves and is OPEC&#x27;s 2nd largest exporter. It has the 2nd largest gas reserves, and 3rd largest natural gas production. In 2019, Iran discovered a southern oil field of 50 bn barrels and in April 2024, the NIOC discovered 10 giant shale oil deposits, totalling 2.6 bn barrels. Iran plans to invest $500 billion in oil by 2025.

Iran manufactures 60–70% of its industrial equipment domestically, including turbines, pumps, catalysts, refineries, oil tankers, drilling rigs, offshore platforms, towers, pipes, and exploration instruments. The addition of new hydroelectric stations and streamlining of conventional coal and oil-fired stations increased installed capacity to 33 GW; about 75% was based on natural gas, 18% on oil, and 7% on hydroelectric power. In 2004, Iran opened its first wind-powered and geothermal plants, and the first solar thermal plant began in 2009. Iran is the world&#x27;s third country to develop GTL technology.

Demographic trends and intensified industrialisation have caused electric power demand to grow by 8% per year. The government&#x27;s goal of 53 GW of installed capacity by 2010 is to be reached by bringing on line new gas-fired plants, and adding hydropower and nuclear generation capacity. Iran&#x27;s first nuclear power plant went online in 2011.

=== Science and technology ===
Iran has made considerable advances in science and technology, despite international sanctions. In the biomedical sciences, Iran&#x27;s Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics has a UNESCO chair in biology. In 2006, Iranian scientists successfully cloned a sheep at the Royan Research Centre in Tehran. Stem cell research is among the top 10 in the world. Iran ranks 15th in the world in nanotechnologies. Iranian scientists outside Iran have made major scientific contributions. In 1960, Ali Javan co-invented the first gas laser, and fuzzy set theory was introduced by Lotfi A. Zadeh.

Cardiologist Tofy Mussivand invented and developed the first artificial cardiac pump, the precursor of the artificial heart. Furthering research in diabetes, the HbA1c was discovered by Samuel Rahbar. Many papers in string theory are published in Iran. In 2014, Iranian mathematician Maryam Mirzakhani became the first woman, and Iranian, to receive the Fields Medal, the highest prize in mathematics.

Iran increased its publication output nearly tenfold from 1996 through 2004, and ranked first in output growth rate, followed by China. According to a study by SCImago in 2012, Iran would rank fourth in research output by 2018, if the trend persisted. The Iranian humanoid robot Sorena 2, which was designed by engineers at the University of Tehran, was unveiled in 2010. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has placed the name of Surena among the five most prominent robots, after analysing its performance.

Iran was ranked 64th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

==== Iranian Space Agency ====
The Iranian Space Agency (ISA) was established in 2004. Iran became an orbital-launch-capable nation in 2009, and is a founding member of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. Iran placed its domestically built satellite Omid into orbit on the 30th anniversary of the Revolution, in 2009, through its first expendable launch vehicle Safir. It became the 9th country capable of both producing a satellite and sending it into space from a domestically made launcher. Simorgh&#x27;s launch in 2016, is the successor of Safir.

In January 2024, Iran launched the Soraya satellite into its highest orbit yet (750 km), a new space launch milestone for the country. It was launched by Qaem 100 rocket. Iran also successfully launched 3 indigenous satellites, The Mahda, Kayan and Hatef, into orbit using the Simorgh carrier rocket. It was the first time in country&#x27;s history that it simultaneously sent three satellites into space. The three satellites are designed for testing advanced satellite subsystems, space-based positioning technology, and narrowband communication.

In February 2024, Iran launched its domestically developed imaging satellite, Pars 1, from Russia into orbit. This was the second time since August 2022, when Russia launched another Iranian remote-sensing, Khayyam satellite, into orbit from Kazakhstan, reflecting deep scientific cooperation between the countries.

=== Telecommunication ===

Iran&#x27;s telecommunications industry is almost entirely state-owned, dominated by the Telecommunication Company of Iran (TCI). As of 2020, 70 million Iranians use high-speed mobile internet. Iran is among the first five countries which have had a growth rate of over 20 percent and the highest level of development in telecommunication. Iran has been awarded the UNESCO special certificate for providing telecommunication services to rural areas.

Globally, Iran ranks 75th in mobile internet speed and 153rd in fixed internet speed.

== Demographics ==

Iran&#x27;s population grew rapidly from about 19 million in 1956 to about 85 million by February 2023. However, Iran&#x27;s fertility rate has dropped dramatically, from 6.5 children born per woman to about 1.7 two decades later, leading to a population growth rate of about 1.39% as of 2018. Due to its young population, studies project that the growth will continue to slow until it stabilises around 105 million by 2050.

Iran hosts one of the largest refugee populations, with almost one million, mostly from Afghanistan and Iraq. According to the Iranian Constitution, the government is required to provide every citizen with access to social security, covering retirement, unemployment, old age, disability, accidents, calamities, health and medical treatment and care services. This is covered by tax revenues and income derived from public contributions.

The country has one of the highest urban growth rates in the world. From 1950 to 2002, the urban proportion of the population increased from 27% to 60%. Iran&#x27;s population is concentrated in its western half, especially in the north, north-west and west.

Tehran, with a population of around 9.4 million, is Iran&#x27;s capital and largest city. The country&#x27;s second most populous city, Mashhad, has a population of around 3.4 million, and is capital of the province of Razavi Khorasan. Isfahan has a population of around 2.2 million and is Iran&#x27;s third most populous city. It is the capital of Isfahan province and was also the third capital of the Safavid Empire.

=== Ethnic groups ===
Ethnic group composition remains a point of debate, mainly regarding the largest and second largest ethnic groups, the Persians and Azerbaijanis, due to the lack of Iranian state censuses based on ethnicity. The World Factbook has estimated that around 79% of the population of Iran is a diverse Indo-European ethno-linguistic group, with Persians (including Mazenderanis and Gilaks) constituting 61% of the population, Kurds 10%, Lurs 6%, and Balochs 2%. Peoples of other ethnolinguistic groups make up the remaining 21%, with Azerbaijanis constituting 16%, Arabs 2%, Turkmens and other Turkic tribes 2%, and others (such as Armenians, Talysh, Georgians, Circassians, Assyrians) 1%.

The Library of Congress issued slightly different estimates: 65% Persians (including Mazenderanis, Gilaks, and the Talysh), 16% Azerbaijanis, 7% Kurds, 6% Lurs, 2% Baloch, 1% Turkic tribal groups (including Qashqai and Turkmens), and non-Iranian, non-Turkic groups (including Armenians, Georgians, Assyrians, Circassians, and Arabs) less than 3%.

=== Languages ===
Most of the population speaks Persian, the country&#x27;s official and national language. Others include speakers of other Iranian languages, within the greater Indo-European family, and languages belonging to other ethnicities. The Gilaki and Mazenderani languages are widely spoken in Gilan and Mazenderan, northern Iran. The Talysh language is spoken in parts of Gilan. Varieties of Kurdish are concentrated in the province of Kurdistan and nearby areas. In Khuzestan, several dialects of Persian are spoken. South Iran also houses the Luri and Lari languages.

Azerbaijani, the most-spoken minority language in the country, and other Turkic languages and dialects are found in various regions, especially Azerbaijan. Notable minority languages include Armenian, Georgian, Neo-Aramaic, and Arabic. Khuzi Arabic is spoken by the Arabs in Khuzestan, and the wider group of Iranian Arabs. Circassian was also once widely spoken by the large Circassian minority, but, due to assimilation, no sizable number of Circassians speak the language anymore.

Percentages of spoken language continue to be a point of debate, most notably regarding the largest and second largest ethnicities in Iran, the Persians and Azerbaijanis. Percentages given by the CIA&#x27;s World Factbook include 53% Persian, 16% Azerbaijani, 10% Kurdish, 7% Mazenderani and Gilaki, 7% Luri, 2% Turkmen, 2% Balochi, 2% Arabic, and 2% the remainder Armenian, Georgian, Neo-Aramaic, and Circassian.

=== Religion ===

Twelver Shia Islam is the state religion, to which 90–95% of Iranians adhere; about 5–10% are in the Sunni and Sufi branches of Islam. 96% of Iranians believe in Islam, but 14% identify as not religious.

There is a large population of adherents to Yarsanism, a Kurdish indigenous religion, estimated to be over half a million to one million followers. The Baháʼí Faith is not officially recognised and has been subject to official persecution. Since the Revolution, the persecution of Baháʼís has increased. Irreligion is not recognised by the government.

Christianity, Judaism, Zoroastrianism, and the Sunni branch of Islam are officially recognised by the government and have reserved seats in the Parliament. Iran is home to the largest Jewish community in the Muslim World and the Middle East, outside of Israel. Around 250,000 to 370,000 Christians reside in Iran, and Christianity is the country&#x27;s largest recognised minority religion, most are of Armenian background, as well as a sizable minority of Assyrians. The Iranian government has supported the rebuilding and renovation of Armenian churches, and has supported the Armenian Monastic Ensembles of Iran. In 2019, the government registered the Vank Cathedral, in Isfahan, as a World Heritage Site. Currently three Armenian churches in Iran have been included in the World Heritage List.

=== Education ===
Education is highly centralised. K–12 is supervised by the Ministry of Education, and higher education is supervised by the Ministry of Science and Technology. Literacy among people aged 15 and older was 86% , with men (90%) significantly more educated than women (81%). Government expenditure on education is around 4% of GDP.

The requirement to enter into higher education is to have a high school diploma and pass the Iranian University Entrance Exam. Many students do a one–two-year course of pre-university. Iran&#x27;s higher education is sanctioned by different levels of diplomas, including an associate degree in two years, a bachelor&#x27;s degree in four years, and a master&#x27;s degree in two years, after which another exam allows the candidate to pursue a doctoral programme.

=== Health ===
Healthcare is provided by the public-governmental system, the private sector, and NGOs.

Iran is the only country in the world with a legal organ trade. Iran has been able to extend public health preventive services through the establishment of an extensive Primary Health Care Network. As a result, child and maternal mortality rates have fallen significantly, and life expectancy at birth has risen. Iran&#x27;s medical knowledge rank is 17th globally, and 1st in the Middle East and North Africa. In terms of medical science production index, Iran ranks 16th in the world. Iran is fast emerging as a preferred destination for medical tourism.

The country faces the common problem of other young demographic nations in the region, which is keeping pace with growth of an already huge demand for various public services. An anticipated increase in the population growth rate will increase the need for public health infrastructures and services. About 90% of Iranians have health insurance.

== Culture ==
=== Art ===
Iran has one of the richest art heritages in history and been strong in many media including architecture, painting, literature, music, metalworking, stonemasonry, weaving, calligraphy and sculpture. At different times, influences from neighbouring civilisations have been important, and latterly Persian art gave and received major influences as part of the wider styles of Islamic art.

From the Achaemenid Empire of 550–330 BC, the courts of successive dynasties led the style of Persian art, and court-sponsored art left many of the most impressive pieces that remain. The Islamic style of dense decoration, geometrically laid out, developed in Iran into an elegant and harmonious style, combining motifs derived from plants with Chinese motifs such as the cloud-band, and often animals represented at a smaller scale. During the Safavid Empire in the 16th century, this style was used across a variety of media, and diffused from the court artists of the king, most being painters.

By the time of the Sasanians, Iranian art had a renaissance. During the Middle Ages, Sasanian art played a prominent role in the formation of European and Asian mediaeval art.
The Safavid era is known as the Golden Age of Iranian art. Safavid art exerted noticeable influences upon the Ottomans, the Mughals, and the Deccans, and was influential through its fashion and garden architecture on 11th–17th-century Europe.

Iran&#x27;s contemporary art traces its origins to Kamal-ol-molk, a prominent realist painter at the court of the Qajar Empire who affected the norms of painting and adopted a naturalistic style that would compete with photographic works. A new Iranian school of fine art was established by him in 1928, and was followed by the so-called &quot;coffeehouse&quot; style of painting. Iran&#x27;s avant-garde modernists emerged by the arrival of new western influences during World War II. The contemporary art scene originates in the late 1940s, and Tehran&#x27;s first modern art gallery, Apadana, was opened in 1949 by Mahmud Javadipur, Hosein Kazemi, and Hushang Ajudani. The new movements received official encouragement by the 1950s, which led to the emergence of artists such as Marcos Grigorian.

=== Architecture ===
The history of architecture in Iran dates back to at least 5,000 BC, with characteristic examples distributed over an area from what is now Turkey and Iraq to Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, and from the Caucasus to Zanzibar. The Iranians made early use of mathematics, geometry and astronomy in their architecture, yielding a tradition with structural and aesthetic variety. The guiding motif is its cosmic symbolism.

Without sudden innovations, and despite the trauma of invasions and cultural shocks, it developed a recognizable style distinct from other regions of the Muslim world. Its virtues are &quot;a marked feeling for form and scale; structural inventiveness, especially in vault and dome construction; a genius for decoration with a freedom and success not rivalled in any other architecture&quot;. In addition to historic gates, palaces, and mosques, the rapid growth of cities such as Tehran has brought a wave of construction. Iran ranks 7th among UNESCO&#x27;s list of countries with the most archaeological ruins and attractions from antiquity.

=== World Heritage Sites ===

Iran&#x27;s rich culture and history is reflected by its 27 World Heritage Sites, ranking 1st in the Middle East, and 10th in the world. These include Persepolis, Naghsh-e Jahan Square, Chogha Zanbil, Pasargadae, Golestan Palace, Arg-e Bam, Behistun Inscription, Shahr-e Sukhteh, Susa, Takht-e Soleyman, Hyrcanian forests, the city of Yazd and more. Iran has 24 Intangible Cultural Heritage, or Human treasures, which ranks 5th worldwide.

=== Weaving ===
Iran&#x27;s carpet-weaving has its origins in the Bronze Age and is one of the most distinguished manifestations of Iranian art. Carpet weaving is an essential part of Persian culture and Iranian art. Persian rugs and carpets were woven in parallel by nomadic tribes in village and town workshops, and by royal court manufactories. As such, they represent simultaneous lines of tradition, and reflect the history of Iran, Persian culture, and its various peoples. Although the term &quot;Persian carpet&quot; most often refers to pile-woven textiles, flat-woven carpets and rugs like Kilim, Soumak, and embroidered tissues like Suzani are part of the manifold tradition of Persian carpet weaving.

Iran produces three-quarters of the world&#x27;s handmade carpets, and has 30% of export markets. In 2010, the &quot;traditional skills of carpet weaving&quot; in Fars Province and Kashan were inscribed to the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List. Within the Oriental rugs produced by the countries of the &quot;rug belt&quot;, the Persian carpet stands out by the variety and elaborateness of its manifold designs.

Carpets woven in towns and regional centres like Tabriz, Kerman, Ravar, Neyshabour, Mashhad, Kashan, Isfahan, Nain and Qom are characterized by their specific weaving techniques and use of high-quality materials, colours and patterns. Hand-woven Persian rugs and carpets have been regarded as objects of high artistic value and prestige, since they were mentioned by ancient Greek writers.

=== Literature ===

Iran&#x27;s oldest literary tradition is that of Avestan, the Old Iranian sacred language of the Avesta, which consists of the legendary and religious texts of Zoroastrianism and the ancient Iranian religion. The Persian language was used and developed through Persianate societies in Asia Minor, Central Asia, and South Asia, leaving extensive influences on Ottoman and Mughal literatures, among others. Iran has several famous mediaeval poets, notably Mawlana, Ferdowsi, Hafez, Sa&#x27;adi, Omar Khayyam, and Nezami Ganjavi.

Described as one of the great literatures of humanity, including Goethe&#x27;s assessment of it as one of the four main bodies of world literature, Persian literature has its roots in surviving works of Middle Persian and Old Persian, the latter of which dates back as far as 522 BCE, the date of the earliest surviving Achaemenid inscription, the Behistun Inscription. The bulk of surviving Persian literature, however, comes from the times following the Muslim conquest in c. 650 CE. After the Abbasids came to power (750 CE), the Iranians became the scribes and bureaucrats of the Islamic Caliphate and, increasingly, also its writers and poets. The New Persian language literature arose and flourished in Khorasan and Transoxiana because of political reasons, early Iranian dynasties of post-Islamic Iran such as the Tahirids and Samanids being based in Khorasan.

=== Philosophy ===
Iranian philosophy can be traced back as far as Old Iranian philosophical traditions and thoughts which originated in ancient Indo-Iranian roots and were influenced by Zarathustra&#x27;s teachings. Throughout Iranian history and due to remarkable political and social changes such as the Arab and Mongol invasions, a wide spectrum of schools of thoughts showed a variety of views on philosophical questions, extending from Old Iranian and mainly Zoroastrianism-related traditions, to schools appearing in the late pre-Islamic era such as Manicheism and Mazdakism as well as post-Islamic schools.

The Cyrus Cylinder is seen as a reflection of the questions and thoughts expressed by Zoroaster and developed in Zoroastrian schools of the Achaemenid era. Post-Islam Iranian philosophy is characterised by different interactions with the Old Iranian philosophy, the Greek philosophy and with the development of Islamic philosophy. The Illumination School and the Transcendent Philosophy are regarded as two of the main philosophical traditions of that era in Iran. Contemporary Iranian philosophy has been limited in its scope by intellectual repression.

=== Mythology and folklore ===
Iranian mythology consists of ancient Iranian folklore and stories of extraordinary beings reflecting on good and evil (Ahura Mazda and Ahriman), actions of the gods, and the exploits of heroes and creatures. The tenth-century Persian poet, Ferdowsi, is the author of the national epic known as the &quot;Shahnameh&quot; (&quot;Book of Kings&quot;), which is for the most part based on &quot;Xwadāynāmag&quot;, a Middle Persian compilation of the history of Iranian kings and heroes, as well as the stories and characters of the Zoroastrian tradition, from the texts of the Avesta, the Denkard, the Vendidad and the Bundahishn. Modern scholars study the myths to shed light on the religious and political institutions of not only Iran but of the Greater Iran, which includes regions of West Asia, Central Asia, South Asia, and Transcaucasia where the culture of Iran has had significant influence.

Storytelling has a significant presence in Iranian folklore and culture. In classical Iran, minstrels performed for their audiences at royal courts and in public theatres. A minstrel was referred to by the Parthians as gōsān, and by the Sasanians as huniyāgar. Since the Safavid Empire, storytellers and poetry readers appeared at coffeehouses. After the Iranian Revolution, it took until 1985 to found the MCHTH (Ministry of Cultural Heritage, Tourism and Handicrafts), a now heavily centralised organisation, supervising all kinds of cultural activities. It held the first scientific meeting on anthropology and folklore in 1990.

=== Museums ===

The National Museum of Iran in Tehran is the country&#x27;s most important cultural institution. As the first and biggest museum in Iran, the institution includes the Museum of Ancient Iran and the Museum of the Islamic Era. The National Museum is the world&#x27;s most important museum in terms of preservation, display and research of archaeological collections of Iran, and ranks as one of the few most prestigious museums globally in terms of volume, diversity and quality of its monuments.

There are many other popular museums across the country such as the Golestan Palace (World Heritage Site), The Treasury of National Jewels, Reza Abbasi Museum, Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art, Sa&#x27;dabad Complex, The Carpet Museum, Abgineh Museum, Pars Museum, Azerbaijan Museum, Hegmataneh Museum, Susa Museum and more. Around 25 million people visited the museums in 2019.

=== Music and dance ===
Iran is the apparent birthplace of the earliest complex instruments, dating to the third millennium BC. The use of angular harps have been documented at Madaktu and Kul-e Farah, with the largest collection of Elamite instruments documented at Kul-e Farah. Xenophon&#x27;s &quot;Cyropaedia&quot; mentions singing women at the court of the Achaemenid Empire. Under the Parthian Empire, the &quot;gōsān&quot; (Parthian for &#x27;minstrel&#x27;) had a prominent role.

The history of Sasanian music is better documented than earlier periods and is especially more evident in Avestan texts. By the time of Khosrow II, the Sasanian royal court hosted prominent musicians, namely Azad, Bamshad, Barbad, Nagisa, Ramtin, and Sarkash. Iranian traditional musical instruments include string instruments such as chang (harp), qanun, santur, rud (oud, barbat), tar, dotar, setar, tanbur, and kamanche, wind instruments such as sorna (zurna, karna) and ney, and percussion instruments such as tompak, kus, daf (dayere), and naqare.

Iran&#x27;s first symphony orchestra, the Tehran Symphony Orchestra, was founded in 1933. By the late 1940s, Ruhollah Khaleqi founded the country&#x27;s first national music society and established the School of National Music in 1949. Iranian pop music has its origins in the Qajar era. It was significantly developed since the 1950s, using indigenous instruments and forms accompanied by electric guitar and other imported characteristics. Iranian rock emerged in the 1960s and hip hop in the 2000s.

Iran has known dance in the forms of music, play, drama or religious rituals since at least the 6th millennium BC. Artifacts with pictures of dancers were found in archaeological prehistoric sites. Genres of dance vary depending on the area, culture, and language of the local people, and can range from sophisticated reconstructions of refined court dances to energetic folk dances. Each group, region, and historical epoch has specific dance styles associated with it. The earliest researched dance from historic Iran is a dance worshipping Mithra. Ancient Persian dance was significantly researched by Greek historian Herodotus. Iran was occupied by foreign powers, causing a slow disappearance of heritage dance traditions.

The Qajar period had an important influence on Persian dance. In this period, a style of dance began to be called &quot;classical Persian dance&quot;. Dancers performed artistic dances in court for entertainment purposes such as coronations, marriage celebrations, and Norouz celebrations. In the 20th century, the music came to be orchestrated and dance movement and costuming gained a modernistic orientation to the West.

=== Fashion and clothing ===

The exact date of the emergence of weaving in Iran is not yet known, but it is likely to coincide with the emergence of civilisation. Ferdowsi and many historians have considered Keyumars to be first to use animals&#x27; skin and hair as clothing, while others propose Hushang. Ferdowsi considers Tahmuras to be a kind of textile initiator in Iran. The clothing of ancient Iran took an advanced form, and the fabric and colour of clothing became very important. Depending on the social status, eminence, climate of the region and the season, Persian clothing during the Achaemenian period took various forms. This clothing, in addition to being functional, had an aesthetic role.

=== Cinema, animation and theatre ===


A third-millennium BC earthen goblet discovered at the Burnt City in southeast Iran depicts what could be the world&#x27;s oldest example of animation. The earliest attested Iranian examples of visual representations, however, are traced back to the bas-reliefs of Persepolis, the ritual centre of the Achaemenid Empire.

The first Iranian filmmaker was probably Mirza Ebrahim (Akkas Bashi), the court photographer of Mozaffar-ed-Din of the Qajar Empire. Mirza Ebrahim obtained a camera and filmed the Qajar ruler&#x27;s visit to Europe. In 1904, Mirza Ebrahim (Sahhaf Bashi) opened the first public cinema in Tehran. The first Iranian feature film, &quot;Abi and Rabi&quot;, was a silent comedy directed by Ovanes Ohanian in 1930. The first sound one, &quot;Lor Girl&quot;, was produced by Ardeshir Irani and Abd-ol-Hosein Sepanta in 1932. Iran&#x27;s animation industry began by the 1950s and was followed by the establishment of the influential Institute for the Intellectual Development of Children and Young Adults in 1965.
With the screening of the films &quot;Qeysar&quot; and &quot;The Cow&quot;, directed by Masoud Kimiai and Dariush Mehrjui respectively in 1969, alternative films set out to establish their status in the film industry and Bahram Beyzai&#x27;s &quot;Downpour&quot; and Nasser Taghvai&#x27;s &quot;Tranquility in the Presence of Others&quot; followed. Attempts to organise a film festival, which had begun in 1954 within the Golrizan Festival, resulted in the festival of Sepas in 1969. It also resulted in the formation of Tehran&#x27;s World Film Festival in 1973.

Following the Cultural Revolution, a new age emerged in Iranian cinema, starting with &quot;Long Live!&quot; by Khosrow Sinai and followed by other directors, such as Abbas Kiarostami and Jafar Panahi. Kiarostami, an acclaimed director, planted Iran firmly on the map of world cinema when he won the for &quot;Taste of Cherry&quot; in 1997. The presence of Iranian films in prestigious international festivals, such as Cannes, Venice and Berlin, attracted attention to Iranian films. In 2006, 6 films represented Iranian cinema at Berlin; critics considered this a remarkable event in Iranian cinema. Asghar Farhadi, an Iranian director, has received a Golden Globe Award and two Academy Awards, representing Iran for Best Foreign Language Film in 2012 and 2017, with &quot;A Separation&quot; and &quot;The Salesman&quot;. In 2020, Ashkan Rahgozar&#x27;s &quot;The Last Fiction&quot; became the first representative of Iranian animated cinema in the competition section, in Best Animated Feature and Best Picture categories at the Academy Awards.

The oldest Iranian initiation of theatre can be traced to ancient epic ceremonial theatres such as &quot;Sug-e Siāvuڑ&quot; (&quot;mourning of Siāvaڑ&quot;), as well as dances and theatre narrations of Iranian mythological tales reported by Herodotus and Xenophon. Iran&#x27;s traditional theatrical genres include Baqqāl-bāzi (&quot;grocer play&quot;, a form of slapstick comedy), Ruhowzi (or &quot;Taxt-howzi&quot;, comedy performed over a courtyard pool covered with boards), Siāh-bāzi (the central comedian appears in blackface), Sāye-bāzi (shadow play), Xeyme-ڑab-bāzi (marionette), and Arusak-bāzi (puppetry), and Ta&#x27;zie (religious tragedy plays).

The Roudaki Hall is home to the Tehran Symphony Orchestra, the Tehran Opera Orchestra, and the Iranian National Ballet Company, and was officially renamed &quot;Vahdat Hall&quot; after the Revolution.

=== Media ===

Iran&#x27;s largest media corporation is the state-owned IRIB. The Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance is responsible for the cultural policy, including activities regarding communications and information.
Most of the newspapers published in Iran are in Persian, the country&#x27;s official and national language. The country&#x27;s most widely circulated periodicals are based in Tehran, among which are &quot;Etemad&quot;, &quot;Ettela&#x27;at&quot;, &quot;Kayhan&quot;, &quot;Hamshahri&quot;, &quot;Resalat&quot;, and &quot;Shargh&quot;. &quot;Tehran Times&quot;, &quot;Iran Daily&quot;, and &quot;Financial Tribune&quot; are among the famous English-language newspapers based in Iran.

Iran ranks 17th among countries by number of Internet users. Google Search is Iran&#x27;s most widely used search engine and Instagram is the most popular online social networking service. Direct access to many worldwide mainstream websites has been blocked in Iran, including Facebook, which has been blocked since 2009. About 90% of Iran&#x27;s e-commerce takes place on the Iranian online store Digikala, which has around 750,000 visitors per day and is the most visited online store in the Middle East.

=== Cuisine ===

Iranian main dishes include varieties of kebab, pilaf, stew (khoresh), soup and āsh, and omelette. Lunch and dinner meals are commonly accompanied by side dishes such as plain yogurt or mast-o-khiar, sabzi, salad Shirazi, and torshi, and might follow dishes such as borani, Mirza Qasemi, or kashk e bademjan. In Iranian culture, tea is widely consumed. Iran is the world&#x27;s seventh major tea producer. One of Iran&#x27;s most popular desserts is the falude. There is also the popular saffron ice cream, known as &quot;Bastani Sonnati&quot; (&quot;traditional ice cream&quot;), which is sometimes accompanied with carrot juice. Iran is also famous for its caviar.

Typical Iranian main dishes are combinations of rice with meat, vegetables and nuts. Herbs are frequently used, along with fruits such as plums, pomegranates, quince, prunes, apricots and raisins. Characteristic Iranian spices and flavourings such as saffron, cardamom, and dried lime and other sources of sour flavoring, cinnamon, turmeric and parsley are mixed and used in various dishes.

=== Sports ===

Iran is the most likely birthplace of polo, locally known as Chogan, with its earliest records attributed to the ancient Medes. Freestyle wrestling is traditionally considered the national sport, and Iran&#x27;s wrestlers have been world champions many times. Iran&#x27;s traditional wrestling, called &quot;koڑti e pahlevāni&quot; (&quot;heroic wrestling&quot;), is registered on UNESCO&#x27;s Intangible Cultural Heritage list. Iran&#x27;s National Olympic Committee was founded in 1947. Wrestlers and weightlifters have achieved the country&#x27;s highest records at the Olympics. In 1974, Iran became the first country in West Asia to host the Asian Games.

As a mountainous country, Iran is a venue for skiing, snowboarding, hiking, rock climbing, and mountain climbing. It is home to ski resorts, the most famous being Tochal, Dizin, and Shemshak. Dizin is the largest, and authorised by FIS to administer international competitions.

Football is the most popular sport, with the men&#x27;s national team having won the Asian Cup three times. The men&#x27;s team ranks 2nd in Asia and 20th in the FIFA World Rankings . The Azadi Stadium in Tehran is the largest association football stadium in West Asia and on a list of top-20 stadiums in the world. Volleyball is the second most popular sport. Having won the 2011 and 2013 Asian Men&#x27;s Volleyball Championships, the men&#x27;s national team is the 2nd strongest in Asia, and 15th in the FIVB World Rankings . Basketball is also popular, with the men&#x27;s national team having won three Asian Championships since 2007.

=== Observances ===

Iran&#x27;s official New Year begins with Nowruz, an ancient Iranian tradition celebrated annually on the vernal equinox and described as the &quot;Persian New Year&quot;. It was registered on the UNESCO&#x27;s list of Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity in 2009. On the eve of the last Wednesday of the preceding year, as a prelude to Nowruz, the ancient festival of بārڑanbe Suri celebrates Ātar (&quot;fire&quot;) by performing rituals such as jumping over bonfires and lighting fireworks.

Yaldā, another ancient tradition, commemorates the ancient goddess Mithra and marks the longest night of the year on the eve of the winter solstice (usually on 20 or 21 December), during which families gather to recite poetry and eat fruits. In some regions of Mazanderan and Markazi, there is a midsummer festival, Tirgān, which is observed on Tir 13 (2 or 3July) as a celebration of water.

Islamic annual events such as Ramezān, Eid e Fetr, and Ruz e Āڑurā are marked by the country&#x27;s population, Christian traditions such as Noel, elle ye Ruze, and Eid e Pāk are observed by the Christian communities, Jewish traditions such as Hanukā and Eid e Fatir (Pesah) are observed by the Jewish communities, and Zoroastrian traditions such as Sade and Mehrgān are observed by the Zoroastrians.

==== Public holidays ====
With 26, Iran has one of the world&#x27;s highest number of public holidays. It ranks 1st in the world with the most paid leave days: 52. Iran&#x27;s official calendar is the Solar Hejri calendar, beginning at the vernal equinox in the Northern Hemisphere. Each of the 12 months of the Solar Hejri calendar correspond with a zodiac sign, and the length of each year is solar. Alternatively, the Lunar Hejri calendar is used to indicate Islamic events, and the Gregorian calendar marks international events.

Legal public holidays based on the Iranian solar calendar include the cultural celebrations of Nowruz (Farvardin 1–4; 21–24 March) and Sizdebedar (Farvardin 13; 2April), and the political events of Islamic Republic Day (Farvardin 12; 1April), the death of Ruhollah Khomeini (Khordad 14; 4June), the Khordad 15 event (Khordad 15; 5June), the anniversary of the Iranian Revolution (Bahman 22; 10 February), and Oil Nationalisation Day (Esfand 29; 19 March).

Lunar Islamic public holidays include Tasua (Muharram 9), Ashura (Muharram 10), Arba&#x27;een (Safar 20), Muhammad&#x27;s death (Safar 28), the death of Ali al-Ridha (Safar 29 or 30), the birthday of Muhammad (Rabi-al-Awwal 17), the death of Fatimah (Jumada-al-Thani 3), the birthday of Ali (Rajab 13), Muhammad&#x27;s first revelation (Rajab 27), the birthday of Muhammad al-Mahdi (Sha&#x27;ban 15), the death of Ali (Ramadan 21), Eid al-Fitr (Shawwal 1–2), the death of Ja&#x27;far al-Sadiq (Shawwal 25), Eid al-Qurban (Zulhijja 10), and Eid al-Qadir (Zulhijja 18).

== See also ==

* Outline of Iran

== Explanatory notes ==
&lt;templatestyles src=&quot;Reflist/styles.css&quot; /&gt;

== References ==

=== Footnotes ===
=== Citations ===
== Bibliography ==
* 
* &quot;Iran: A Country Study &quot;. 2008, Washington, DC: Library of Congress, 354 pp.
* 
* 
* 
*


== External links ==
* The Office of the Supreme Leader of Iran
* President of Iran
* Visit Iran - Official Travel Guide of Iran
* Iran.ir 
* Iran . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* 
&lt;templatestyles src=&quot;Plain navboxes/styles.css&quot; /&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="0" end="4" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="21" end="45" title="Iran" label="Islamic Republic of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="47" end="50" title="Iran" label="IRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="70" end="76" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="94" end="103" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="116" end="122" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="144" end="148" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="162" end="172" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="174" end="181" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="187" end="198" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="204" end="216" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="231" end="242" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="256" end="264" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="287" end="299" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Gulf of Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="308" end="320" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404320" start="342" end="354" title="Ethnicities in Iran" label="multi-ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="435" end="450" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="geographic size"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="455" end="465" title="List of countries and dependencies by population density" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983969" start="477" end="498" title="List of Asian countries by area" label="sixth-largest country"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="511" end="515" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131180" start="544" end="560" title="List of mountains in Iran" label="most mountainous"/>
<link wikidata="Q672729" start="586" end="602" title="Islamic republic" label="Islamic republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243071" start="613" end="641" title="Islam in Iran" label="a Muslim-majority population"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507090" start="671" end="683" title="Regions of Iran" label="five regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344695" start="689" end="701" title="Provinces of Iran" label="31 provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="703" end="709" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="731" end="738" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q327077" start="740" end="752" title="List of cities in Iran by province" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="757" end="773" title="financial centre" label="financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207629" start="778" end="800" title="cradle of civilization" label="cradle of civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="836" end="854" title="Lower Palaeolithic" label="Lower Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20437507" start="902" end="918" title="Median kingdom" label="political entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8735" start="926" end="931" title="Medes" label="Medes"/>
<link wikidata="Q297855" start="938" end="946" title="Cyaxares" label="Cyaxares"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="1039" end="1054" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="1067" end="1084" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="1108" end="1123" title="ancient history" label="ancient history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="1125" end="1144" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="1229" end="1244" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="1323" end="1338" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28926" start="1364" end="1376" title="History of Iran" label="Ancient Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="1571" end="1588" title="Muslim conquest of Persia" label="Muslims conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204038" start="1638" end="1662" title="Islamization of Iran" label="Iran&amp;#x27;s Islamisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q365585" start="1668" end="1678" title="Persian literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187327" start="1680" end="1690" title="Iranian philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1692" end="1703" title="Islamic Golden Age#Mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332452" start="1705" end="1713" title="Ancient Iranian medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1715" end="1724" title="Islamic Golden Age#Astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718840" start="1729" end="1732" title="Persian art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="1801" end="1819" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067278" start="1824" end="1843" title="Iranian Intermezzo" label="Persian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067278" start="1862" end="1886" title="Iranian Intermezzo" label="Iranian Muslim dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="1916" end="1932" title="Persian language" label="Persian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="1965" end="1971" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="1976" end="1982" title="Ilkhanate" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="2057" end="2065" title="Safavid Iran" label="Safavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q269785" start="2110" end="2130" title="Twelver Shi&amp;#x27;ism" label="Twelver Shi&amp;#x27;ism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="2138" end="2155" title="State religion" label="official religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q63149558" start="2168" end="2183" title="Afsharid Iran" label="Afsharid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="2279" end="2285" title="Qajar Iran" label="Qajars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368440" start="2342" end="2375" title="Persian Constitutional Revolution" label="Persian Constitutional Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207991" start="2405" end="2420" title="Pahlavi dynasty" label="Pahlavi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q182921" start="2424" end="2443" title="Reza Shah the Great" label="Reza Shah the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q123037" start="2497" end="2515" title="Mohammad Mosaddegh" label="Mohammad Mosaddegh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962148" start="2519" end="2547" title="Nationalization of the Iranian oil industry" label="nationalise the oil industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q593774" start="2558" end="2585" title="1953 Iran coup" label="Anglo-American coup in 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="2597" end="2615" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="2705" end="2722" title="Ruhollah Khomeini" label="Ruhollah Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q332486" start="2760" end="2774" title="Supreme Leader of Iran" label="Supreme Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941438" start="2785" end="2802" title="Iraqi invasion of Iran" label="Iraq invaded Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="2833" end="2846" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16052369" start="2883" end="2902" title="Government of Iran" label="officially governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="2908" end="2915" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q672729" start="2916" end="2932" title="Islamic republic" label="Islamic republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="2940" end="2959" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="3031" end="3044" title="authoritarian" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002620" start="3118" end="3130" title="Human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="3168" end="3182" title="regional power" label="regional power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="3213" end="3224" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859094" start="3269" end="3287" title="Natural gas reserves in Iran" label="natural gas supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253007" start="3289" end="3322" title="List of countries by proven oil reserves" label="third largest proven oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609135" start="3365" end="3386" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Armed Forces" label="military capabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q54427" start="3388" end="3405" title="cultural hegemony" label="cultural hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="3471" end="3481" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018442" start="3487" end="3502" title="Economy of Iran" label="Iranian economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="3523" end="3542" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="23rd-largest by PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3577" end="3591" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="3593" end="3596" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="3598" end="3602" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q225950" start="3608" end="3611" title="Economic Cooperation Organization" label="ECO"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="3647" end="3650" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q485207" start="3652" end="3655" title="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation" label="SCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q243630" start="3661" end="3666" title="BRICS" label="BRICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385654" start="3687" end="3714" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Iran" label="UNESCO World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q84036549" start="3764" end="3792" title="Intangible cultural heritage" label="Intangible Cultural Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452112" start="3846" end="3850" title="Iran (word)" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="3870" end="3884" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q648705" start="3934" end="3948" title="Naqsh-e Rostam" label="Naqsh-e Rostam"/>
<link wikidata="Q25953" start="3972" end="3980" title="Parthian language" label="Parthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q124818442" start="4021" end="4029" title="Arya (Iran)" label="Iranians"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="4063" end="4071" title="Demonym" label="gentilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167865" start="4158" end="4180" title="Proto-Iranian language" label="Proto-Iranian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="4215" end="4220" title="Aryan" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="4281" end="4309" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130378" start="4341" end="4358" title="Persian mythology" label="Iranian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300562" start="4380" end="4384" title="Iraj" label="Iraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="4451" end="4459" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="4468" end="4473" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="4548" end="4556" title="Persians" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004666" start="4590" end="4603" title="Fars province" label="Fars province"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="4685" end="4692" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35225" start="4822" end="4833" title="Old Persian" label="Old Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121865" start="4918" end="4932" title="Fars (territory)" label="this territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q182921" start="5051" end="5060" title="Reza Shah" label="Reza Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378587" start="5407" end="5427" title="English in the Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth English"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="5487" end="5512" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="5534" end="5550" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025348" start="5617" end="5637" title="Cambridge Advanced Learner&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Cambridge Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="5714" end="5730" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="5999" end="6016" title="ancient Near East" label="ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="6022" end="6026" title="Elam" label="Elam"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="6083" end="6091" title="Kassites" label="Kassites"/>
<link wikidata="Q552328" start="6093" end="6102" title="Mannaeans" label="Mannaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q549531" start="6108" end="6115" title="Gutian people" label="Gutians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="6117" end="6146" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6240" end="6248" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q8735" start="6270" end="6275" title="Medes" label="Medes"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="6332" end="6349" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="6375" end="6390" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="6453" end="6460" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="6464" end="6476" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="6481" end="6493" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="6522" end="6530" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="6532" end="6540" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="6546" end="6561" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6696" end="6708" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6732" end="6748" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q576065" start="6781" end="6792" title="Ancient Macedonians" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="6794" end="6799" title="Muslim conquest of Persia" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="6801" end="6806" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="6812" end="6819" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880695" start="6878" end="6895" title="national identity" label="national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="6959" end="6984" title="Muslim conquest of Persia" label="Muslim conquest of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204038" start="7083" end="7103" title="Islamization of Iran" label="Islamisation of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="7158" end="7172" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="7258" end="7265" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="7327" end="7343" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="7348" end="7367" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q161205" start="7460" end="7475" title="Safavid dynasty" label="Safavid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="7495" end="7505" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q642379" start="7583" end="7599" title="history of Islam" label="history of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7680" end="7694" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="7758" end="7766" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="7774" end="7788" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8543350" start="7803" end="7821" title="Russo-Persian Wars" label="Russo-Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="7864" end="7882" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q672729" start="7913" end="7929" title="Islamic republic" label="Islamic republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="8150" end="8168" title="Ayatollah Khomeini" label="Ayatollah Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="8246" end="8259" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q186111" start="8440" end="8456" title="Akbar Rafsanjani" label="Akbar Rafsanjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="8590" end="8601" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="8626" end="8639" title="privatization" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q73509" start="8747" end="8756" title="Iranian reform movement" label="reformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q180795" start="8757" end="8773" title="Mohammad Khatami" label="Mohammad Khatami"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="8802" end="8823" title="Freedom of speech" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="8877" end="8891" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q251830" start="8974" end="9000" title="2005 Iranian presidential election" label="2005 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="9022" end="9030" title="populist" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34448" start="9057" end="9076" title="Mahmoud Ahmadinejad" label="Mahmoud Ahmadinejad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116709" start="9162" end="9168" title="Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="9170" end="9182" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9188" end="9190" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q378605" start="9266" end="9276" title="Islamic Consultative Assembly" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q348144" start="9355" end="9369" title="Hassan Rouhani" label="Hassan Rouhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001802" start="9597" end="9631" title="Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action" label="Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="9655" end="9661" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291494" start="9689" end="9693" title="P5+1" label="P5+1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688521" start="9695" end="9714" title="permanent members of the United Nations Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470281" start="9781" end="9799" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1929" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="9853" end="9869" title="enriched uranium" label="enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="9902" end="9922" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068128" start="10067" end="10091" title="nuclear latency" label="nuclear threshold status"/>
<link wikidata="Q271110" start="10102" end="10106" title="Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="IRGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q892014" start="10116" end="10131" title="Qasem Soleimani" label="Qasem Soleimani"/>
<link wikidata="Q80754846" start="10175" end="10197" title="Assassination of Qasem Soleimani" label="assassinated by the US"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745298" start="10211" end="10232" title="Iran–United States relations" label="tensions between them"/>
<link wikidata="Q81341687" start="10234" end="10277" title="Operation Martyr Soleimani" label="Iran retaliated against US airbases in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995526" start="10349" end="10363" title="Traumatic brain injury" label="brain injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947347" start="10376" end="10389" title="Ebrahim Raisi" label="Ebrahim Raisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30640701" start="10417" end="10421" title="2021 Iranian presidential election" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q348144" start="10434" end="10448" title="Hassan Rouhani" label="Hassan Rouhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q329891" start="10481" end="10511" title="Nuclear program of Iran" label="intensified uranium enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q115613968" start="10571" end="10587" title="Iran and the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="supported Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="10595" end="10614" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q125257835" start="10683" end="10706" title="Israeli bombing of the Iranian embassy in Damascus" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s airstrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843791" start="10721" end="10730" title="consulate" label="consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q125464497" start="10763" end="10773" title="April 2024 Iranian strikes against Israel" label="retaliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="10779" end="10783" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="UAVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="10785" end="10791" title="Cruise missile" label="cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="10796" end="10813" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q97860712" start="11046" end="11056" title="1991 Iraqi missile attacks against Israel" label="since 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q123036458" start="11155" end="11189" title="Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip" label="Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q125986235" start="11236" end="11252" title="2024 Varzaqan helicopter crash" label="helicopter crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q111588743" start="11270" end="11291" title="2024 Iranian presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091528" start="11327" end="11345" title="Ministry of Health and Medical Education" label="Minister of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933752" start="11347" end="11364" title="Masoud Pezeshkian" label="Masoud Pezeshkian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152378" start="11498" end="11512" title="Ismail Haniyeh" label="Ismail Haniyeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q181182" start="11514" end="11530" title="Hassan Nasrallah" label="Hassan Nasrallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q123760878" start="11535" end="11553" title="Abbas Nilforoushan" label="Abbas Nilforoushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983969" start="11724" end="11762" title="List of Asian countries by area" label="sixth-largest country entirely in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254915" start="11826" end="11829" title="24th parallel north" label="24°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186266" start="11834" end="11839" title="40th parallel north" label="40° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186167" start="11856" end="11859" title="44th meridian east" label="44°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701432" start="11864" end="11869" title="64th meridian east" label="64° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="11906" end="11913" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131083" start="11939" end="11949" title="Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic" label="Nakhchivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="11962" end="11984" title="Azerbaijan" label="Republic of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="12009" end="12020" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="12042" end="12054" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="12074" end="12085" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="12126" end="12138" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="12147" end="12159" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Gulf of Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="12180" end="12184" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q38768" start="12294" end="12307" title="Richter scale" label="Richter scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990627" start="12413" end="12432" title="2003 Bam earthquake" label="2003 Bam earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q237660" start="12456" end="12471" title="Iranian Plateau" label="Iranian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="12568" end="12582" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="12598" end="12604" title="drainage basin" label="basins"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="12608" end="12615" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477" start="12690" end="12698" title="Caucasus Mountains" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="12700" end="12706" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros"/>
<link wikidata="Q484725" start="12712" end="12718" title="Alborz" label="Alborz"/>
<link wikidata="Q40758" start="12740" end="12754" title="Mount Damavand" label="Mount Damavand"/>
<link wikidata="Q29724" start="12951" end="12976" title="Hyrcanian forests" label="Caspian Hyrcanian forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="13056" end="13062" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q272514" start="13083" end="13095" title="Dasht-e Kavir" label="Kavir Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q767128" start="13149" end="13159" title="Dasht-e Loot" label="Lut Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q188025" start="13172" end="13181" title="salt lake" label="salt lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="13303" end="13308" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q166966" start="13436" end="13448" title="Shatt al-Arab" label="Arvand river"/>
<link wikidata="Q79883" start="13541" end="13557" title="Strait of Hormuz" label="Strait of Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q199551" start="13674" end="13684" title="Lake Urmia" label="Urmia Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q179751" start="13693" end="13703" title="Aras (river)" label="Aras River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778433" start="13716" end="13729" title="Anzali Lagoon" label="Anzali Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q726696" start="13731" end="13746" title="Ashuradeh" label="Ashurade Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="13754" end="13765" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="13789" end="13797" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Oman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="13877" end="13889" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Gulf of Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115029" start="14059" end="14076" title="Seizure of Abu Musa and the Greater and Lesser Tunbs" label="Iran took control"/>
<link wikidata="Q167217" start="14080" end="14086" title="Abu Musa" label="Bumusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475754" start="14096" end="14120" title="Greater and Lesser Tunbs" label="Greater and Lesser Tunbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79883" start="14137" end="14153" title="Strait of Hormuz" label="Strait of Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="14348" end="14368" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q221883" start="14544" end="14555" title="Kish Island" label="Kish island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="14562" end="14577" title="Free-trade zone" label="free trade zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240719" start="14690" end="14695" title="Qeshm Island" label="Qeshm"/>
<link wikidata="Q53444003" start="14733" end="14754" title="UNESCO Global Geoparks" label="UNESCO Global Geopark"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="14927" end="14931" title="Desert climate" label="arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="14936" end="14945" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="14950" end="14961" title="subtropics" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376358" start="15290" end="15304" title="Water scarcity" label="Water scarcity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="15875" end="15881" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q29724" start="16047" end="16063" title="Hyrcanian forests" label="Hyrcanian region"/>
<link wikidata="Q164585" start="16129" end="16134" title="Turan" label="Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="16193" end="16206" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros region"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="16259" end="16278" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf region"/>
<link wikidata="Q278021" start="16333" end="16350" title="Arasbaran" label="Arasbarani region"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="16408" end="16413" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="16597" end="16610" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="16651" end="16654" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q613760" start="16664" end="16684" title="Indian grey mongoose" label="Indian grey mongoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q123900653" start="16686" end="16707" title="small Indian mongoose" label="small Indian mongoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q128098" start="16709" end="16722" title="golden jackal" label="golden jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q855921" start="16724" end="16735" title="Indian wolf" label="Indian wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="16737" end="16740" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q188657" start="16744" end="16757" title="striped hyena" label="striped hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q34706" start="16759" end="16766" title="leopard" label="leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q43375" start="16768" end="16781" title="Eurasian lynx" label="Eurasian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="16783" end="16793" title="brown bear" label="brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q124410" start="16798" end="16814" title="Asian black bear" label="Asian black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="16816" end="16824" title="Ungulate" label="Ungulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="16841" end="16850" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q839513" start="16852" end="16857" title="urial" label="urial"/>
<link wikidata="Q793853" start="16859" end="16875" title="Armenian mouflon" label="Armenian mouflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="16877" end="16885" title="red deer" label="red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q460977" start="16891" end="16907" title="goitered gazelle" label="goitered gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q278912" start="16969" end="16984" title="Asiatic cheetah" label="Asiatic cheetah"/>
<link wikidata="Q182347" start="17033" end="17045" title="Asiatic lion" label="Asiatic lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q188535" start="17063" end="17076" title="Caspian tiger" label="Caspian tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="17143" end="17148" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="17150" end="17154" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="17156" end="17162" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="17164" end="17169" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q42710" start="17171" end="17184" title="water buffalo" label="water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="17186" end="17192" title="donkey" label="donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="17197" end="17202" title="camel" label="camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214169" start="17222" end="17230" title="pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q732775" start="17232" end="17241" title="partridge" label="partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28507" start="17243" end="17248" title="stork" label="stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="17250" end="17255" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="17261" end="17267" title="falcon" label="falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332486" start="17339" end="17353" title="Supreme Leader of Iran" label="Supreme Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="17440" end="17453" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q311381" start="18064" end="18074" title="Quds Force" label="Quds Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962994" start="18155" end="18160" title="Execution of Imam Khomeini&amp;#x27;s Order" label="Setad"/>
<link wikidata="Q378605" start="18251" end="18261" title="Iranian parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="18282" end="18300" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609135" start="18308" end="18320" title="Armed Forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q828689" start="18549" end="18565" title="Guardian Council" label="Guardian Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q917663" start="18604" end="18623" title="Assembly of Experts" label="Assembly of Experts"/>
<link wikidata="Q24682" start="18907" end="18921" title="Sadeq Larijani" label="Sadeq Larijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="19134" end="19152" title="the New York Times" label="the New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116949" start="19180" end="19196" title="Karim Sadjadpour" label="Karim Sadjadpour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153595" start="19223" end="19265" title="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" label="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388932" start="19763" end="19790" title="Constitution of Iran" label="country&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="19828" end="19857" title="The Economist Democracy Index" label="The Economist Democracy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q62478" start="19865" end="19879" title="Juan José Linz" label="Juan José Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="19957" end="19972" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="20003" end="20019" title="authoritarianism" label="authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q838380" start="20050" end="20059" title="President of Iran" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="20063" end="20081" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="20178" end="20196" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093426" start="20217" end="20226" title="Elections in Iran" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q828689" start="20296" end="20312" title="Guardian Council" label="Guardian Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="20505" end="20523" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465096" start="20531" end="20535" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551972" start="20549" end="20582" title="Supreme National Security Council" label="Supreme National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="20615" end="20633" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249045" start="21317" end="21337" title="Council of Ministers of Iran" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q828689" start="21664" end="21680" title="Guardian Council" label="Guardian Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q378605" start="22082" end="22092" title="Majlis of Iran" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="22316" end="22322" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207434" start="22551" end="22589" title="1989 Iranian constitutional referendum" label="1989 Iranian constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388932" start="22745" end="22757" title="Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q838380" start="22785" end="22794" title="President of Iran" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="23064" end="23075" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q378605" start="23090" end="23119" title="Islamic Consultative Assembly" label="Islamic Consultative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="23174" end="23184" title="unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="23283" end="23291" title="treaty" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q828689" start="23414" end="23430" title="Guardian Council" label="Guardian Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422933" start="23640" end="23670" title="Expediency Discernment Council" label="Expediency Discernment Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q874190" start="23925" end="23939" title="reserved seats" label="reserved seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q137535" start="24042" end="24050" title="Counties of Iran" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="24080" end="24086" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="24129" end="24138" title="civil law (legal system)" label="Civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q694334" start="24331" end="24351" title="Islamic Revolutionary Court" label="revolutionary courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="24409" end="24426" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107481" start="24645" end="24666" title="Supreme Court of Iran" label="Supreme Court of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301024" start="24829" end="24851" title="Special Clerical Court" label="Special Clerical Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="24890" end="24896" title="cleric" label="cleric"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407657" start="24940" end="24949" title="laity" label="laypeople"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="25362" end="25370" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029618" start="25507" end="25513" title="Markaz (country subdivision)" label="markaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="25579" end="25595" title="governor-general" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091482" start="25645" end="25669" title="Ministry of Interior (Iran)" label="Minister of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q17175093" start="25693" end="25704" title="Cabinet of Iran" label="the cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415129" start="25775" end="25788" title="Foreign relations of Iran" label="165 countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="25820" end="25826" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948406" start="25881" end="25923" title="Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict" label="adversarial relationship with Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303039" start="25967" end="25982" title="Iran–Turkey relations" label="Iran and Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="26039" end="26044" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="26046" end="26051" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="26061" end="26075" title="South Caucasus" label="South Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057435" start="26142" end="26160" title="Kurdish nationalism" label="Kurdish separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30130610" start="26169" end="26192" title="Qatar diplomatic crisis" label="Qatar diplomatic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="26240" end="26250" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="26303" end="26307" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="26309" end="26316" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="26397" end="26403" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q318693" start="26660" end="26664" title="Collective Security Treaty Organization" label="CSTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="26732" end="26736" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="26766" end="26771" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q96743196" start="26899" end="26928" title="Iran–China 25-year Cooperation Program" label="25-year cooperation agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095" start="27066" end="27086" title="China–Iran relations" label="Iran-China relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="27224" end="27229" title="North Korea" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="27234" end="27245" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131404510" start="27270" end="27294" title="fall of the Assad regime" label="fall of the Assad regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q971612" start="27472" end="27476" title="Group of 15" label="G-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589222" start="27478" end="27482" title="Group of 24" label="G-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="27484" end="27488" title="Group of 77" label="G-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="27490" end="27494" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="27496" end="27500" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="27502" end="27505" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="27507" end="27510" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q41230" start="27512" end="27515" title="Islamic Development Bank" label="IDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="27517" end="27520" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="27522" end="27525" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="27527" end="27530" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="27532" end="27535" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="27537" end="27545" title="Interpol" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="27547" end="27550" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="27552" end="27556" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="27558" end="27561" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="27571" end="27573" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="27616" end="27619" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609135" start="27698" end="27735" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Armed Forces" label="Islamic Republic of Iran Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465096" start="27752" end="27781" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Army" label="Islamic Republic of Iran Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643350" start="27802" end="27815" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Army Ground Forces" label="Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082582" start="27817" end="27834" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Air Defense Force" label="Air Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q378442" start="27836" end="27845" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408298" start="27851" end="27855" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271110" start="27861" end="27894" title="Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610863" start="27918" end="27931" title="Ground Forces of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410582" start="27933" end="27948" title="Aerospace Force of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="Aerospace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670650" start="27950" end="27954" title="Navy of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q311381" start="27956" end="27966" title="Quds Force" label="Quds Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q750202" start="27972" end="27977" title="Basij" label="Basij"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082591" start="27987" end="28010" title="Law Enforcement Force of the Islamic Republic of Iran" label="Law Enforcement Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="28061" end="28069" title="Gendarmerie" label="gendarme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962411" start="28273" end="28283" title="Conscription in Iran" label="Since 1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q821387" start="28523" end="28568" title="List of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel" label="percentage of citizens with military training"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="28595" end="28607" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="28817" end="28829" title="police force" label="police force"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="29376" end="29385" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593564" start="29412" end="29425" title="Army Aviation" label="Army Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="29439" end="29450" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="29856" end="29860" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="29863" end="29889" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="29892" end="29899" title="missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="29902" end="29911" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492549" start="29914" end="29931" title="Iranian frigate Jamaran" label="missile destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="29933" end="29938" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="29948" end="29958" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="29961" end="29974" title="Navy" label="naval vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="29980" end="29994" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="30152" end="30169" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q51777060" start="30243" end="30272" title="Hypersonic missile" label="hypersonic missile technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="30355" end="30378" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588142" start="30439" end="30467" title="drone warfare" label="drone warfare and technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q849340" start="30519" end="30531" title="cyberwarfare" label="cyberwarfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="30751" end="30770" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q378442" start="30794" end="30828" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force" label="Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q245275" start="30879" end="30891" title="Sukhoi Su-35" label="Sukhoi Su-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q242806" start="30906" end="30915" title="Mil Mi-28" label="Mil Mi-28"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408298" start="30973" end="30985" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Navy" label="Iranian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="31015" end="31021" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="31026" end="31031" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928830" start="31237" end="31282" title="Views on the nuclear program of Iran" label="subject of intense international negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q979775" start="31389" end="31406" title="Iran and weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291494" start="31430" end="31434" title="P5+1" label="P5+1"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001802" start="31449" end="31483" title="Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action" label="Joint Comprehensive Plan on Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470281" start="31507" end="31525" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1929" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="31567" end="31583" title="enriched uranium" label="enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q52836581" start="31608" end="31619" title="United States withdrawal from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action" label="US withdrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="31644" end="31664" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068128" start="31938" end="31962" title="Nuclear latency" label="nuclear threshold status"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850231" start="32330" end="32345" title="Iranian nationalism" label="national legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="32347" end="32353" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28926" start="32358" end="32365" title="History of Iran" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="32378" end="32388" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="32544" end="32553" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="32557" end="32564" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271110" start="32578" end="32582" title="Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="IRGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q311381" start="32630" end="32640" title="Quds Force" label="Quds Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="32687" end="32691" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="32708" end="32713" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="32942" end="32959" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49104" start="33054" end="33079" title="2006 Lebanon War" label="2006 Israel–Hezbollah War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="33119" end="33125" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="33165" end="33177" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim World"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="33190" end="33217" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="US invasion of Iraq in 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="33237" end="33241" title="Islamic State" label="ISIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="33324" end="33337" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran-Iraq war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="33363" end="33377" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6400883" start="33507" end="33523" title="Khatam-al Anbiya Construction Headquarters" label="Khatam al-Anbiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="33655" end="33663" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686631" start="33714" end="33736" title="Yemeni civil war (2014–present)" label="Yemen&amp;#x27;s civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042087" start="33776" end="33783" title="Houthi movement" label="Houthis"/>
<link wikidata="Q144333" start="33787" end="33799" title="Zaydism" label="Zaydi Shiite"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="33831" end="33836" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q123285238" start="33872" end="33889" title="Red Sea crisis" label="significant power"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="33942" end="33953" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="33958" end="33966" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19883290" start="33999" end="34014" title="Liwa Fatemiyoun" label="Liwa Fatemiyoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q24043381" start="34019" end="34035" title="Liwa Zainebiyoun" label="Liwa Zainebiyoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="34041" end="34046" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44329" start="34077" end="34092" title="Bashar al-Assad" label="Bashar al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="34317" end="34329" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="34348" end="34355" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="34360" end="34367" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="34379" end="34384" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="34433" end="34468" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestinian Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275939" start="34917" end="34936" title="LGBT rights in Iran" label="sexual orientations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275939" start="34938" end="34985" title="LGBT rights in Iran" label="Sexual activity between members of the same sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q25091704" start="35004" end="35023" title="Death penalty for homosexuality" label="punishable by death"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="35025" end="35043" title="Capital punishment" label="Capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55403330" start="35198" end="35211" title="Javaid Rehman" label="Javaid Rehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="35294" end="35296" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="35419" end="35431" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668046" start="35584" end="35603" title="Internet censorship in Iran" label="internet censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="35647" end="35659" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="35764" end="35773" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="35775" end="35783" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="35785" end="35793" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="35795" end="35803" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="35805" end="35812" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="35817" end="35824" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q854206" start="35888" end="35896" title="2009 Iranian presidential election protests" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q46999835" start="35902" end="35926" title="2017–18 Iranian protests" label="2017–18 Iranian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q75161062" start="36079" end="36103" title="2019–20 Iranian protests" label="2019–20 Iranian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q170366" start="36130" end="36135" title="Ahvaz" label="Ahvaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q76342106" start="36240" end="36273" title="2019 Internet blackout in Iran" label="week-long total Internet shutdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="36531" end="36552" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q81360866" start="36555" end="36596" title="Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752" label="Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="36659" end="36665" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="36669" end="36673" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q836560" start="36687" end="36717" title="Ukraine International Airlines" label="Ukraine International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q271110" start="36795" end="36828" title="Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q81877191" start="36909" end="36917" title="Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752 protests" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q114065797" start="37046" end="37077" title="Mahsa Amini protests" label="Protests against the government"/>
<link wikidata="Q114051466" start="37125" end="37159" title="Death of Mahsa Amini" label="Mahsa Amini died in police custody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5964479" start="37188" end="37203" title="Guidance Patrol" label="Guidance Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="37299" end="37328" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="19th largest economy (by PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="37338" end="37345" title="Mixed economy" label="mixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="37349" end="37365" title="Planned economy" label="central planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="37367" end="37382" title="state ownership" label="state ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719780" start="37567" end="37573" title="Mining in Iran" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827194" start="37597" end="37608" title="Agriculture in Iran" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803662" start="37748" end="37760" title="Iran&amp;#x27;s oil reserves" label="oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859094" start="37772" end="37784" title="Iran&amp;#x27;s Natural Gas Reserves" label="gas reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630815" start="37797" end="37814" title="energy superpower" label="energy superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028209" start="37821" end="37834" title="Industry of Iran" label="40 industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805567" start="37864" end="37885" title="Tehran Stock Exchange" label="Tehran Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261157" start="38099" end="38119" title="Central Bank of Iran" label="Central Bank of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="38170" end="38178" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q188608" start="38184" end="38196" title="Iranian rial" label="Iranian rial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599034" start="38232" end="38244" title="List of trade unions in Iran" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067420" start="38260" end="38283" title="Iranian labor law" label="Islamic labour councils"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38388" end="38403" title="Politics of Iran#Budget" label="Budget deficits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067522" start="38447" end="38468" title="Subsidies in Iran" label="large state subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="38714" end="38725" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="38763" end="38777" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098436" start="38894" end="38907" title="Biotechnology in Iran" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098436" start="38909" end="38923" title="Chemistry in Iran" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690860" start="38929" end="38943" title="Pharmaceuticals in Iran" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246276" start="38972" end="38994" title="Privatization in Iran" label="privatising industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733836" start="39296" end="39303" title="apricot" label="apricot"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="39306" end="39314" title="cherry" label="cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="39316" end="39324" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365891" start="39330" end="39337" title="gherkin" label="gherkin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39340" end="39345" title="Date palm#Description" label="dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q36146" start="39347" end="39351" title="common fig" label="figs"/>
<link wikidata="Q36071" start="39353" end="39362" title="pistachio" label="pistachio"/>
<link wikidata="Q43300" start="39365" end="39371" title="quince" label="quince"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="39374" end="39380" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194" start="39383" end="39392" title="Kiwifruit" label="Kiwifruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="39397" end="39407" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038124" start="39410" end="39446" title="International sanctions against Iran" label="International sanctions against Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="39531" end="39546" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752885" start="39556" end="39570" title="Climate change in the Middle East and North Africa" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="39691" end="39708" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="40222" end="40229" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397066" start="40231" end="40237" title="Shiraz" label="Shiraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="40242" end="40249" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q757232" start="40299" end="40314" title="medical tourism" label="medical tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="40414" end="40421" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="40423" end="40429" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="40431" end="40435" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="40441" end="40453" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12089958" start="40455" end="40471" title="Domestic tourism" label="Domestic tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="40831" end="40840" title="irrigated" label="irrigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q926906" start="40865" end="40880" title="dryland farming" label="dryland farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="41027" end="41040" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="41114" end="41121" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q186385" start="42112" end="42118" title="caviar" label="caviar"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="42256" end="42258" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="42260" end="42265" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q289612" start="42560" end="42571" title="General contractor" label="contractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615525" start="42662" end="42666" title="List of reservoirs and dams in Iran" label="dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q583413" start="42668" end="42682" title="Transport in Iran" label="bridges, roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164462" start="42684" end="42693" title="Construction in Iran" label="buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q748603" start="42695" end="42704" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Railways" label="railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634641" start="42706" end="42722" title="List of power stations in Iran" label="power generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q593733" start="42728" end="42736" title="National Iranian Oil Company" label="gas, oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q747391" start="42741" end="42754" title="National Iranian Petrochemical Company" label="petrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719780" start="42991" end="43012" title="Mining in Iran" label="rich mineral reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="43131" end="43137" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="43248" end="43259" title="cooperative" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="43333" end="43339" title="bazaar" label="bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="43473" end="43477" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="43479" end="43490" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="43492" end="43504" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="43506" end="43516" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="43518" end="43524" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="43526" end="43533" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="43535" end="43542" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="43544" end="43552" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="43554" end="43566" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="43568" end="43574" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="43576" end="43596" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="43598" end="43603" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="43605" end="43609" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="43611" end="43616" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="43618" end="43625" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="43627" end="43632" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="43638" end="43649" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="43651" end="43657" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="43659" end="43665" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="43667" end="43676" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="43678" end="43683" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="43685" end="43696" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="43701" end="43707" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343045" start="43824" end="43835" title="Iran Khodro" label="Iran Khodro"/>
<link wikidata="Q44027" start="43892" end="43897" title="Iran Tractor Manufacturing Company" label="ITMCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483418" start="43947" end="43982" title="List of countries by motor vehicle production" label="12th largest automaker in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q714823" start="44543" end="44555" title="Tehran Metro" label="Tehran Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q154814" start="44741" end="44753" title="Bandar Abbas" label="Bandar Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79883" start="44761" end="44777" title="Strait of Hormuz" label="Strait of Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="44864" end="44870" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="44970" end="44977" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q210885" start="45005" end="45020" title="Bandar-e Anzali" label="Bandar e-Anzali"/>
<link wikidata="Q643394" start="45025" end="45042" title="Bandar Torkaman" label="Bandar e-Torkeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="45050" end="45061" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q458396" start="45066" end="45078" title="Khorramshahr" label="Khorramshahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q772940" start="45083" end="45105" title="Bandar-e Emam Khomeyni" label="Bandar-e Emam Khomeyni"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="45113" end="45125" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057372" start="45128" end="45158" title="List of airports in Iran" label="Dozens of cities have airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q461631" start="45198" end="45206" title="Iran Air" label="Iran Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630815" start="45483" end="45500" title="energy superpower" label="energy superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="45572" end="45581" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q317617" start="45662" end="45678" title="Foreign reserves" label="foreign currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827361" start="45759" end="45771" title="oil reserves" label="oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253007" start="45805" end="45817" title="List of countries by proven oil reserves" label="oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="45825" end="45829" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859094" start="45882" end="45894" title="Natural gas in Iran" label="gas reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633578" start="45900" end="45934" title="List of countries by natural gas production" label="3rd largest natural gas production"/>
<link wikidata="Q593733" start="46022" end="46026" title="National Iranian Oil Company" label="NIOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028209" start="46172" end="46196" title="Industry of Iran" label="its industrial equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="46249" end="46259" title="Oil refinery" label="refineries"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="46261" end="46271" title="oil tanker" label="oil tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688575" start="46274" end="46286" title="drilling rig" label="drilling rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q689880" start="46289" end="46307" title="Oil platform" label="offshore platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="46373" end="46386" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="46656" end="46661" title="Solar power" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q902539" start="46741" end="46744" title="Gas to liquids" label="GTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q29484" start="46758" end="46769" title="Demographics of Iran" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="46823" end="46837" title="electric power" label="electric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634641" start="46972" end="46992" title="List of power stations in Iran" label="new gas-fired plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q204637" start="47049" end="47086" title="Bushehr Nuclear Power Plant" label="Iran&amp;#x27;s first nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038124" start="47211" end="47234" title="International sanctions against Iran" label="international sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039935" start="47276" end="47316" title="Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics" label="Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="47323" end="47329" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963187" start="47357" end="47375" title="List of contemporary Iranian scientists, scholars, and engineers" label="Iranian scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q120877" start="47389" end="47395" title="Cloning" label="cloned"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="47444" end="47453" title="Stem cell" label="Stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="47529" end="47545" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q120216" start="47630" end="47639" title="Ali Javan" label="Ali Javan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635447" start="47662" end="47671" title="gas laser" label="gas laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055058" start="47677" end="47686" title="fuzzy set" label="fuzzy set"/>
<link wikidata="Q92767" start="47712" end="47726" title="Lotfi A. Zadeh" label="Lotfi A. Zadeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10292349" start="47742" end="47756" title="Tofy Mussivand" label="Tofy Mussivand"/>
<link wikidata="Q126888" start="47836" end="47852" title="artificial heart" label="artificial heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q311213" start="47891" end="47896" title="Glycated hemoglobin" label="HbA1c"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903346" start="47915" end="47928" title="Samuel Rahbar" label="Samuel Rahbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="47945" end="47958" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771279" start="48013" end="48030" title="Maryam Mirzakhani" label="Maryam Mirzakhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="48083" end="48095" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389163" start="48292" end="48299" title="SCImago Journal Rank" label="SCImago"/>
<link wikidata="Q583549" start="48411" end="48419" title="Surena (robot)" label="Sorena 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q737835" start="48460" end="48480" title="University of Tehran" label="University of Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="48508" end="48557" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="48695" end="48718" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q681447" start="48902" end="48962" title="United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space" label="United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="48999" end="49008" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q639824" start="49009" end="49013" title="Omid" label="Omid"/>
<link wikidata="Q142596" start="49121" end="49126" title="Safir (rocket)" label="Safir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039031" start="49142" end="49153" title="Timeline of first orbital launches by country" label="9th country"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="49212" end="49217" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353183" start="49243" end="49251" title="launch pad" label="launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905149" start="49253" end="49260" title="Simorgh (rocket)" label="Simorgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q124327573" start="49347" end="49363" title="Soraya (satellite)" label="Soraya satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q115815184" start="49466" end="49481" title="Qaem 100" label="Qaem 100 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q113499909" start="50069" end="50086" title="Khayyam satellite" label="Khayyam satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="50104" end="50114" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695842" start="50295" end="50328" title="Telecommunication Company of Iran" label="Telecommunication Company of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="50693" end="50701" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="50889" end="50903" title="Total fertility rate" label="fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="51220" end="51227" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500929" start="51278" end="51289" title="Afghan refugees" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="51294" end="51298" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388932" start="51317" end="51337" title="Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran" label="Iranian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="51406" end="51421" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="51467" end="51477" title="disability" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949796" start="51569" end="51581" title="Taxation in Iran" label="tax revenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="52025" end="52032" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q587090" start="52108" end="52123" title="Razavi Khorasan province" label="Razavi Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="52125" end="52132" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367759" start="52238" end="52254" title="Isfahan province" label="Isfahan province"/>
<link wikidata="Q161205" start="52293" end="52307" title="Safavid dynasty" label="Safavid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="52540" end="52558" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145774" start="52628" end="52641" title="Proto-Indo-Europeans" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q853085" start="52642" end="52664" title="ethnolinguistics" label="ethno-linguistic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="52671" end="52679" title="Persian people" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q46531" start="52691" end="52703" title="Mazanderani people" label="Mazenderanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346254" start="52708" end="52714" title="Gilaks" label="Gilaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="52752" end="52757" title="Kurds" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q508194" start="52763" end="52767" title="Lurs" label="Lurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q201501" start="52776" end="52783" title="Baloch people" label="Balochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426677" start="52860" end="52872" title="Iranian Azerbaijanis" label="Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="52891" end="52896" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="52901" end="52909" title="Turkmens" label="Turkmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="52920" end="52933" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584186" start="52958" end="52967" title="Iranian Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q10290517" start="52969" end="52975" title="Talysh people" label="Talysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q579080" start="52977" end="52986" title="Iranian Georgians" label="Georgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q20646047" start="52988" end="52999" title="Circassians in Iran" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810479" start="53001" end="53010" title="Iranian Assyrians" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="53021" end="53040" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q249893" start="53224" end="53231" title="Qashqai people" label="Qashqai"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="53236" end="53244" title="Turkmens" label="Turkmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="53413" end="53420" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="53441" end="53449" title="official language" label="official"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="53454" end="53471" title="national language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="53506" end="53523" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="53544" end="53557" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q33657" start="53616" end="53622" title="Gilaki language" label="Gilaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q13356" start="53627" end="53638" title="Mazanderani language" label="Mazenderani"/>
<link wikidata="Q928828" start="53670" end="53675" title="Gilan Province" label="Gilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q308864" start="53680" end="53690" title="Mazandaran Province" label="Mazenderan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34318" start="53711" end="53726" title="Talysh language" label="Talysh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="53769" end="53776" title="Kurdish languages" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q134386" start="53813" end="53822" title="Kurdistan Province" label="Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="53844" end="53853" title="Khuzestan Province" label="Khuzestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="53855" end="53882" title="Persian dialects in Khuzestan" label="several dialects of Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701277" start="53922" end="53926" title="Luri language" label="Luri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699526" start="53931" end="53935" title="Achomi language" label="Lari"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="53948" end="53959" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="54021" end="54037" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q274536" start="54092" end="54102" title="Azerbaijan (Iran)" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="54139" end="54147" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="54149" end="54157" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414422" start="54159" end="54170" title="Neo-Aramaic languages" label="Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="54176" end="54182" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040944" start="54184" end="54196" title="Khuzestani Arabic" label="Khuzi Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014472" start="54214" end="54232" title="Ahwazi Arabs" label="Arabs in Khuzestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859361" start="54257" end="54270" title="Iranian Arabs" label="Iranian Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q858543" start="54272" end="54282" title="Circassian languages" label="Circassian"/>
<link wikidata="Q482942" start="54590" end="54602" title="Azerbaijanis" label="Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="54629" end="54632" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="54640" end="54654" title="World Factbook" label="World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="54680" end="54691" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="54697" end="54704" title="Kurdish languages" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13356" start="54709" end="54720" title="Mazanderani language" label="Mazenderani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33657" start="54725" end="54731" title="Gilaki language" label="Gilaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701277" start="54736" end="54740" title="Luri language" label="Luri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="54745" end="54752" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33049" start="54757" end="54764" title="Balochi language" label="Balochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="54769" end="54775" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="54798" end="54806" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="54808" end="54816" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414422" start="54818" end="54829" title="Neo-Aramaic languages" label="Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q858543" start="54835" end="54845" title="Circassian languages" label="Circassian"/>
<link wikidata="Q269785" start="54866" end="54873" title="Twelver" label="Twelver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="54874" end="54884" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="54892" end="54906" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="54967" end="54972" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="54977" end="54981" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="55028" end="55033" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7485854" start="55115" end="55124" title="Yarsanism" label="Yarsanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20987630" start="55128" end="55135" title="Kurds in Iran" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="55223" end="55235" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475662" start="55337" end="55359" title="persecution of Baháʼís" label="persecution of Baháʼís"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="55375" end="55385" title="Irreligion" label="Irreligion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="55424" end="55436" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="55438" end="55445" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="55447" end="55461" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="55632" end="55644" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="55653" end="55664" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078440" start="55711" end="55736" title="Christianity in Iran" label="Christians reside in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q841896" start="56003" end="56038" title="Armenian Monastic Ensembles of Iran" label="Armenian Monastic Ensembles of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398856" start="56079" end="56093" title="Vank Cathedral" label="Vank Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="56098" end="56105" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="56112" end="56131" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151386" start="56274" end="56278" title="K–12" label="K–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602122" start="56300" end="56321" title="Ministry of Education (Iran)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589378" start="56365" end="56399" title="Ministry of Science, Research and Technology (Iran)" label="Ministry of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312529" start="56630" end="56649" title="high school diploma" label="high school diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761446" start="56663" end="56695" title="Iranian University Entrance Exam" label="Iranian University Entrance Exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="56739" end="56753" title="University-preparatory school" label="pre-university"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="56844" end="56860" title="associate degree" label="associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="56877" end="56899" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="56921" end="56941" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="57014" end="57022" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="doctoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="57132" end="57136" title="Non-governmental organization" label="NGOs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57184" end="57201" title="Organ trade#Iran" label="legal organ trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="57246" end="57265" title="Preventive medicine" label="preventive services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243136" start="57308" end="57335" title="Primary Health Centre" label="Primary Health Care Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q757232" start="57679" end="57694" title="medical tourism" label="medical tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29484" start="57743" end="57768" title="Demographics of Iran" label="young demographic nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="57954" end="57967" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="58025" end="58041" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="58098" end="58101" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="58163" end="58175" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="58177" end="58185" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="58187" end="58197" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="58199" end="58204" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="58206" end="58218" title="metalworking" label="metalworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="58220" end="58232" title="stonemasonry" label="stonemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="58234" end="58241" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="58243" end="58254" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="58259" end="58268" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="58445" end="58456" title="Islamic art" label="Islamic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="58468" end="58485" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161205" start="58904" end="58918" title="Safavid dynasty" label="Safavid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366921" start="59293" end="59304" title="Safavid art" label="Safavid art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="59344" end="59352" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="59358" end="59365" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183649" start="59375" end="59382" title="Deccan sultanates" label="Deccans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067464" start="59490" end="59506" title="Iranian modern and contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659496" start="59529" end="59542" title="Kamal-ol-molk" label="Kamal-ol-molk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="59556" end="59563" title="realism (arts)" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="59592" end="59604" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Qajar Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="59871" end="59882" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282221" start="60260" end="60276" title="Marcos Grigorian" label="Marcos Grigorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="60440" end="60446" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="60451" end="60455" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="60459" end="60469" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="60474" end="60484" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="60499" end="60507" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="60511" end="60519" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="60552" end="60563" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="60565" end="60573" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="60578" end="60587" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229071" start="60683" end="60688" title="motif (visual arts)" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="60982" end="60987" title="Vault (architecture)" label="vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895319" start="60992" end="60996" title="Gonbad" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="61260" end="61266" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q953291" start="61407" end="61414" title="Culture of Iran" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="61450" end="61469" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="61541" end="61551" title="Persepolis" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4519" start="61553" end="61574" title="Naqsh-e Jahan Square" label="Naghsh-e Jahan Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4523" start="61576" end="61589" title="Chogha Zanbil" label="Chogha Zanbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q230025" start="61591" end="61601" title="Pasargadae" label="Pasargadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q210610" start="61603" end="61618" title="Golestan Palace" label="Golestan Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q43277" start="61620" end="61629" title="Arg-e Bam" label="Arg-e Bam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180012" start="61631" end="61651" title="Behistun Inscription" label="Behistun Inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025825" start="61653" end="61668" title="Shahr-e Sukhteh" label="Shahr-e Sukhteh"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="61670" end="61674" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q115253" start="61676" end="61692" title="Takht-e Soleymān" label="Takht-e Soleyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q29724" start="61694" end="61711" title="Hyrcanian forests" label="Hyrcanian forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q182394" start="61725" end="61729" title="Yazd" label="Yazd"/>
<link wikidata="Q84036549" start="61752" end="61780" title="Intangible cultural heritage" label="Intangible Cultural Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="61896" end="61906" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q953291" start="62014" end="62029" title="Persian culture" label="Persian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718840" start="62034" end="62045" title="Iranian art" label="Iranian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134237" start="62151" end="62162" title="royal court" label="royal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q585358" start="62430" end="62435" title="Kilim" label="Kilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5668480" start="62437" end="62443" title="Soumak rug" label="Soumak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432446" start="62474" end="62480" title="Suzani (textile)" label="Suzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004666" start="62707" end="62720" title="Fars province" label="Fars Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q240475" start="62725" end="62731" title="Kashan" label="Kashan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="62754" end="62789" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists" label="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251541" start="62807" end="62819" title="Oriental rug" label="Oriental rug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032112" start="63014" end="63020" title="Tabriz rug" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515494" start="63022" end="63028" title="Kerman carpet" label="Kerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628801" start="63030" end="63035" title="Ravar" label="Ravar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131350" start="63037" end="63047" title="Neyshabour" label="Neyshabour"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="63049" end="63056" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q240475" start="63058" end="63064" title="Kashan" label="Kashan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515488" start="63066" end="63073" title="Isfahan rug" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515500" start="63075" end="63079" title="Nain rug" label="Nain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663619" start="63084" end="63087" title="Qom rug" label="Qom"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="63332" end="63345" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="63395" end="63403" title="literature" label="literary"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572" start="63425" end="63432" title="Avestan" label="Avestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="63438" end="63449" title="Old Iranian" label="Old Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q839470" start="63450" end="63465" title="sacred language" label="sacred language"/>
<link wikidata="Q83426" start="63473" end="63479" title="Avesta" label="Avesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="63536" end="63550" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959447" start="63559" end="63583" title="ancient Iranian religion" label="ancient Iranian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170270" start="63637" end="63657" title="Persianate society" label="Persianate societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="63661" end="63671" title="Anatolia" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="63673" end="63685" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="63691" end="63701" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252120" start="63735" end="63742" title="Ottoman poetry" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243463" start="63747" end="63765" title="Persian language in the Indian subcontinent" label="Mughal literatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q43347" start="63830" end="63837" title="Rumi" label="Mawlana"/>
<link wikidata="Q43459" start="63839" end="63847" title="Ferdowsi" label="Ferdowsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240" start="63849" end="63854" title="Hafez" label="Hafez"/>
<link wikidata="Q170302" start="63856" end="63867" title="Saadi Shirazi" label="Sa&amp;#x27;adi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35900" start="63869" end="63881" title="Omar Khayyam" label="Omar Khayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q234908" start="63887" end="63901" title="Nizami Ganjavi" label="Nezami Ganjavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="63969" end="63975" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="64107" end="64121" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35225" start="64126" end="64137" title="Old Persian" label="Old Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="64224" end="64234" title="Achaemenid" label="Achaemenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q180012" start="64252" end="64272" title="Behistun Inscription" label="Behistun Inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="64360" end="64375" title="Muslim conquest of Persia" label="Muslim conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="64400" end="64407" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="64488" end="64505" title="Caliphate" label="Islamic Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="64613" end="64621" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183324" start="64626" end="64637" title="Transoxiana" label="Transoxiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q373981" start="64725" end="64733" title="Tahirids" label="Tahirids"/>
<link wikidata="Q486181" start="64738" end="64746" title="Samanids" label="Samanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178890" start="64762" end="64770" title="Khorasan province" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="64840" end="64851" title="Iranian languages" label="Old Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453813" start="64918" end="64930" title="Indo-Iranians" label="Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35811" start="64960" end="64971" title="Zarathustra" label="Zarathustra"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="65076" end="65084" title="Rashidun conquest of the Sassanian Empire" label="the Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330335" start="65089" end="65105" title="Mongol invasion of Central Asia" label="Mongol invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="65238" end="65252" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="65330" end="65340" title="Manicheism" label="Manicheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19750498" start="65345" end="65354" title="Mazdakism" label="Mazdakism"/>
<link wikidata="Q405008" start="65393" end="65407" title="Cyrus Cylinder" label="Cyrus Cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q35811" start="65475" end="65484" title="Zoroaster" label="Zoroaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65627" end="65649" title="Ancient philosophy#Ancient Iranian philosophy" label="Old Iranian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="65655" end="65671" title="Greek philosophy" label="Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193104" start="65700" end="65718" title="Islamic philosophy" label="Islamic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q716920" start="65724" end="65743" title="Illumination School" label="Illumination School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272136" start="65752" end="65775" title="Transcendent Philosophy" label="Transcendent Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130378" start="65976" end="65993" title="Persian mythology" label="Iranian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067378" start="66014" end="66030" title="Iranian folklore" label="Iranian folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q10797504" start="66081" end="66094" title="good and evil" label="good and evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q179575" start="66096" end="66107" title="Ahura Mazda" label="Ahura Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q223805" start="66112" end="66119" title="Ahriman" label="Ahriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43459" start="66217" end="66225" title="Ferdowsi" label="Ferdowsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521512" start="66248" end="66261" title="national epic" label="national epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8279" start="66281" end="66290" title="Shahnameh" label="Shahnameh"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="66389" end="66403" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="66505" end="66516" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83426" start="66550" end="66556" title="Avesta" label="Avesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187901" start="66562" end="66569" title="Denkard" label="Denkard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193983" start="66575" end="66583" title="Vendidad" label="Vendidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005362" start="66592" end="66602" title="Bundahishn" label="Bundahishn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25763" start="66722" end="66734" title="Greater Iran" label="Greater Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="66762" end="66771" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="66773" end="66785" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="66787" end="66797" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="66803" end="66816" title="Transcaucasia" label="Transcaucasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953291" start="66827" end="66842" title="culture of Iran" label="culture of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q989963" start="66875" end="66887" title="Storytelling" label="Storytelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="67081" end="67090" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495709" start="67094" end="67099" title="Gusans" label="gōsān"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="67112" end="67121" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="67146" end="67160" title="Safavid Iran" label="Safavid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="67230" end="67248" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q85976400" start="67282" end="67287" title="Ministry of Cultural Heritage, Tourism and Handicrafts" label="MCHTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631008" start="67529" end="67552" title="National Museum of Iran" label="National Museum of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="67556" end="67562" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961339" start="67692" end="67714" title="Museum of Ancient Iran" label="Museum of Ancient Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607574" start="67723" end="67748" title="Museum of the Islamic Era" label="Museum of the Islamic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q210610" start="68089" end="68104" title="Golestan Palace" label="Golestan Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="68106" end="68125" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949273" start="68128" end="68159" title="Treasury of National Jewels" label="The Treasury of National Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319720" start="68161" end="68179" title="Reza Abbasi Museum" label="Reza Abbasi Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756399" start="68181" end="68214" title="Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art" label="Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969012" start="68216" end="68237" title="Sa&amp;#x27;dabad Complex" label="Sa&amp;#x27;dabad Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q970335" start="68239" end="68256" title="Carpet Museum of Iran" label="The Carpet Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479500" start="68258" end="68272" title="Abgineh Museum of Tehran" label="Abgineh Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q846317" start="68274" end="68285" title="Pars Museum" label="Pars Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q723951" start="68287" end="68304" title="Azerbaijan Museum" label="Azerbaijan Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q55724880" start="68541" end="68553" title="angular harp" label="angular harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109678" start="68591" end="68602" title="Kul-e Farah" label="Kul-e Farah"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="68635" end="68639" title="Elam" label="Elam"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="68682" end="68690" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145374" start="68704" end="68714" title="Cyropaedia" label="Cyropaedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="68764" end="68781" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="68793" end="68808" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495709" start="68820" end="68825" title="Gusans" label="gōsān"/>
<link wikidata="Q25953" start="68833" end="68841" title="Parthian language" label="Parthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425759" start="68906" end="68920" title="Sasanian music" label="Sasanian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q212732" start="69027" end="69037" title="Khosrow II" label="Khosrow II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853546" start="69105" end="69112" title="Bamshad" label="Bamshad"/>
<link wikidata="Q970487" start="69114" end="69120" title="Barbad" label="Barbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882328" start="69122" end="69128" title="Nagisa (harpist)" label="Nagisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425759" start="69142" end="69149" title="Sarkash" label="Sarkash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956018" start="69226" end="69231" title="chang (instrument)" label="chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="69233" end="69237" title="harp" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q904646" start="69240" end="69245" title="qanun (instrument)" label="qanun"/>
<link wikidata="Q504847" start="69247" end="69253" title="santur" label="santur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4399245" start="69255" end="69258" title="rud" label="rud"/>
<link wikidata="Q191000" start="69260" end="69263" title="oud" label="oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q807780" start="69265" end="69271" title="barbat (lute)" label="barbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q546936" start="69274" end="69277" title="tar (string instrument)" label="tar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143814" start="69279" end="69284" title="dutar" label="dotar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544746" start="69286" end="69291" title="setar" label="setar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424319" start="69293" end="69299" title="tanbur" label="tanbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q290951" start="69305" end="69313" title="kamancheh" label="kamanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q825246" start="69340" end="69345" title="sorna" label="sorna"/>
<link wikidata="Q230471" start="69347" end="69352" title="zurna" label="zurna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452218" start="69354" end="69359" title="karnay" label="karna"/>
<link wikidata="Q743836" start="69365" end="69368" title="ney" label="ney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574843" start="69405" end="69411" title="tonbak" label="tompak"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070015" start="69413" end="69416" title="kus" label="kus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="69418" end="69421" title="daf" label="daf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="69423" end="69429" title="dayereh" label="dayere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898734" start="69436" end="69442" title="naqareh" label="naqare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980660" start="69487" end="69512" title="Tehran Symphony Orchestra" label="Tehran Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082939" start="69554" end="69570" title="Ruhollah Khaleqi" label="Ruhollah Khaleqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170257" start="69681" end="69698" title="Iranian pop music" label="Iranian pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="69835" end="69850" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396829" start="69887" end="69899" title="Iranian rock" label="Iranian rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q840748" start="69925" end="69932" title="Iranian hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q201022" start="70319" end="70329" title="folk dance" label="folk dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="70569" end="70578" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199945" start="70797" end="70820" title="classical Persian dance" label="classical Persian dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q483236" start="70946" end="70952" title="Nowruz" label="Norouz"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="71167" end="71174" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="71252" end="71264" title="civilization" label="civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43459" start="71266" end="71274" title="Ferdowsi" label="Ferdowsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077286" start="71311" end="71319" title="Keyumars" label="Keyumars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="71339" end="71357" title="Animal skin" label="animals&amp;#x27; skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638892" start="71401" end="71408" title="Hushang" label="Hushang"/>
<link wikidata="Q519239" start="71429" end="71437" title="Tahmuras" label="Tahmuras"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="71454" end="71461" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170231" start="71674" end="71690" title="Persian clothing" label="Persian clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025825" start="71908" end="71918" title="Shahr-e Sukhteh" label="Burnt City"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="72155" end="72172" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q650706" start="72216" end="72243" title="Mirza Ebrahim Khan Akkas Bashi" label="Mirza Ebrahim (Akkas Bashi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q467021" start="72271" end="72286" title="Mozaffar ad-Din Shah Qajar" label="Mozaffar-ed-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="72294" end="72306" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Qajar Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874832" start="72400" end="72428" title="Mirza Ebrahim Khan Sahhafbashi" label="Mirza Ebrahim (Sahhaf Bashi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880418" start="72509" end="72521" title="Abi and Rabi" label="Abi and Rabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113240" start="72561" end="72575" title="Ovanes Ohanian" label="Ovanes Ohanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033823" start="72612" end="72620" title="Lor Girl" label="Lor Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q639084" start="72644" end="72658" title="Ardeshir Irani" label="Ardeshir Irani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821328" start="72663" end="72684" title="Abdolhossein Sepanta" label="Abd-ol-Hosein Sepanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728199" start="72801" end="72872" title="Institute for the Intellectual Development of Children and Young Adults" label="Institute for the Intellectual Development of Children and Young Adults"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759981" start="72920" end="72926" title="Qeysar (film)" label="Qeysar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214152" start="72943" end="72950" title="The Cow (1969 film)" label="The Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101208" start="72970" end="72983" title="Masoud Kimiai" label="Masoud Kimiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166019" start="72988" end="73003" title="Dariush Mehrjui" label="Dariush Mehrjui"/>
<link wikidata="Q803646" start="73103" end="73116" title="Bahram Beyzai" label="Bahram Beyzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945989" start="73130" end="73138" title="Downpour (film)" label="Downpour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817346" start="73149" end="73163" title="Nasser Taghvai" label="Nasser Taghvai"/>
<link wikidata="Q955802" start="73461" end="73480" title="Iranian Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q923365" start="73559" end="73572" title="Khosrow Sinai" label="Khosrow Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q55210" start="73614" end="73630" title="Abbas Kiarostami" label="Abbas Kiarostami"/>
<link wikidata="Q31637" start="73635" end="73647" title="Jafar Panahi" label="Jafar Panahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q794178" start="73757" end="73772" title="Taste of Cherry" label="Taste of Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="73866" end="73872" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="73874" end="73880" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="73885" end="73891" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334242" start="74048" end="74062" title="Asghar Farhadi" label="Asghar Farhadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="74100" end="74118" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="74127" end="74140" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q640561" start="74221" end="74233" title="A Separation" label="A Separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22344480" start="74250" end="74262" title="The Salesman (2016 film)" label="The Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q27067379" start="74279" end="74294" title="Ashkan Rahgozar" label="Ashkan Rahgozar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27636108" start="74308" end="74324" title="The Last Fiction" label="The Last Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q106800" start="74421" end="74442" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Feature" label="Best Animated Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="74447" end="74459" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="74478" end="74492" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338926" start="74638" end="74644" title="Siyâvash" label="Siāvaڑ"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="74736" end="74745" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="74750" end="74758" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q854836" start="75040" end="75051" title="shadow play" label="shadow play"/>
<link wikidata="Q189888" start="75070" end="75080" title="marionette" label="marionette"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="75100" end="75108" title="puppetry" label="puppetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576885" start="75115" end="75126" title="Ta&amp;#x27;zieh" label="Ta&amp;#x27;zie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389872" start="75159" end="75171" title="Roudaki Hall" label="Roudaki Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980660" start="75187" end="75212" title="Tehran Symphony Orchestra" label="Tehran Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067305" start="75250" end="75281" title="Iranian National Ballet Company" label="Iranian National Ballet Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389872" start="75316" end="75327" title="Vahdat Hall" label="Vahdat Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674127" start="75429" end="75433" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting" label="IRIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445474" start="75439" end="75479" title="Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance" label="Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711347" start="75503" end="75518" title="cultural policy" label="cultural policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250634" start="75595" end="75623" title="list of newspapers in Iran" label="newspapers published in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859569" start="75788" end="75794" title="Etemad" label="Etemad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371762" start="75808" end="75822" title="Ettela&amp;#x27;at" label="Ettela&amp;#x27;at"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468962" start="75836" end="75842" title="Kayhan" label="Kayhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574046" start="75856" end="75865" title="Hamshahri" label="Hamshahri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314924" start="75879" end="75886" title="Resalat (newspaper)" label="Resalat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819149" start="75904" end="75910" title="Shargh" label="Shargh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708943" start="75924" end="75936" title="Tehran Times" label="Tehran Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859757" start="75950" end="75960" title="Iran (newspaper)" label="Iran Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q20110716" start="75978" end="75995" title="Financial Tribune" label="Financial Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="76089" end="76126" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="countries by number of Internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366" start="76128" end="76141" title="Google Search" label="Google Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="76192" end="76201" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="76229" end="76254" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="76344" end="76352" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="76414" end="76424" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5678438" start="76465" end="76473" title="Digikala" label="Digikala"/>
<link wikidata="Q179010" start="76633" end="76638" title="kebab" label="kebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q485796" start="76640" end="76645" title="pilaf" label="pilaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="76647" end="76651" title="stew" label="stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685351" start="76653" end="76660" title="khoresh" label="khoresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="76663" end="76667" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822751" start="76672" end="76675" title="āsh" label="āsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q20129" start="76681" end="76689" title="omelette" label="omelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="76768" end="76774" title="yogurt" label="yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q836538" start="76778" end="76790" title="Tzatziki" label="mast-o-khiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25044638" start="76792" end="76797" title="Sabzi khordan" label="sabzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674757" start="76799" end="76812" title="Shirazi salad" label="salad Shirazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12012266" start="76818" end="76824" title="Tursu" label="torshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q893318" start="76858" end="76864" title="borani" label="borani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994988" start="76866" end="76878" title="Mirza Ghassemi" label="Mirza Qasemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937065" start="76883" end="76899" title="kashk e bademjan" label="kashk e bademjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986506" start="77046" end="77052" title="Faloodeh" label="falude"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711624" start="77114" end="77129" title="Bastani Sonnati" label="Bastani Sonnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190074" start="77209" end="77221" title="carrot juice" label="carrot juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q186385" start="77251" end="77257" title="caviar" label="caviar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="77308" end="77312" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="77318" end="77322" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="77324" end="77333" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009" start="77339" end="77343" title="Nut (fruit)" label="nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509910" start="77345" end="77350" title="List of culinary herbs and spices" label="Herbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="77398" end="77402" title="plum" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13188" start="77405" end="77416" title="pomegranate" label="pomegranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43300" start="77419" end="77425" title="quince" label="quince"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766526" start="77427" end="77432" title="prune" label="prune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733836" start="77435" end="77442" title="apricot" label="apricot"/>
<link wikidata="Q13186" start="77448" end="77454" title="raisin" label="raisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="77511" end="77518" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625808" start="77520" end="77528" title="cardamom" label="cardamom"/>
<link wikidata="Q460570" start="77534" end="77544" title="dried lime" label="dried lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="77582" end="77590" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="77592" end="77600" title="turmeric" label="turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="77605" end="77612" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="77706" end="77710" title="polo" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8735" start="77789" end="77794" title="Medes" label="Medes"/>
<link wikidata="Q327223" start="77796" end="77815" title="Freestyle wrestling" label="Freestyle wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050260" start="77848" end="77862" title="national sport" label="national sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067091" start="77868" end="77889" title="Iran national freestyle wrestling athletes" label="Iran&amp;#x27;s wrestlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760586" start="77976" end="77993" title="Pahlevani and zoorkhaneh rituals" label="koڑti e pahlevāni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045672" start="78110" end="78136" title="National Olympic Committee of the Islamic Republic of Iran" label="National Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83462" start="78172" end="78185" title="Olympic weightlifting" label="weightlifters"/>
<link wikidata="Q832980" start="78227" end="78250" title="Iran at the Olympics" label="records at the Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q483463" start="78316" end="78327" title="Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="78376" end="78382" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178131" start="78384" end="78396" title="snowboarding" label="snowboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="78398" end="78404" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="78406" end="78419" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="78425" end="78442" title="mountaineering" label="mountain climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811977" start="78493" end="78499" title="Tochal Complex" label="Tochal"/>
<link wikidata="Q259613" start="78501" end="78506" title="Dizin" label="Dizin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14889394" start="78512" end="78520" title="Shemshak (ski resort)" label="Shemshak"/>
<link wikidata="Q212928" start="78562" end="78565" title="International Ski and Snowboard Federation" label="FIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297862" start="78609" end="78617" title="Football in Iran" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q184602" start="78654" end="78678" title="Iran national football team" label="men&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q157894" start="78694" end="78703" title="AFC Asian Cup" label="Asian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q125351662" start="78771" end="78790" title="FIFA World Rankings" label="FIFA World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q653535" start="78797" end="78810" title="Azadi Stadium" label="Azadi Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334462" start="78999" end="79039" title="Asian Men&amp;#x27;s Volleyball Championship" label="Asian Men&amp;#x27;s Volleyball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q932162" start="79046" end="79070" title="Iran men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="men&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475759" start="79117" end="79136" title="FIVB World Rankings" label="FIVB World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="79139" end="79149" title="Basketball" label="Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465546" start="79176" end="79200" title="Iran national basketball team" label="men&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q810308" start="79218" end="79237" title="FIBA Asia Championship" label="Asian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q34812" start="79293" end="79301" title="New Year" label="New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q483236" start="79314" end="79320" title="Nowruz" label="Nowruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="79378" end="79392" title="equinox" label="vernal equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q877988" start="79491" end="79551" title="Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity" label="Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372493" start="79665" end="79678" title="Chaharshanbe Suri" label="بārڑanbe Suri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272422" start="79690" end="79694" title="Atar" label="Ātar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9505308" start="79757" end="79764" title="bonfire" label="bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="79779" end="79788" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328626" start="79791" end="79796" title="Yaldā Night" label="Yaldā"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="79858" end="79864" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q207932" start="79923" end="79938" title="winter solstice" label="winter solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q308864" start="80052" end="80062" title="Mazandaran Province" label="Mazanderan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134417" start="80067" end="80074" title="Markazi Province" label="Markazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603898" start="80087" end="80096" title="summer solstice" label="midsummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135034" start="80107" end="80113" title="Tirgan" label="Tirgān"/>
<link wikidata="Q47276" start="80136" end="80139" title="Tir (month)" label="Tir"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="80214" end="80221" title="Ramadan" label="Ramezān"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="80223" end="80233" title="Eid al-Fitr" label="Eid e Fetr"/>
<link wikidata="Q183283" start="80239" end="80250" title="Ashura" label="Ruz e Āڑurā"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="80325" end="80329" title="Christmas" label="Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="80331" end="80343" title="Lent" label="elle ye Ruze"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="80349" end="80358" title="Easter" label="Eid e Pāk"/>
<link wikidata="Q130881" start="80428" end="80434" title="Hanukkah" label="Hanukā"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="80439" end="80450" title="Passover" label="Eid e Fatir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070318" start="80534" end="80538" title="Sadeh" label="Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q749563" start="80543" end="80550" title="Mehregan" label="Mehrgān"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124644" start="80762" end="80779" title="civil calendar" label="official calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q950135" start="80787" end="80807" title="Solar Hijri calendar" label="Solar Hejri calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="80826" end="80840" title="March equinox" label="vernal equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="80848" end="80867" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795024" start="80937" end="80948" title="astrological sign" label="zodiac sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81007" end="81027" title="Islamic calendar" label="Lunar Hejri calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="81072" end="81090" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46433" start="81223" end="81232" title="Farvardin" label="Farvardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46433" start="81267" end="81276" title="Farvardin" label="Farvardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675742" start="81318" end="81338" title="Iranian Islamic Republic Day" label="Islamic Republic Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q46433" start="81340" end="81349" title="Farvardin" label="Farvardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="81376" end="81393" title="Ruhollah Khomeini" label="Ruhollah Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q46982" start="81395" end="81402" title="Khordad" label="Khordad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496712" start="81419" end="81435" title="5 June 1963, demonstrations in Iran" label="Khordad 15 event"/>
<link wikidata="Q46982" start="81437" end="81444" title="Khordad" label="Khordad"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="81480" end="81498" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41497" start="81500" end="81506" title="Bahman" label="Bahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962148" start="81529" end="81552" title="Nationalization of the Iranian oil industry" label="Oil Nationalisation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q41501" start="81554" end="81560" title="Esfand" label="Esfand"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81622" end="81630" title="Islamic calendar" label="Muharram"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81643" end="81651" title="Islamic calendar" label="Muharram"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81672" end="81677" title="Islamic calendar" label="Safar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81706" end="81711" title="Islamic calendar" label="Safar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81744" end="81749" title="Islamic calendar" label="Safar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81787" end="81800" title="Islamic calendar" label="Rabi-al-Awwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81828" end="81843" title="Islamic calendar" label="Jumada-al-Thani"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81869" end="81874" title="Islamic calendar" label="Rajab"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81914" end="81919" title="Islamic calendar" label="Rajab"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81960" end="81972" title="Islamic calendar" label="Sha&amp;#x27;ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="81996" end="82003" title="Islamic calendar" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="82022" end="82029" title="Islamic calendar" label="Shawwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="82071" end="82078" title="Islamic calendar" label="Shawwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="82099" end="82107" title="Islamic calendar" label="Zulhijja"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="82131" end="82139" title="Islamic calendar" label="Zulhijja"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112300" start="82164" end="82179" title="Outline of Iran" label="Outline of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="82402" end="82421" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="82599" end="82617" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="82625" end="82652" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14664" wikidata="Q695980" url="?curid=14664" title="History of Iraq">
<text>Iraq, a country located in West Asia, largely coincides with the ancient region of Mesopotamia, often referred to as the cradle of civilization. The history of Mesopotamia extends back to the Lower Paleolithic period, with significant developments continuing through the establishment of the Caliphate in the late 7th century AD, after which the region became known as Iraq. Within its borders lies the ancient land of Sumer, which emerged between 6000 and 5000 BC during the Neolithic Ubaid period. Sumer is recognized as the world’s earliest civilization, marking the beginning of urban development, written language, and monumental architecture. Iraq&#x27;s territory also includes the heartlands of the Akkadian, Neo-Sumerian, Babylonian, Neo-Assyrian, and Neo-Babylonian empires, which dominated Mesopotamia and much of the Ancient Near East during the Bronze and Iron Ages.

Iraq was a center of innovation in antiquity, producing early written languages, literary works, and significant advancements in astronomy, mathematics, law, and philosophy. This era of indigenous rule ended in 539 BC when the Neo-Babylonian Empire was conquered by the Achaemenid Empire under Cyrus the Great, who declared himself the &quot;King of Babylon.&quot; The city of Babylon, the ancient seat of Babylonian power, became one of the key capitals of the Achaemenid Empire.

In the following centuries, the regions constituting modern Iraq came under the control of several empires, including the Greeks, Parthians, and Romans, establishing new centers like Seleucia and Ctesiphon. By the 3rd century AD, the region fell under Persian control through the Sasanian Empire, during which time Arab tribes from South Arabia migrated into Lower Mesopotamia, leading to the formation of the Sassanid-aligned Lakhmid kingdom. The Arabic name &quot;al-ʿIrāq&quot; likely originated during this period. The Sasanian Empire was eventually conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate in the 7th century, bringing Iraq under Islamic rule after the Battle of al-Qadisiyyah in 636. The city of Kufa, founded shortly thereafter, became a central hub for the Rashidun dynasty until their overthrow by the Umayyads in 661.

With the rise of the Abbasid Caliphate in the mid-8th century, Iraq became the center of Islamic rule, with Baghdad, founded in 762, serving as the capital. Baghdad flourished during the Islamic Golden Age, becoming a global center for culture, science, and intellectualism. However, the city&#x27;s prosperity declined following the Buwayhid and Seljuq invasions in the 10th century and suffered further with the Mongol invasion of 1258. Iraq later came under the control of the Ottoman Empire in the 16th century, remaining under Ottoman rule until the end of World War I, after which Mandatory Iraq was established by the British Empire. Iraq gained independence in 1932 as the Kingdom of Iraq, which became a republic in 1958. The modern era has seen Iraq facing challenges, including the rule of Saddam Hussein, the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and subsequent efforts to rebuild the country amidst sectarian violence and the rise of the Islamic State. Despite these difficulties, Iraq plays a vital role in the geopolitics of the Middle East.

== Prehistory ==

Between 65,000 BC and 35,000 BC, northern Iraq was home to a Neanderthal culture, archaeological remains of which have been discovered at Shanidar Cave. During 1957–1961, Shanidar Cave was excavated by Ralph Solecki and his team from Columbia University, uncovering nine skeletons of Neanderthal man of varying ages and states of preservation (labelled Shanidar I–IX). A tenth individual was later discovered by M. Zeder during examination of a faunal assemblage from the site at the Smithsonian Institution. The remains seemed to suggest that Neanderthals had funeral ceremonies, burying their dead with flowers (although the flowers are now thought to be a modern contaminant), and that they took care of injured and elderly individuals.

This region is also the location of a number of pre-Neolithic burials, dating from approximately 11,000 BC. Since approximately 10,000 BC, Iraq, together with a large part of the Fertile Crescent, was a center of a Neolithic culture known as Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA), where agriculture and cattle breeding appeared for the first time. In Iraq, this period has been excavated at sites like M&#x27;lefaat and Nemrik 9. The following Neolithic period, PPNB, is represented by rectangular houses. At the time of the pre-pottery Neolithic, people used vessels made of stone, gypsum, and burnt lime (Vaisselle blanche). Finds of obsidian tools from Anatolia are evidence of early trade relations. Further important sites of human advancement were Jarmo (circa 7100 BC), a number of sites belonging to the Halaf culture, and Tell al-&#x27;Ubaid, the type site of the Ubaid period (between 6500 BC and 3800 BC).

== Ancient Mesopotamia ==
Mesopotamia is the site of the earliest developments of the Neolithic Revolution from around 10,000 BC. It has been identified as having &quot;inspired some of the most important developments in human history including the invention of the wheel, the planting of the first cereal crops, and the development of cursive script, mathematics, astronomy, and agriculture.&quot;

The &quot;Cradle of Civilisation&quot; is a common term for the area comprising modern Iraq as it was home to the earliest known civilisation, the Sumerian civilisation, which arose in the fertile Tigris-Euphrates river valley of southern Iraq in the Chalcolithic (Ubaid period). It was there, in the late 4th millennium BC, that the world&#x27;s first known writing system emerged. The Sumerians were also the first known to harness the wheel and create city-states; their writings record the first known evidence of mathematics, astronomy, astrology, written law, medicine, and organised religion. The Sumerian language is a language isolate. The major city-states of the early Sumerian period included Eridu, Bad-tibira, Larsa, Sippar, Shuruppak, Uruk, Kish, Ur, Nippur, Lagash, Girsu, Umma, Hamazi, Adab, Mari, Isin, Kutha, Der, and Akshak. The cities to the north, like Ashur, Arbela (modern Erbil), and Arrapha (modern Kirkuk), were also extant in what was to be called Assyria from the 25th century BC; however, at this stage, they were Sumerian-ruled administrative centers.

=== Bronze Age ===

Sumer emerged as the civilization of Lower Mesopotamia out of the prehistoric Ubaid period (mid-6th millennium BC) in the Early Bronze Age (Uruk period). Classical Sumer ended with the rise of the Akkadian Empire in the 24th century BC. Following the Gutian period, the Ur III kingdom was once again able to unite large parts of southern and central Mesopotamia under a single ruler in the 21st century. It may have eventually disintegrated due to Amorite incursions. The Amorite dynasty of Isin persisted until c. 1600 BC, when southern Mesopotamia was united under Kassite Babylonian rule.

During the Bronze Age, in the 26th century BC, Eannatum of Lagash created a short-lived empire. Later, Lugal-Zage-Si, the priest-king of Umma, overthrew the primacy of the Lagash dynasty in the area, then conquered Uruk, making it his capital, and claimed an empire extending from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean. It was during this period that the Epic of Gilgamesh originated, which includes the tale of The Great Flood. The origin and location of Akkad remain unclear. Its people spoke Akkadian, an East Semitic language. Between the 29th and 24th centuries BC, a number of kingdoms and city-states within Iraq began to have Akkadian-speaking dynasties, including Assyria, Ekallatum, Isin, and Larsa. However, the Sumerians remained generally dominant until the rise of the Akkadian Empire (2335–2124 BC), based in the city of Akkad in central Iraq. Sargon of Akkad founded the empire, conquered all the city-states of southern and central Iraq, and subjugated the kings of Assyria, thus uniting the Sumerians and Akkadians in one state. The Akkadian Empire was the first ancient empire of Mesopotamia after the long-lived civilization of Sumer.

He then set about expanding his empire, conquering Gutium, Elam in modern-day Iran, and had victories that did not result in full conquest against the Amorites and Eblaites of the Levant. The empire of Akkad likely fell in the 22nd century BC, within 180 years of its founding, ushering in a &quot;Dark Age&quot; with no prominent imperial authority until the Third Dynasty of Ur. The region&#x27;s political structure may have reverted to the &quot;status quo ante&quot; of local governance by city-states.

After the collapse of the Akkadian Empire in the late 22nd century BC, the Gutians occupied the south for a few decades, while Assyria reasserted its independence in the north. Most of southern Mesopotamia was again united under one ruler during the Ur III period, most notably during the rule of the prolific king Shulgi. His accomplishments include the completion of construction of the Great Ziggurat of Ur, begun by his father Ur-Nammu. In 1792 BC, an Amorite ruler named Hammurabi came to power and immediately set about building Babylon into a major city, declaring himself its king. Hammurabi conquered southern and central Iraq, as well as Elam to the east and Mari to the west, then engaged in a protracted war with the Assyrian king Ishme-Dagan for domination of the region, creating the short-lived Babylonian Empire. He eventually prevailed over the successor of Ishme-Dagan and subjected Assyria and its Anatolian colonies. By the middle of the eighteenth century BC, the Sumerians had lost their cultural identity and ceased to exist as a distinct people.

It is from the period of Hammurabi that southern Iraq came to be known as Babylonia, while the north had already coalesced into Assyria hundreds of years before. However, his empire was short-lived, and rapidly collapsed after his death, with both Assyria and southern Iraq, in the form of the Sealand Dynasty, falling back into native Akkadian hands. After this, another foreign people, the language-isolate-speaking Kassites, seized control of Babylonia. Iraq was from this point divided into three polities: Assyria in the north, Kassite Babylonia in the south-central region, and the Sealand Dynasty in the far south. The Sealand Dynasty was finally conquered by Kassite Babylonia circa 1380 BC. The origin of the Kassites is uncertain.

The Middle Assyrian Empire (1365–1020 BC) saw Assyria rise to be the most powerful nation in the known world. Beginning with the campaigns of Ashur-uballit I, Assyria destroyed the rival Hurrian-Mitanni Empire, annexed huge swathes of the Hittite Empire for itself, annexed northern Babylonia from the Kassites, forced the Egyptian Empire from the region, and defeated the Elamites, Phrygians, Canaanites, Phoenicians, Cilicians, Gutians, Dilmunites, and Arameans. At its height, the Middle Assyrian Empire stretched from The Caucasus to Dilmun (modern Bahrain), and from the Mediterranean coasts of Phoenicia to the Zagros Mountains of Iran. In 1235 BC, Tukulti-Ninurta I of Assyria took the throne of Babylon.

During the Bronze Age collapse (1200–900 BC), Babylonia was in a state of chaos, dominated for long periods by Assyria and Elam. The Kassites were driven from power by Assyria and Elam, allowing native south Mesopotamian kings to rule Babylonia for the first time, although often subject to Assyrian or Elamite rulers. However, these Akkadian kings were unable to prevent new waves of West Semitic migrants from entering southern Iraq, and during the 11th century BC, Arameans and Suteans entered Babylonia from The Levant, followed in the late 10th to early 9th century BC by the Chaldeans. However, the Chaldeans were absorbed and assimilated into the indigenous population of Babylonia.

Assyria was an Akkadian (East Semitic) kingdom in Upper Mesopotamia, that came to rule regional empires a number of times through history. It was named for its original capital, the ancient city of Assur (Akkadian &quot;&quot;).

Of the early history of the kingdom of Assyria, little is positively known. In the Assyrian King List, the earliest king recorded was Tudiya. He was a contemporary of Ibrium of Ebla, who appears to have lived in the late 25th or early 24th century BC, according to the king list. The foundation of the first true urbanised Assyrian monarchy was traditionally ascribed to Ushpia, a contemporary of Ishbi-Erra of Isin and Naplanum of Larsa. c. 2030 BC.

Assyria had a period of empire from the 19th to 18th centuries BC. From the 14th to 11th centuries BC, Assyria once more became a major power with the rise of the Middle Assyrian Empire.
=== Iron Age ===

The Neo-Assyrian Empire (911–609 BC) was the dominant political force in the Ancient Near East during the Iron Age, eclipsing Babylonia, Egypt, Urartu, and Elam. Because of its geopolitical dominance and ideology based on world domination, the Neo-Assyrian Empire is regarded by many researchers as the first world empire. At its height, the empire ruled over all of Mesopotamia, the Levant, and Egypt, as well as portions of Anatolia, the Arabian Peninsula, and modern-day Iran and Armenia. Under rulers such as Adad-Nirari II, Ashurnasirpal, Shalmaneser III, Semiramis, Tiglath-pileser III, Sargon II, Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, and Ashurbanipal, Iraq became the center of an empire stretching from Persia, Parthia, and Elam in the east to Cyprus and Antioch in the west, and from The Caucasus in the north to Egypt, Nubia, and Arabia in the south.

It was during this period that an Akkadian-influenced form of Eastern Aramaic was adopted by the Assyrians as their lingua franca, and Mesopotamian Aramaic began to supplant Akkadian as the spoken language of the general populace of both Assyria and Babylonia. The descendant dialects of this tongue survive among the Mandaeans of southern Iraq and Assyrians of northern Iraq. The Arabs and the Chaldeans are first mentioned in written history (circa 850 BC) in the annals of Shalmaneser III. The Neo-Assyrian Empire left a legacy of great cultural significance. The political structures established by the Neo-Assyrian Empire became the model for the later empires that succeeded it, and the ideology of universal rule promulgated by the Neo-Assyrian kings inspired similar ideas of rights to world domination in later empires. The Neo-Assyrian Empire became an important part of later folklore and literary traditions in northern Mesopotamia. Judaism, and thus in turn also Christianity and Islam, was profoundly affected by the period of Neo-Assyrian rule; numerous Biblical stories appear to draw on earlier Assyrian mythology and history, and the Assyrian impact on early Jewish theology was immense. Although the Neo-Assyrian Empire is prominently remembered today for the supposed excessive brutality of the Neo-Assyrian army, the Assyrians were not excessively brutal compared to other civilizations.

In the late 7th century BC, the Assyrian Empire tore itself apart with a series of brutal civil wars, weakening itself to such a degree that a coalition of its former subjects, including the Babylonians, Chaldeans, Medes, Persians, Parthians, Scythians, and Cimmerians, were able to attack Assyria, finally bringing its empire down by 605 BC.

 The short-lived Neo-Babylonian Empire (626–539 BC) succeeded that of Assyria. It failed to attain the size, power, or longevity of its predecessor; however, it came to dominate The Levant, Canaan, Arabia, Israel, and Judah, and even defeated Egypt. Initially, Babylon was ruled by the Chaldeans, who had migrated to the region in the late 10th or early 9th century BC. Its greatest king, Nebuchadnezzar II, rivaled Hammurabi as the greatest king of Babylon. However, by 556 BC, the Chaldeans had been deposed by the Assyrian-born Nabonidus and his son and regent Belshazzar.

 The transfer of empire to Babylon marked the first time the city, and southern Mesopotamia in general, had risen to dominate the Ancient Near East since the collapse of Hammurabi&#x27;s Old Babylonian Empire. The period of Neo-Babylonian rule saw unprecedented economic and population growth and a renaissance of culture and artwork. Nebuchadnezzar II succeeded Nabopolassar in 605 BC. The empire Nebuchadnezzar inherited was among the most powerful in the world. He quickly reinforced his father&#x27;s alliance with the Medes by marrying Cyaxares&#x27;s daughter or granddaughter, Amytis. Some sources suggest that the famous Hanging Gardens of Babylon, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, were built by Nebuchadnezzar for his wife (though the existence of these gardens is debated). Nebuchadnezzar&#x27;s 43-year reign brought a golden age for Babylon, which became the most powerful kingdom in the Middle East.

The Neo-Babylonian period ended with the reign of Nabonidus in 539 BC. To the east, the Persians had been growing in strength, and eventually Cyrus the Great established his dominion over Babylon. The Chaldeans disappeared around this time, though both Assyria and Babylonia endured and thrived under Achaemenid rule (see Achaemenid Assyria). The Persian rulers retained Assyrian Imperial Aramaic as the language of empire, together with the Assyrian imperial infrastructure and an Assyrian style of art and architecture.

==Classical Antiquity==
===Achaemenid and Seleucid rule===

Mesopotamia was conquered by the Achaemenid Persians under Cyrus the Great in 539 BC, and remained under Persian rule for two centuries.

The Persian Empire fell to Alexander of Macedon in 331 BC and came under Greek rule as part of the Seleucid Empire. Babylon declined after the founding of Seleucia on the Tigris, the new Seleucid Empire capital. The Seleucid Empire at the height of its power stretched from the Aegean in the west to India in the east. It was a major center of Hellenistic culture that maintained the preeminence of Greek customs where a Greek political elite dominated, mostly in the urban areas. The Greek population of the cities who formed the dominant elite were reinforced by immigration from Greece. Much of the eastern part of the empire was conquered by the Parthians under Mithridates I of Parthia in the mid-2nd century BC.

===Parthian and Roman rule===

 At the beginning of the 2nd century AD, the Romans, led by emperor Trajan, invaded Parthia and conquered Mesopotamia, making it an imperial province. It was returned to the Parthians shortly after by Trajan&#x27;s successor, Hadrian.

Christianity reached Mesopotamia in the 1st century AD, and Roman Syria in particular became the center of Eastern Rite Christianity and the Syriac literary tradition. Mandeism is also believed to have either originated there around this time or entered as Mandaeans sought refuge from Palestine.
Sumerian-Akkadian religious tradition disappeared during this period, as did the last remnants of cuneiform literacy, although temples were still being dedicated to the Assyrian national god Ashur in his home city as late as the 4th century.

===Sassanid Empire===

In the 3rd century AD, the Parthians were in turn succeeded by the Sassanid dynasty, which ruled Mesopotamia until the 7th-century Islamic invasion. The Sassanids conquered the independent states of Adiabene, Osroene, Hatra, and finally Assur during the 3rd century. In the mid-6th century, the Persian Empire under the Sassanid dynasty was divided by Khosrow I into four quarters, of which the western one, called &quot;Khvārvarān&quot;, included most of modern Iraq, and was subdivided into the provinces of &quot;Mishān&quot;, Asuristān (Assyria), Adiabene, and Lower Media. The term Iraq is widely used in the medieval Arabic sources for the area in the center and south of the modern republic as a geographic rather than a political term, implying no greater precision of boundaries than the term &quot;Mesopotamia&quot; or, indeed, many of the names of modern states before the 20th century.

There was a substantial influx of Arabs in the Sassanid period. Upper Mesopotamia came to be known as &quot;Al-Jazirah&quot; in Arabic (meaning &quot;The Island&quot; in reference to the &quot;island&quot; between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers), and Lower Mesopotamia came to be known as &quot;ʿIrāq-i ʿArab&quot;, meaning &quot;the escarpment of the Arabs&quot; (viz. to the south and east of &quot;the island&quot;).

Until 602, the desert frontier of the Persian Empire had been guarded by the Arab Lakhmid kings of Al-Hirah. In that year, Shahanshah Khosrow II Aparviz (Persian خسرو پرويز) abolished the Lakhmid kingdom and laid the frontier open to nomad incursions. Farther north, the western quarter was bounded by the Byzantine Empire. The frontier more or less followed the modern Syria-Iraq border and continued northward, passing between Nisibis (modern Nusaybin) as the Sassanian frontier fortress and Dara and Amida (modern Diyarbakır) held by the Byzantines.

== Middle Ages ==
=== Islamic conquest ===

The first organized conflict between invading Arab-Muslim forces and occupying Sassanid domains in Mesopotamia seems to have been in 634, when the Arabs were defeated at the Battle of the Bridge. There was a force of some 5,000 Muslims under Abū `Ubayd ath-Thaqafī, which was routed by the Persians. This was followed by Khalid ibn al-Walid&#x27;s successful campaign, which saw all of Iraq come under Arab rule within a year, with the exception of the Sassanid Empire&#x27;s capital, Ctesiphon. Around 636, a larger Arab Muslim force under Sa`d ibn Abī Waqqās defeated the main Persian army at the Battle of al-Qādisiyyah and moved on to capture Ctesiphon. By the end of 638, the Muslims had conquered all of the Western Sassanid provinces (including modern Iraq), and the last Sassanid Emperor, Yazdegerd III, had fled to central and then northern Persia, where he was killed in 651.

The Islamic expansions constituted the largest of the Semitic expansions in history. These new arrivals established two new garrison cities, at Kufa, near ancient Babylon, and at Basra in the south and established Islam in these cities, while the north remained largely Assyrian and Christian in character.

=== Abbasid Caliphate ===
The city of Baghdad, established in the 8th century as the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate, quickly became the leading cultural and intellectual hub of the Muslim world during the Islamic Golden Age. At its peak, Baghdad was the largest and most multicultural city of the Middle Ages, with a population exceeding a million. However, its prominence was dramatically curtailed in the 13th century when the Mongol Empire sacked the city and destroyed its famed library during the Siege of Baghdad (1258).

In the 9th century, the Abbasid Caliphate entered a period of decline. During the late 9th to early 11th centuries, a period known as the &quot;Iranian Intermezzo&quot;, parts of (the modern territory of) Iraq were governed by a number of minor Iranian emirates, including the Tahirids, Saffarids, Samanids, Buyids and Sallarids. Tughril, the founder of the Seljuk Empire, captured Baghdad in 1055. In spite of having lost all governance, the Abbasid caliphs nevertheless maintained a highly ritualized court in Baghdad and remained influential in religious matters, maintaining the orthodoxy of their Sunni sect in opposition to the Ismaili and Shia sects of Islam.

=== Mongol invasion ===
In the later 11th century, Iraq fell under the rule of the Khwarazmian dynasty. Both Turkic secular rule and Abbasid caliphate came to an end with the Mongol invasions of the 13th century.
The Mongols under Genghis Khan had conquered Khwarezmia by 1221, but Iraq proper gained a respite due to the death of Genghis Khan in 1227 and the subsequent power struggles.
Möngke Khan from 1251 began a renewed expansion of the Mongol Empire, and when caliph al-Mustasim refused to submit to the Mongols, Baghdad was besieged and captured by Hulagu Khan in 1258. With the destruction of the Abbasid Caliphate, Hulagu had an open route to Syria and moved against the other Muslim powers in the region.

=== Turko-Mongol rule ===
Iraq now became a province on the southwestern fringes of the Ilkhanate and Baghdad would never regain its former importance.

The Jalayirids were a Mongol Jalayir dynasty which ruled over Iraq and western Persia after the breakup of the Ilkhanate in the 1330s. The Jalayirid sultanate lasted about fifty years, until disrupted by Tamerlane&#x27;s conquests and the revolts of the &quot;Black Sheep Turks&quot; or Qara Qoyunlu Turkmen. After Tamerlane&#x27;s death in 1405, there was a brief attempt to re-establish the sultanate in southern Iraq and Khuzistan. The Jalayirids were finally eliminated by Kara Koyunlu in 1432.

== Ottoman and Mamluk rule ==
During the late 14th and early 15th centuries, the Qara Qoyunlu, or Black Sheep Turkmens, ruled the area now known as Iraq. In 1466, the Aq Qoyunlu, or White Sheep, defeated the Qara Qoyunlu and took control. From 1508, as with all territories of the former White Sheep Turkmen, Iraq fell into the hands of the Iranian Safavids. With the Treaty of Zuhab in 1639, most of the territory of present-day Iraq came under the control of the Ottoman Empire as the eyalet of Baghdad as a result of wars with the neighboring rival, Safavid Iran. Throughout most of the period of Ottoman rule (1533–1918), the territory of present-day Iraq was a battle zone between rival regional empires and tribal alliances. Iraq was divided into three vilayets:
*Mosul Province
*Baghdad Province
*Basra Province

In the 16th century, the Portuguese commanded by António Tenreiro crossed from Aleppo to Basra in 1523, attempting to make alliances with local lords in the name of the Portuguese king. In 1550, the local kingdom of Basra and tribal rulers relied on the Portuguese against the Ottomans, leading to threats of invasion and conquest by the Portuguese. From 1595, the Portuguese acted as military protectors of Basra, and in 1624, they helped the Ottoman pasha of Basra repel a Persian invasion. The Portuguese were granted a share of customs revenue and exemption from tolls. From approximately 1625 to 1668, Basra and the Delta marshes were in the hands of local chiefs independent of the Ottoman administration in Baghdad. In the 17th century, frequent conflicts with the Safavids sapped the strength of the Ottoman Empire and weakened its control over its provinces. The nomadic population swelled with the influx of bedouins from Najd, leading to raids on settled areas that became difficult to curb.

During the years 1747–1831, Iraq was ruled by a Mamluk dynasty of Georgian origin, who succeeded in obtaining autonomy from the Ottoman Empire. They suppressed tribal revolts, curbed the power of the Janissaries, restored order, and introduced a program of modernization in the economy and military. In 1802, Wahhabis from Najd attacked Karbala in Iraq, killing up to 5,000 people and plundering the Imam Husayn Shrine. In 1831, the Ottomans managed to overthrow the Mamluk regime and reimposed their direct control over Iraq. The population of Iraq, estimated at 30 million in 800 AD, had dwindled to only 5 million by the start of the 20th century.

== 20th century ==
=== British mandate of Mesopotamia ===
Ottoman rule over Iraq lasted until World War I, when the Ottomans sided with Germany and the Central Powers. In the Mesopotamian campaign against the Central Powers, British forces invaded the country and suffered a defeat at the hands of the Turkish army during the Siege of Kut (1915–16). However, the British ultimately won the Mesopotamian Campaign with the capture of Baghdad in March 1917. During the war, the British employed the help of several Assyrian, Armenian, and Arab tribes against the Ottomans, who in turn employed the Kurds as allies. Following the defeat of the Ottoman Empire and its subsequent division, the British Mandate of Mesopotamia was established by the League of Nations mandate.

In line with their &quot;Sharifian Solution&quot; policy, the British established a monarchy on 23 August 1921, with Faisal I of Iraq as king, who was previously King of Syria but was forced out by the French. The official English name of the country simultaneously changed from &quot;Mesopotamia&quot; to the endonymic &quot;Iraq&quot;. Likewise, British authorities selected Sunni Arab elites from the region for appointments to government and ministry offices. The royal family were Hashemites, who were also rulers of the neighboring Emirate of Transjordan, which later became the Kingdom of Jordan.

During the rise of the Zionist movement and Arab nationalism, Faisal envisioned a federation consisting of the modern states of Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, and Palestine, including both modern Palestine and Israel. He also signed the Faisal–Weizmann agreement.

Faced with spiraling costs and influenced by the public protestations of the war hero T. E. Lawrence, Britain replaced Arnold Wilson in October 1920 with a new Civil Commissioner, Sir Percy Cox. Cox managed to quell a rebellion and was also responsible for implementing the policy of close cooperation with Iraq&#x27;s Sunni minority. Slavery was abolished in Iraq in the 1920s. Britain granted independence to the Kingdom of Iraq in 1932, on the urging of King Faisal, though the British retained military bases and local militia in the form of Assyrian Levies. King Ghazi ruled as a figurehead after King Faisal&#x27;s death in 1933. His rule, which lasted until his death in 1939, was undermined by numerous attempted military coups until his death in 1939. His underage son, Faisal II succeeded him, with &#x27;Abd al-Ilah as Regent.

=== Independent Kingdom of Iraq ===
In 1934 Iraq became an oil exporter with the completion of the Kirkuk-Haifa oil pipeline which transported oil from the Kirkuk Field, discovered in 1927, to the Mediterranean coast for shipment to Europe. The first commercial oil production on a small scale for domestic consumption had begun in 1927 from the Naft Khana field on the border with Iran.

Establishment of Arab Sunni domination in Iraq was followed by Assyrian, Yazidi and Shi&#x27;a unrests, which were all brutally suppressed. In 1936, the first military coup took place in the Kingdom of Iraq, as Bakr Sidqi succeeded in replacing the acting Prime Minister with his associate. Multiple coups followed in a period of political instability, peaking in 1941.

During World War II, Iraqi regime of Regent &#x27;Abd al-Ilah was overthrown in 1941 by the Golden Square officers, headed by Rashid Ali. The short lived pro-Nazi government of Iraq was defeated in May 1941 by the allied forces (with local Assyrian and Kurdish help) in the Anglo-Iraqi War. Iraq was later used as a base for allied attacks on Vichy-French held Mandate of Syria and support for the Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran.

In 1945, Iraq joined the United Nations and became a founding member of the Arab League. At the same time, the Kurdish leader Mustafa Barzani led a rebellion against the central government in Baghdad. After the failure of the uprising, Barzani and his followers fled to the Soviet Union.

In 1948, massive violent protests known as the Al-Wathbah uprising broke out across Baghdad with partial communist support, having demands against the government&#x27;s treaty with Britain. Protests continued into spring and were interrupted in May when martial law was enforced as Iraq entered the failed 1948 Arab–Israeli War along with other Arab League members.

In February 1958, King Hussein of Jordan and `Abd al-Ilāh proposed a union of Hāshimite monarchies to counter the recently formed Egyptian-Syrian union. The prime minister Nuri as-Said wanted Kuwait to be part of the proposed Arab-Hāshimite Union. Shaykh `Abd-Allāh as-Salīm, the ruler of Kuwait, was invited to Baghdad to discuss Kuwait&#x27;s future. This policy brought the government of Iraq into direct conflict with Britain, which did not want to grant independence to Kuwait. At that point, the monarchy found itself completely isolated. Nuri as-Said was able to contain the rising discontent only by resorting to even greater political oppression.

=== Republic of Iraq ===
In 1958, inspired by Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, officers from the Nineteenth Brigade, 3rd Division, known as &quot;The Four Colonels,&quot; under the leadership of Brigadier Abd al-Karīm Qāsim (known as &quot;az-Za`īm&quot;, &#x27;the leader&#x27;) and Colonel Abdul Salam Arif overthrew the Hashemite monarchy on July 14, 1958. The new government proclaimed Iraq to be a republic and rejected the idea of a union with Jordan. Iraq&#x27;s activity in the Baghdad Pact ceased.

This revolution was strongly anti-imperial and anti-monarchical in nature and had strong socialist elements. Numerous people were killed in the coup, including King Faisal II, Prince Abd al-Ilah, and Nuri al-Sa&#x27;id, as well as members of the royal family, which came to be known as the &quot;Royal family massacre&quot;. After burial, their bodies were dragged through the streets of Baghdad by their opponents and mutilated. The short-lived federation between Jordan and Iraq was abolished by King Hussein following the coup in 1958.

Abd al-Karim Qasim promoted a civic nationalism in Iraq, which asserted the belief that Iraqis are a nation and emphasized the cultural unity of Iraqis of different ethnoreligious groups such as Mesopotamian Arabs, Kurds, Turkmens, Assyrians, Yazidis, Mandeans, Yarsans, and others. His vision of nationalism involved the recognition of an Iraqi identity stemming from ancient Mesopotamia, including its civilizations of Sumer, Akkad, Babylonia, and Assyria.

Qasim controlled Iraq through military rule and began forcibly redistributing surplus land owned by some citizens in 1958. The Iraqi state emblem under Qasim was largely based on the Mesopotamian symbol of Shamash, avoiding pan-Arab symbolism by incorporating elements of Socialist heraldry. Under Qasim, freedom of religion was granted to religious minorities, and early restrictions on Jews were removed, leading to their reintegration into society.

Qasim&#x27;s political ideologies were based on Iraqi nationalism instead of Arab nationalism, and he refused to join Gamal Abdel Nasser&#x27;s political union between Egypt and Syria, known as the United Arab Republic. In 1959, Colonel Abd al-Wahab al-Shawaf led an uprising in Mosul against Qasim with the aim of joining the United Arab Republic, but was defeated by the government.

Iraq withdrew from the Baghdad Pact in 1959, leading to strained relations with the West and developing a close alliance with the Soviet Union. Qasim began claiming Kuwait as part of Iraq when it was officially declared an independent country in 1961. During Ottoman rule, Kuwait was part of Basra Province and was separated by the British to establish the Kuwait protectorate. In response, the United Kingdom sent its armed forces to the Iraq–Kuwait border, and Qasim was forced to back down.

In 1961, Kurdish nationalist movements, led by Mustafa Barzani&#x27;s Kurdistan Democratic Party, launched an armed rebellion against the Iraqi government, seeking Kurdish autonomy. The government faced challenges in quelling the Kurdish uprising, leading to intermittent conflict between Kurdish forces and the Iraqi military. The armed rebellion escalated into war, which officially lasted for nine years until 1970, during which numerous coups occurred.

====Ba&#x27;athist Iraq====
Qāsim was assassinated in February 1963 when the Ba&#x27;ath Party took power under the leadership of General Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr (prime minister) and Colonel Abdul Salam Arif (president). In June 1963, Syria, which by then had also fallen under Ba&#x27;athist rule, took part in the Iraqi military campaign against the Kurds by providing aircraft, armoured vehicles, and a force of 6,000 soldiers. Several months later, Abd as-Salam Muhammad Arif led a successful coup against the Ba&#x27;ath government. Arif declared a ceasefire in February 1964, which provoked a split among Kurdish urban radicals on one hand and Peshmerga (Freedom fighters) forces led by Barzani on the other.

On April 13, 1966, President Abdul Salam Arif died in a helicopter crash and was succeeded by his brother, General Abdul Rahman Arif. Following this unexpected death, the Iraqi government launched a last-ditch effort to defeat the Kurds. This campaign failed in May 1966, when Barzani forces thoroughly defeated the Iraqi Army at the Battle of Mount Handrin, near Rawanduz. Following the Six-Day War of 1967, the Ba&#x27;ath Party felt strong enough to retake power in 1968. Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr became president and chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC). The Ba&#x27;ath government started a campaign to end the Kurdish insurrection, which stalled in 1969 due to internal power struggles and tensions with Iran. The war ended with more than 100,000 casualties and little achievement for both sides.

In March 1970, a peace plan was announced that provided for broader Kurdish autonomy and gave Kurds representation in government bodies, to be implemented in four years. Despite this, the Iraqi government embarked on an Arabization program in the oil-rich regions of Kirkuk and Khanaqin. By 1974, tensions escalated again, leading to the Second Kurdish Iraqi War, which lasted until 1975. The 1975 peace treaty between Iraq and Iran resolved the Shatt al-Arab dispute, leading to Iran withdrawing support for the Kurdish rebels and their subsequent defeat by the Iraqi government.

====Under Saddam Hussein====
In July 1979, President Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr was forced to resign by Saddam Hussein, who assumed the offices of both President and Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council. Saddam then purged his opponents including those from within the Baath party.

;Iraq&#x27;s Territorial Claims to Neighboring Countries
Iraq&#x27;s territorial claims to neighboring countries were largely due to the plans and promises of the Entente countries in 1919–1920, when the Ottoman Empire was divided, to create a more extensive Arab state in Iraq and Jazeera, which would also include significant territories of eastern Syria, southeastern Turkey, all of Kuwait and Iran’s border areas, which are shown on this English map of 1920.
Territorial disputes with Iran led to an inconclusive and costly eight-year war, the &quot;Iran–Iraq War&quot; (1980–1988, termed &quot;Qādisiyyat-Saddām&quot; – &#x27;Saddam&#x27;s Qādisiyyah&#x27;), which devastated the economy. Iraq falsely declared victory in 1988 but actually only achieved a weary return to the &quot;status quo ante bellum&quot;, meaning both sides retained their original borders.

The war began when Iraq invaded Iran, launching a simultaneous invasion by air and land into Iranian territory on 22 September 1980, following a long history of border disputes, and fears of Shia insurgency among Iraq&#x27;s long-suppressed Shia majority influenced by the Iranian Revolution. Iraq was also aiming to replace Iran as the dominant Persian Gulf state. The United States supported Saddam Hussein in the war against Iran. Although Iraq hoped to take advantage of the revolutionary chaos in Iran and attacked without formal warning, they made only limited progress into Iran and within several months were repelled by the Iranians who regained virtually all lost territory by June 1982. For the next six years, Iran was on the offensive. Despite calls for a ceasefire by the United Nations Security Council, hostilities continued until 20 August 1988. The war finally ended with a United Nations-brokered ceasefire in the form of United Nations Security Council Resolution 598, which was accepted by both sides. It took several weeks for the Iranian armed forces to evacuate Iraqi territory to honor pre-war international borders between the two nations (see 1975 Algiers Agreement). The last prisoners of war were exchanged in 2003.

The war came at a great cost in lives and economic damage—half a million Iraqi and Iranian soldiers, as well as civilians, are believed to have died in the war with many more injured—but it brought neither reparations nor change in borders. The conflict is often compared to World War I, in that the tactics used closely mirrored those of that conflict, including large scale trench warfare, manned machine-gun posts, bayonet charges, use of barbed wire across trenches, human wave attacks across no-man&#x27;s land, and extensive use of chemical weapons such as mustard gas by the Iraqi government against Iranian troops and civilians as well as Iraqi Kurds. At the time, the UN Security Council issued statements that &quot;chemical weapons had been used in the war.&quot; However, in these UN statements, it was never made clear that it was only Iraq that was using chemical weapons, so it has been said that &quot;the international community remained silent as Iraq used weapons of mass destruction against Iranian as well as Iraqi Kurds&quot; and it is believed.

A long-standing territorial dispute was the ostensible reason for Iraq&#x27;s invasion of Kuwait in 1990. In November 1990, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 678, permitting member states to use all necessary means, authorizing military action against the Iraqi forces occupying Kuwait and demanded a complete withdrawal by January 15, 1991. When Saddam Hussein failed to comply with this demand, the Gulf War (Operation &quot;Desert Storm&quot;) ensued on January 17, 1991. Estimates range from 1,500 to as many as 30,000 Iraqi soldiers killed, as well as less than a thousand civilians.

In March 1991 revolts in the Shia-dominated southern Iraq started involving demoralized Iraqi Army troops and the anti-government Shia parties. Another wave of insurgency broke out shortly afterwards in the Kurdish populated northern Iraq (see 1991 Iraqi uprisings). Although they presented a serious threat to the Iraqi Ba&#x27;ath Party regime, Saddam Hussein managed to suppress the rebellions with massive and indiscriminate force and maintained power. They were ruthlessly crushed by the loyalist forces spearheaded by the Iraqi Republican Guard and the population was successfully terrorized. During the few weeks of unrest tens of thousands of people were killed. Many more died during the following months, while nearly two million Iraqis fled for their lives. In the aftermath, the government intensified the forced relocating of Marsh Arabs and the draining of the Iraqi marshlands, while the Coalition established the Iraqi no-fly zones.

On 6 August 1990, after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 661 which imposed economic sanctions on Iraq, providing for a full trade embargo, excluding medical supplies, food and other items of humanitarian necessity, these to be determined by the Security Council sanctions committee. After the end of the Gulf War and after the Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, the sanctions were linked to removal of weapons of mass destruction by Resolution 687. To varying degrees, the effects of government policy, the aftermath of Gulf War and the sanctions regime have been blamed for these conditions.

The effects of the sanctions on the civilian population of Iraq have been disputed. Whereas it was widely believed that the sanctions caused a major rise in child mortality, recent research has shown that commonly cited data were fabricated by the Iraqi government and that &quot;there was no major rise in child mortality in Iraq after 1990 and during the period of the sanctions.&quot; An oil for food program was established in 1996 to ease the effects of sanctions.

Iraqi cooperation with UN weapons inspection teams was questioned on several occasions during the 1990s. UNSCOM chief weapons inspector Richard Butler withdrew his team from Iraq in November 1998 because of Iraq&#x27;s lack of cooperation. The team returned in December. Butler prepared a report for the UN Security Council afterwards in which he expressed dissatisfaction with the level of compliance . The same month, US President Bill Clinton authorized air strikes on government targets and military facilities. Air strikes against military facilities and alleged WMD sites continued into 2002.

== U.S. invasion and the aftermath (2003–present) ==
=== 2003 U.S. invasion ===
After the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington in the United States in 2001 were linked to the group formed by the multi-millionaire Saudi Osama bin Laden, American foreign policy began to call for the removal of the Ba&#x27;ath government in Iraq. Neoconservative think-tanks in Washington had for years been urging regime change in Baghdad. On August 14, 1998, President Clinton signed Public Law 105–235, which declared that ‘‘the Government of Iraq is in material and unacceptable breach of its international obligations.’’ It urged the President ‘‘to take appropriate action, in accordance with the Constitution and relevant laws of the United States, to bring Iraq into compliance with its international obligations.’’ Several months later, Congress enacted the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998 on October 31, 1998. This law stated that it &quot;should be the policy of the United States to support efforts to remove the regime headed by Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq and to promote the emergence of a democratic government to replace that regime.&quot; It was passed 360 - 38 by the United States House of Representatives and 99–0 by the United States Senate in 1998.

The US urged the United Nations to take military action against Iraq. American president George W. Bush stated that Saddām had repeatedly violated 16 UN Security Council resolutions. The Iraqi government rejected Bush&#x27;s assertions. A team of U.N. inspectors, led by Swedish diplomat Hans Blix was admitted, into the country; their final report stated that Iraqis capability in producing &quot;weapons of mass destruction&quot; was not significantly different from 1992 when the country dismantled the bulk of their remaining arsenals under terms of the ceasefire agreement with U.N. forces, but did not completely rule out the possibility that Saddam still had weapons of mass destruction. The United States and the United Kingdom charged that Iraq was hiding WMD and opposed the team&#x27;s requests for more time to further investigate the matter. Resolution 1441 was passed unanimously by the UN Security Council on November 8, 2002, offering Iraq &quot;a final opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations&quot; that had been set out in several previous UN resolutions, threatening &quot;serious consequences&quot; if the obligations were not fulfilled. The UN Security Council did not issue a resolution authorizing the use of force against Iraq.

In March 2003, the United States and the United Kingdom, with military aid from other nations, invaded Iraq.

Over the following years in the U.S. occupation of Iraq, Iraq disintegrated into a civil war from 2006 to 2008, and the situation deteriorated in 2011 which later escalated into a renewed war following ISIL gains in the country in 2014. By 2015, Iraq was effectively divided, the central and southern part being controlled by the government, the northwest by the Kurdistan Regional Government and the western part by the Islamic State. IS was expelled from Iraq in 2017, but a low-intensity ISIL insurgency continues mostly in the rural parts of northern western parts of the country, due to Iraq&#x27;s long border with Syria.

=== Occupation (2003–11) ===

In 2003, after the American and British invasion, Iraq was occupied by U.S.-led Coalition forces. On May 23, 2003, the UN Security Council unanimously approved a resolution lifting all economic sanctions against Iraq. As the country struggled to rebuild after three wars and a decade of sanctions, it was plagued by violence between a growing Iraqi insurgency and occupation forces. Saddam Hussein, who vanished in April, was captured on December 13, 2003 in ad-Dawr, Saladin Governorate.Jay Garner was appointed Interim Civil Administrator with three deputies, including Tim Cross. Garner was replaced in May 2003 by Paul Bremer, who was himself replaced by John Negroponte on April 19, 2004. Negroponte was the last US interim administrator and left Iraq in 2005. A parliamentary election was held in January 2005, followed by the drafting and ratification of a constitution and a further parliamentary election in December 2005.

Terrorism emerged as a threat to Iraq&#x27;s people not long after the invasion of 2003. Al Qaeda now had a presence in the country, in the form of several terrorist groups formerly led by Abu Musab Al Zarqawi. Al Zarqawi was a Jordanian militant Islamist who ran a militant training camp in Afghanistan. He became known after going to Iraq and being responsible for a series of bombings, beheadings and attacks during the Iraq war. Al Zarqawi was killed on June 7, 2006. Many foreign fighters and former Ba&#x27;ath Party officials also joined the insurgency, which was mainly aimed at attacking American forces and Iraqis who worked with them. The most dangerous insurgent area was the Sunni Triangle, a mostly Sunni-Muslim area just north of Baghdad.

Reported acts of violence conducted by an uneasy tapestry of insurgents steadily increased by the end of 2006. Sunni jihadist forces including Al Qaeda in Iraq continued to target Shia civilians, notably in the 23 February 2006 attack on the Al Askari Mosque in Samarra, one of Shi&#x27;ite Islam&#x27;s holiest sites leading to a civil war between Sunni and Shia militants in Iraq. Analysis of the attack suggested that the Mujahideen Shura Council and Al-Qaeda in Iraq were responsible, and that the motivation was to provoke further violence by outraging the Shia population. In mid-October 2006, a statement was released stating that the Mujahideen Shura Council had been disbanded and was replaced by the &quot;Islamic State of Iraq&quot;. It was formed to resist efforts by the U.S. and Iraqi authorities to win over Sunni supporters of the insurgency. Shia militias, some of whom were associated with elements in the Iraq government, reacted with reprisal acts against the Sunni minority. A cycle of violence thus ensued whereby Sunni insurgent attacks were followed reprisals by Shiite militias, often in the form of Shi&#x27;ite death squads that sought out and killed Sunnis. Following a surge in U.S. troops in 2007 and 2008, violence in Iraq began to decrease. The U.S. ended their main military presence in 2011, however, resulting in renewed escalation into war.

=== Insurgency and war (2011–2017) ===


The departure of US troops from Iraq in 2011 triggered a renewed insurgency and by a spillover of the Syrian civil war into Iraq. By 2013, the insurgency escalated into a state renewed war, the central government of Iraq being opposed by various factions, primarily radical Sunni forces.

The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant invaded Iraq in 2013–14 and seized the majority of Al Anbar Governorate, including the cities of Fallujah, Al Qaim, Abu Ghraib and (in May 2015) Ramadi, leaving them in control of 90% of Anbar. Tikrit, Mosul and most of the Nineveh province, along with parts of Salahuddin, Kirkuk and Diyala provinces, were seized by insurgent forces in the June 2014 offensive. ISIL also captured Sinjar and a number of other towns in the August 2014 offensive, but were halted by the Sinjar offensive launched in December 2014 by Kurdish Peshmerga and YPG forces. The war ended with a government victory in December 2017.

On 30 April 2016, thousands of protesters entered the Green Zone in Baghdad and occupied the Iraqi parliament building. This happened after the Iraqi parliament did not approve new government ministers. The protesters included supporters of Shia cleric Muqtada Al Sadr. Although Iraqi security forces were present, they did not attempt to stop the protesters from entering the parliament building.

=== Continued ISIL insurgency and protests (2017–present) ===
Tensions between the federal Iraqi government and Kurdistan Region arising from the Kurdistan Region independence referendum of 25 September 2017 escalated into armed conflict in October 2017. As a result of the conflict, Kurdistan Region lost a fifth of the land mass it had administered prior to the conflict and was forced to cancel the results of the referendum.

By 2018, violence in Iraq was at its lowest level in ten years.

Protests over deteriorating economic conditions and state corruption started in July 2018 in Baghdad and other major Iraqi cities, mainly in the central and southern provinces. The latest nationwide protests, erupting in October 2019, had a death toll of at least 93 people, including police.

In November 2021, Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa al-Kadhimi survived a failed assassination attempt.

Cleric Muqtada al-Sadr&#x27;s Sadrist Movement was the biggest winner in the 2021 parliamentary elections. Governmental stalemate lead to the 2022 Iraqi political crisis.

In October 2022, Abdul Latif Rashid was elected as the new President of Iraq after winning the parliamentary election against incumbent Barham Salih, who was running for a second term. The presidency is largely ceremonial and is traditionally held by a Kurd. On 27 October 2022, Mohammed Shia al-Sudani, close ally of former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, took the office to succeed Mustafa al-Kadhimi as new Prime Minister of Iraq.

== See also ==

* Abbasid Caliphate
* Akkadian Empire
* Assyria
* Babylonia
* History of Asia
* History of Baghdad
* History of the Middle East
* List of kings of Iraq
* List of presidents of Iraq
* List of prime ministers of Iraq
* Mesopotamia
* Politics of Iraq
* Sumer
* Timeline of Baghdad
* Timeline of Basra
== References ==
== Sources ==
* 

== Further reading ==
* Broich, John. &quot;Blood, Oil and the Axis: The Allied Resistance Against a Fascist State in Iraq and the Levant, 1941&quot; (Abrams, 2019).
* de Gaury, Gerald. &quot;Three Kings in Baghdad: The Tragedy of Iraq&#x27;s Monarchy&quot;, (IB Taurus, 2008). 
* Elliot, Matthew. &quot;Independent Iraq: British Influence from 1941 to 1958&quot; (IB Tauris, 1996).
* Fattah, Hala Mundhir, and Frank Caso. &quot;A brief history of Iraq&quot; (Infobase Publishing, 2009).
* Franzén, Johan. &quot;Development vs. Reform: Attempts at Modernisation during the Twilight of British Influence in Iraq, 1946–1958,&quot; &quot;Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History&quot; 37#1 (2009), pp. 77–98
* Kriwaczek, Paul. &quot;Babylon: Mesopotamia and the Birth of Civilization&quot;. Atlantic Books (2010). 
* Murray, Williamson, and Kevin M. Woods. &quot;The Iran-Iraq War: A military and strategic history&quot; (Cambridge UP, 2014).
* Roux, Georges. &quot;Ancient Iraq&quot;. Penguin Books (1992). 
* Silverfarb, Daniel. &quot;Britain&#x27;s informal empire in the Middle East: a case study of Iraq, 1929-1941&quot; ( Oxford University Press, 1986).
* Silverfarb, Daniel. &quot;The twilight of British ascendancy in the Middle East: a case study of Iraq, 1941-1950&quot; (1994)
* Silverfarb, Daniel. &quot;The revision of Iraq&#x27;s oil concession, 1949–52.&quot; &quot;Middle Eastern Studies&quot; 32.1 (1996): 69-95.
* Simons, Geoff. &quot;Iraq: From Sumer to Saddam&quot; (Springer, 2016).
* Tarbush, Mohammad A. &quot;The role of the military in politics: A case study of Iraq to 1941&quot; (Routledge, 2015).

=== Historiography ===

== External links ==
*Iraq: The Cradle of Civilization
*Iraq History and Culture from the cradle of civilization and Noah to the present age and time 
*Historical Context of the Iran – Iraq War from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="0" end="4" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="27" end="36" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="83" end="94" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207629" start="121" end="143" title="cradle of civilization" label="cradle of civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="192" end="209" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="292" end="301" title="Caliphate" label="Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="419" end="424" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="476" end="485" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q245156" start="486" end="498" title="Ubaid period" label="Ubaid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="707" end="715" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="717" end="729" title="Third Dynasty of Ur" label="Neo-Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="731" end="740" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="743" end="755" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="761" end="775" title="Neo-Babylonian" label="Neo-Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="829" end="846" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="858" end="864" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="869" end="873" title="Iron Age" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624925" start="943" end="960" title="List of languages by first written accounts" label="written languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720217" start="962" end="976" title="Sumerian literature" label="literary works"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="1010" end="1019" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q787931" start="1021" end="1032" title="Babylonian mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433261" start="1034" end="1037" title="Babylonian law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1043" end="1053" title="Assyro-Babylonian literature#Philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="1108" end="1129" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Neo-Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="1151" end="1168" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="1175" end="1190" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q221002" start="1223" end="1238" title="King of Babylon" label="King of Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="1258" end="1265" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="1485" end="1491" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="1493" end="1502" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1508" end="1514" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136681" start="1546" end="1554" title="Seleucia" label="Seleucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192541" start="1559" end="1568" title="Ctesiphon" label="Ctesiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8101" start="1577" end="1588" title="3rd century" label="3rd century"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="1643" end="1658" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="1695" end="1707" title="South Arabia" label="South Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="1790" end="1805" title="Lakhmid kingdom" label="Lakhmid kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1829" end="1837" title="Name of Iraq" label="al-ʿIrāq"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="1917" end="1926" title="Muslim conquest of Persia" label="conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="1934" end="1952" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q836844" start="2016" end="2039" title="Battle of al-Qadisiyyah" label="Battle of al-Qadisiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q186234" start="2060" end="2064" title="Kufa" label="Kufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417059" start="2152" end="2161" title="First Fitna" label="overthrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q45646" start="2169" end="2177" title="Umayyad dynasty" label="Umayyads"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="2208" end="2225" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="2295" end="2302" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="2374" end="2392" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q273874" start="2521" end="2529" title="Buwayhid" label="Buwayhid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="2534" end="2540" title="Seljuk Turks" label="Seljuq"/>
<link wikidata="Q369560" start="2601" end="2616" title="Siege of Baghdad" label="Mongol invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2667" end="2681" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q146720" start="2774" end="2788" title="Mandatory Iraq" label="Mandatory Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="2812" end="2826" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q149805" start="2868" end="2883" title="Kingdom of Iraq" label="Kingdom of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="2988" end="3002" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="3008" end="3029" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="3123" end="3136" title="Islamic State" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="3309" end="3320" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q909799" start="3386" end="3399" title="Shanidar Cave" label="Shanidar Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q909799" start="3419" end="3432" title="Shanidar Cave" label="Shanidar Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288105" start="3450" end="3463" title="Ralph Solecki" label="Ralph Solecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="3482" end="3501" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q35266962" start="3660" end="3668" title="Melinda A. Zeder" label="M. Zeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="3809" end="3827" title="funeral" label="funeral ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="4168" end="4184" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="4204" end="4213" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047444" start="4231" end="4254" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic A" label="Pre-Pottery Neolithic A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523239" start="4384" end="4397" title="M&amp;#x27;lefaat" label="M&amp;#x27;lefaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13708140" start="4402" end="4410" title="Nemrik 9" label="Nemrik 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q897323" start="4444" end="4448" title="PPNB" label="PPNB"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="4565" end="4571" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q53754" start="4618" end="4626" title="obsidian" label="obsidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="4638" end="4646" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000577" start="4736" end="4741" title="Jarmo" label="Jarmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q904998" start="4794" end="4807" title="Halaf culture" label="Halaf culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317854" start="4813" end="4832" title="Tell al-&amp;#x27;Ubaid" label="Tell al-&amp;#x27;Ubaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247173" start="4838" end="4847" title="type site" label="type site"/>
<link wikidata="Q245156" start="4855" end="4867" title="Ubaid period" label="Ubaid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="4986" end="5006" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="Neolithic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207629" start="5310" end="5332" title="Cradle of Civilisation" label="Cradle of Civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="5429" end="5441" title="civilisation" label="civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="5447" end="5468" title="Sumer" label="Sumerian civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608991" start="5497" end="5526" title="Tigris-Euphrates river system" label="Tigris-Euphrates river valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="5551" end="5563" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q245156" start="5565" end="5577" title="Ubaid period" label="Ubaid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q115439" start="5606" end="5623" title="4th millennium BC" label="4th millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="5659" end="5673" title="Cuneiform script" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="5687" end="5692" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="5738" end="5743" title="wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="5755" end="5766" title="City States" label="city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="5818" end="5829" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="5831" end="5840" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="5842" end="5851" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="5853" end="5864" title="Written Law" label="written law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="5866" end="5874" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359138" start="5880" end="5898" title="organised religion" label="organised religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="5904" end="5921" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="5927" end="5943" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210065" start="6005" end="6010" title="Eridu" label="Eridu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372270" start="6012" end="6022" title="Bad-tibira" label="Bad-tibira"/>
<link wikidata="Q244746" start="6024" end="6029" title="Larsa" label="Larsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q619707" start="6031" end="6037" title="Sippar" label="Sippar"/>
<link wikidata="Q392725" start="6039" end="6048" title="Shuruppak" label="Shuruppak"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="6050" end="6054" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q132272" start="6056" end="6060" title="Kish (Sumer)" label="Kish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="6062" end="6064" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q188395" start="6066" end="6072" title="Nippur" label="Nippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q207330" start="6074" end="6080" title="Lagash" label="Lagash"/>
<link wikidata="Q853946" start="6082" end="6087" title="Girsu" label="Girsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q740952" start="6089" end="6093" title="Umma" label="Umma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330881" start="6095" end="6101" title="Hamazi" label="Hamazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q346445" start="6103" end="6107" title="Adab (city)" label="Adab"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="6109" end="6113" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q501259" start="6115" end="6119" title="Isin" label="Isin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096108" start="6121" end="6126" title="Kutha" label="Kutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q262432" start="6128" end="6131" title="Der (Sumer)" label="Der"/>
<link wikidata="Q593537" start="6137" end="6143" title="Akshak" label="Akshak"/>
<link wikidata="Q200200" start="6175" end="6180" title="Assur" label="Ashur"/>
<link wikidata="Q132754" start="6197" end="6202" title="Erbil" label="Erbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q672905" start="6209" end="6216" title="Arrapha" label="Arrapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q173310" start="6225" end="6231" title="Kirkuk" label="Kirkuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="6404" end="6409" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q245156" start="6482" end="6494" title="Ubaid period" label="Ubaid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q731494" start="6544" end="6555" title="Uruk period" label="Uruk period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="6601" end="6616" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064034" start="6655" end="6668" title="Gutian period" label="Gutian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="6674" end="6688" title="Third Dynasty of Ur" label="Ur III kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="6852" end="6859" title="Amorites" label="Amorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q501259" start="6895" end="6899" title="Isin" label="Isin"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="6971" end="6978" title="Kassite" label="Kassite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="6979" end="6988" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="7008" end="7018" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q352544" start="7044" end="7052" title="Eannatum" label="Eannatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207330" start="7056" end="7062" title="Lagash" label="Lagash"/>
<link wikidata="Q48349" start="7085" end="7091" title="empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q316241" start="7100" end="7113" title="Lugal-Zage-Si" label="Lugal-Zage-Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q740952" start="7134" end="7138" title="Umma" label="Umma"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="7212" end="7216" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="7282" end="7294" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="7302" end="7315" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8272" start="7352" end="7369" title="Epic of Gilgamesh" label="Epic of Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="7409" end="7424" title="The Great Flood" label="The Great Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="7492" end="7500" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q164273" start="7505" end="7526" title="East Semitic language" label="East Semitic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="7670" end="7677" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194737" start="7679" end="7688" title="Ekallatum" label="Ekallatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q501259" start="7690" end="7694" title="Isin" label="Isin"/>
<link wikidata="Q244746" start="7700" end="7705" title="Larsa" label="Larsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="7780" end="7795" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150996" start="7833" end="7838" title="Akkad (city)" label="Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q199461" start="7856" end="7871" title="Sargon of Akkad" label="Sargon of Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q48349" start="8086" end="8092" title="empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="8096" end="8107" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="8145" end="8150" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q549531" start="8204" end="8210" title="Gutium" label="Gutium"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="8212" end="8216" title="Elam" label="Elam"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="8231" end="8235" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="8304" end="8312" title="Amorites" label="Amorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743" start="8317" end="8321" title="Ebla" label="Ebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q217192" start="8451" end="8459" title="Dark Ages (historiography)" label="Dark Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="8513" end="8532" title="Third Dynasty of Ur" label="Third Dynasty of Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="8648" end="8658" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="8688" end="8703" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q549531" start="8737" end="8744" title="Gutians" label="Gutians"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="8912" end="8925" title="Third Dynasty of Ur" label="Ur III period"/>
<link wikidata="Q315893" start="8977" end="8983" title="Shulgi" label="Shulgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202927" start="9051" end="9071" title="Great Ziggurat of Ur" label="Great Ziggurat of Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q297417" start="9093" end="9101" title="Ur-Nammu" label="Ur-Nammu"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="9118" end="9125" title="Amorite" label="Amorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q36359" start="9138" end="9147" title="Hammurabi" label="Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q430832" start="9405" end="9416" title="Ishme-Dagan" label="Ishme-Dagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="9472" end="9489" title="Babylonian Empire" label="Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="9807" end="9816" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="9861" end="9868" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440601" start="10027" end="10042" title="Sealand Dynasty" label="Sealand Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="10125" end="10141" title="Language Isolate" label="language-isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="10151" end="10159" title="Kassites" label="Kassites"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="10244" end="10251" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="10266" end="10273" title="Kassite" label="Kassite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="10274" end="10283" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440601" start="10321" end="10336" title="Sealand Dynasty" label="Sealand Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12642600" start="10479" end="10501" title="Middle Assyrian Empire" label="Middle Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q299468" start="10617" end="10632" title="Ashur-uballit I" label="Ashur-uballit I"/>
<link wikidata="Q190394" start="10662" end="10669" title="Hurrian" label="Hurrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="10670" end="10677" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="10714" end="10728" title="Hittite Empire" label="Hittite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="10798" end="10813" title="Egyptian Empire" label="Egyptian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="10848" end="10856" title="Elamites" label="Elamites"/>
<link wikidata="Q149386" start="10858" end="10867" title="Phrygians" label="Phrygians"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="10869" end="10879" title="Canaanites" label="Canaanites"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="10881" end="10892" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="10894" end="10903" title="Cilicians" label="Cilicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q549531" start="10905" end="10912" title="Gutians" label="Gutians"/>
<link wikidata="Q748846" start="10914" end="10920" title="Dilmun" label="Dilmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151255" start="10930" end="10938" title="Arameans" label="Arameans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12642600" start="10959" end="10981" title="Middle Assyrian Empire" label="Middle Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="10997" end="11009" title="The Caucasus" label="The Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q748846" start="11013" end="11019" title="Dilmun" label="Dilmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="11028" end="11035" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="11051" end="11064" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="11075" end="11084" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="11092" end="11108" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="11112" end="11116" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q299013" start="11130" end="11147" title="Tukulti-Ninurta I" label="Tukulti-Ninurta I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="11178" end="11185" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059758" start="11199" end="11218" title="Bronze Age collapse" label="Bronze Age collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="11311" end="11315" title="Elam" label="Elam"/>
<link wikidata="Q124901" start="11573" end="11585" title="West Semitic languages" label="West Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151255" start="11656" end="11664" title="Arameans" label="Arameans"/>
<link wikidata="Q650947" start="11669" end="11676" title="Suteans" label="Suteans"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="11700" end="11710" title="The Levant" label="The Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="11769" end="11776" title="Chaldea" label="Chaldea"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="11867" end="11876" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="11879" end="11886" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="11894" end="11902" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q200200" start="12077" end="12082" title="Assur" label="Assur"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="12084" end="12092" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="12192" end="12210" title="Assyrian King List" label="Assyrian King List"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232866" start="12243" end="12249" title="Tudiya" label="Tudiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280086" start="12276" end="12282" title="Ibrium" label="Ibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743" start="12286" end="12290" title="Ebla" label="Ebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q887371" start="12480" end="12486" title="Ushpia" label="Ushpia"/>
<link wikidata="Q561153" start="12506" end="12516" title="Ishbi-Erra" label="Ishbi-Erra"/>
<link wikidata="Q501259" start="12520" end="12524" title="Isin" label="Isin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291348" start="12529" end="12537" title="Naplanum" label="Naplanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q244746" start="12541" end="12546" title="Larsa" label="Larsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12642600" start="12724" end="12746" title="Middle Assyrian Empire" label="Middle Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="12770" end="12789" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="12892" end="12901" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="12903" end="12908" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q185068" start="12910" end="12916" title="Urartu" label="Urartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="12922" end="12926" title="Elam" label="Elam"/>
<link wikidata="Q540229" start="12988" end="13004" title="world domination" label="world domination"/>
<link wikidata="Q540229" start="13075" end="13087" title="world empire" label="world empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="13133" end="13144" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="13150" end="13156" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="13192" end="13200" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="13206" end="13223" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q311573" start="13279" end="13293" title="Adad-Nirari II" label="Adad-Nirari II"/>
<link wikidata="Q352931" start="13295" end="13308" title="Ashurnasirpal I" label="Ashurnasirpal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211928" start="13310" end="13325" title="Shalmaneser III" label="Shalmaneser III"/>
<link wikidata="Q103960" start="13327" end="13336" title="Semiramis" label="Semiramis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210074" start="13338" end="13357" title="Tiglath-pileser III" label="Tiglath-pileser III"/>
<link wikidata="Q208336" start="13359" end="13368" title="Sargon II" label="Sargon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q207140" start="13370" end="13381" title="Sennacherib" label="Sennacherib"/>
<link wikidata="Q193912" start="13383" end="13393" title="Esarhaddon" label="Esarhaddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171191" start="13399" end="13411" title="Ashurbanipal" label="Ashurbanipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="13465" end="13471" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="13473" end="13480" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="13486" end="13490" title="Elam" label="Elam"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="13506" end="13512" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="13517" end="13524" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="13547" end="13559" title="The Caucasus" label="The Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="13576" end="13581" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="13583" end="13588" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="13594" end="13600" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410322" start="13678" end="13693" title="Eastern Aramaic" label="Eastern Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="13732" end="13745" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="13934" end="13943" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="13965" end="13974" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="13997" end="14002" title="Arab people" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="14011" end="14018" title="Chaldea" label="Chaldea"/>
<link wikidata="Q211928" start="14092" end="14107" title="Shalmaneser III" label="Shalmaneser III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670212" start="14321" end="14335" title="Universal monarchy" label="universal rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q540229" start="14410" end="14426" title="world domination" label="world domination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="14561" end="14568" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="14592" end="14604" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="14609" end="14614" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917216" start="14931" end="14948" title="Military history of the Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="15217" end="15228" title="Babylonians" label="Babylonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="15230" end="15237" title="Chaldea" label="Chaldea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8735" start="15241" end="15246" title="Medes" label="Medes"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="15248" end="15256" title="Persian people" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="15258" end="15267" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="15269" end="15278" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q192730" start="15284" end="15294" title="Cimmerians" label="Cimmerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="15387" end="15408" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Neo-Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="15548" end="15558" title="The Levant" label="The Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="15560" end="15566" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="15568" end="15574" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="15576" end="15582" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="15588" end="15593" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="15613" end="15618" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="15656" end="15663" title="Chaldea" label="Chaldea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="15759" end="15776" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q36359" start="15786" end="15795" title="Hammurabi" label="Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q239414" start="15901" end="15910" title="Nabonidus" label="Nabonidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q225198" start="15934" end="15944" title="Belshazzar" label="Belshazzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="15974" end="15981" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="16077" end="16094" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q36359" start="16117" end="16126" title="Hammurabi" label="Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q733897" start="16134" end="16155" title="Old Babylonian Empire" label="Old Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="16282" end="16299" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q273514" start="16310" end="16322" title="Nabopolassar" label="Nabopolassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574056" start="16531" end="16537" title="Amytis of Babylon" label="Amytis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41931" start="16576" end="16602" title="Hanging Gardens of Babylon" label="Hanging Gardens of Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q489772" start="16615" end="16649" title="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World" label="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World"/>
<link wikidata="Q239414" start="16925" end="16934" title="Nabonidus" label="Nabonidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="17017" end="17032" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625641" start="17197" end="17215" title="Achaemenid Assyria" label="Achaemenid Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="17491" end="17510" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="17517" end="17532" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="17623" end="17643" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15155713" start="17669" end="17674" title="Hellenistic Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="17695" end="17710" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="17712" end="17719" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136681" start="17751" end="17773" title="Seleucia on the Tigris" label="Seleucia on the Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="17783" end="17798" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="17896" end="17901" title="Indo-Greeks" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="17940" end="17951" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="17995" end="18000" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="18178" end="18184" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="18246" end="18255" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q312442" start="18262" end="18286" title="Mithridates I of Parthia" label="Mithridates I of Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="18391" end="18397" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="18414" end="18420" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="18572" end="18579" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="18582" end="18594" title="Early Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="18642" end="18653" title="Roman Syria" label="Roman Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807258" start="18689" end="18701" title="East Syrian Rite" label="Eastern Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q80292" start="18723" end="18729" title="Syriac Christianity" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="18750" end="18758" title="Mandeism" label="Mandeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="18977" end="18986" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q685878" start="19070" end="19075" title="Ashur (god)" label="Ashur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955102" start="19212" end="19228" title="Sassanid dynasty" label="Sassanid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q149747" start="19344" end="19352" title="Adiabene" label="Adiabene"/>
<link wikidata="Q237234" start="19354" end="19361" title="Osroene" label="Osroene"/>
<link wikidata="Q466614" start="19363" end="19368" title="Hatra" label="Hatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200200" start="19382" end="19387" title="Assur" label="Assur"/>
<link wikidata="Q207381" start="19497" end="19506" title="Khosrow I" label="Khosrow I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627700" start="19675" end="19684" title="Asuristān" label="Asuristān"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="19686" end="19693" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q149747" start="19696" end="19704" title="Adiabene" label="Adiabene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="20078" end="20083" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q311819" start="20108" end="20125" title="Upper Mesopotamia" label="Upper Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="20340" end="20353" title="name of Iraq" label="ʿIrāq-i ʿArab"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="20548" end="20555" title="Lakhmid" label="Lakhmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q310799" start="20565" end="20573" title="Al-Hirah" label="Al-Hirah"/>
<link wikidata="Q184299" start="20589" end="20599" title="Shahanshah" label="Shahanshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q212732" start="20600" end="20610" title="Khosrow II" label="Khosrow II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088782" start="20836" end="20853" title="Syria-Iraq border" label="Syria-Iraq border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553052" start="20895" end="20902" title="Nusaybin" label="Nisibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q555783" start="20969" end="20974" title="Amida (Mesopotamia)" label="Amida"/>
<link wikidata="Q83387" start="20983" end="20993" title="Diyarbakır" label="Diyarbakır"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="21007" end="21017" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="21292" end="21299" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q26918" start="21385" end="21404" title="Khalid ibn al-Walid" label="Khalid ibn al-Walid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192541" start="21549" end="21558" title="Ctesiphon" label="Ctesiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q380184" start="21605" end="21624" title="Sa`d ibn Abī Waqqās" label="Sa`d ibn Abī Waqqās"/>
<link wikidata="Q836844" start="21663" end="21686" title="Battle of al-Qādisiyyah" label="Battle of al-Qādisiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q208463" start="21861" end="21874" title="Yazdegerd III" label="Yazdegerd III"/>
<link wikidata="Q186234" start="22095" end="22099" title="Kufa" label="Kufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="22114" end="22121" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="22130" end="22135" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="22165" end="22170" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="22221" end="22229" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="22297" end="22304" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="22442" end="22454" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="22466" end="22484" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="22558" end="22569" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="22690" end="22703" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q369560" start="22763" end="22786" title="Siege of Baghdad (1258)" label="Siege of Baghdad (1258)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067278" start="22933" end="22951" title="Iranian Intermezzo" label="Iranian Intermezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q373981" start="23066" end="23074" title="Tahirid dynasty" label="Tahirids"/>
<link wikidata="Q45310" start="23076" end="23085" title="Saffarid dynasty" label="Saffarids"/>
<link wikidata="Q486181" start="23087" end="23095" title="Samanid Empire" label="Samanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q273874" start="23097" end="23103" title="Buyid dynasty" label="Buyids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431885" start="23108" end="23117" title="Sallarid dynasty" label="Sallarids"/>
<link wikidata="Q144565" start="23119" end="23126" title="Tughril" label="Tughril"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="23147" end="23160" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuk Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="23391" end="23396" title="Sunni" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="23423" end="23430" title="Ismaili" label="Ismaili"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="23435" end="23439" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q486918" start="23540" end="23559" title="Khwarazmian dynasty" label="Khwarazmian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092093" start="23632" end="23648" title="Mongol invasions" label="Mongol invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="23688" end="23700" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q431177" start="23705" end="23725" title="Mongol conquest of Khwarezmia" label="conquered Khwarezmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521" start="23845" end="23856" title="Möngke Khan" label="Möngke Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="23900" end="23913" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q293454" start="23931" end="23942" title="al-Mustasim" label="al-Mustasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q369560" start="23977" end="24010" title="Battle of Baghdad (1258)" label="Baghdad was besieged and captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q177320" start="24014" end="24025" title="Hulagu Khan" label="Hulagu Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="24262" end="24271" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q866716" start="24331" end="24341" title="Jalayirids" label="Jalayirids"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="24349" end="24355" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11927146" start="24356" end="24363" title="Jalayir" label="Jalayir"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="24389" end="24393" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="24406" end="24412" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="24531" end="24540" title="Timur" label="Tamerlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q324470" start="24614" end="24626" title="Qara Qoyunlu" label="Qara Qoyunlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q494462" start="24627" end="24634" title="Oghuz Turks" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="24751" end="24760" title="Khūzestān Province" label="Khuzistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q324470" start="24804" end="24816" title="Kara Koyunlu" label="Kara Koyunlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q324470" start="24908" end="24920" title="Qara Qoyunlu" label="Qara Qoyunlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="24937" end="24945" title="Turkmens" label="Turkmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q555994" start="24994" end="25004" title="Aq Qoyunlu" label="Aq Qoyunlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="25176" end="25184" title="Safavids" label="Safavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060524" start="25195" end="25210" title="Treaty of Zuhab" label="Treaty of Zuhab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828224" start="25314" end="25331" title="eyalet of Baghdad" label="eyalet of Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203073" start="25347" end="25351" title="Ottoman-Persian Wars" label="wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q161205" start="25380" end="25392" title="Safavid dynasty" label="Safavid Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462047" start="25586" end="25594" title="vilayets" label="vilayets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969497" start="25597" end="25611" title="Mosul Province, Ottoman Empire" label="Mosul Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585311" start="25613" end="25629" title="Baghdad Province, Ottoman Empire" label="Baghdad Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862138" start="25631" end="25645" title="Basra Province, Ottoman Empire" label="Basra Province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25696" end="25712" title="António Tenreiro" label="António Tenreiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="25736" end="25741" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="26565" end="26572" title="bedouin" label="bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208154" start="26579" end="26583" title="Najd" label="Najd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745731" start="26699" end="26713" title="Mamluk dynasty (Iraq)" label="Mamluk dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="26717" end="26725" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="26851" end="26862" title="Janissaries" label="Janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="26960" end="26968" title="Wahhabism" label="Wahhabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959771" start="26979" end="26995" title="Wahhabi sack of Karbala" label="attacked Karbala"/>
<link wikidata="Q773704" start="27051" end="27069" title="Imam Husayn Shrine" label="Imam Husayn Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="27397" end="27408" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="27439" end="27446" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="27455" end="27469" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18937" start="27478" end="27499" title="Mesopotamian campaign" label="Mesopotamian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="27528" end="27535" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q815166" start="27629" end="27641" title="Siege of Kut" label="Siege of Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q18937" start="27693" end="27714" title="Mesopotamian campaign" label="Mesopotamian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824470" start="27991" end="28021" title="British Mandate of Mesopotamia" label="British Mandate of Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="28045" end="28070" title="League of Nations mandate" label="League of Nations mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q64684930" start="28098" end="28116" title="Sharifian Solution" label="Sharifian Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q212486" start="28190" end="28206" title="Faisal I of Iraq" label="Faisal I of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412305" start="28235" end="28248" title="King of Syria" label="King of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="28275" end="28281" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="28450" end="28455" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774915" start="28559" end="28569" title="Hashemites" label="Hashemites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121819" start="28611" end="28633" title="Emirate of Transjordan" label="Emirate of Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="28658" end="28675" title="Kingdom of Jordan" label="Kingdom of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="28812" end="28819" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="28821" end="28826" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="28832" end="28841" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="28865" end="28874" title="State of Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="28879" end="28885" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q640534" start="28906" end="28931" title="Faisal–Weizmann agreement" label="Faisal–Weizmann agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="29020" end="29034" title="T. E. Lawrence" label="T. E. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795314" start="29053" end="29066" title="Arnold Wilson" label="Arnold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q266452" start="29114" end="29127" title="Percy Zachariah Cox" label="Sir Percy Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="29269" end="29276" title="Slavery" label="Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q149805" start="29349" end="29364" title="Kingdom of Iraq" label="Kingdom of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q245016" start="29432" end="29445" title="military base" label="military base"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067754" start="29480" end="29495" title="Assyrian Levies" label="Assyrian Levies"/>
<link wikidata="Q314784" start="29502" end="29507" title="Ghazi of Iraq" label="Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="29655" end="29669" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coups"/>
<link wikidata="Q149724" start="29713" end="29722" title="Faisal II of Iraq" label="Faisal II"/>
<link wikidata="Q307540" start="29743" end="29760" title="&amp;#x27;Abd al-Ilah" label="&amp;#x27;Abd al-Ilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="29764" end="29770" title="Regent" label="Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899917" start="29872" end="29897" title="Kirkuk-Haifa oil pipeline" label="Kirkuk-Haifa oil pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q12248754" start="30119" end="30129" title="Naft Khana" label="Naft Khana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481878" start="30225" end="30233" title="Simele massacre" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563672" start="30235" end="30241" title="1935 Yazidi revolt" label="Yazidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563705" start="30246" end="30256" title="1935–1936 Iraqi Shia revolts" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563801" start="30315" end="30334" title="1936 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="first military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q804492" start="30373" end="30383" title="Bakr Sidqi" label="Bakr Sidqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="30540" end="30552" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q307540" start="30577" end="30594" title="&amp;#x27;Abd al-Ilah" label="&amp;#x27;Abd al-Ilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q641205" start="30599" end="30617" title="1941 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="overthrown in 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839559" start="30625" end="30638" title="Golden Square (Iraq)" label="Golden Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q369936" start="30659" end="30669" title="Rashid Ali" label="Rashid Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q696848" start="30807" end="30822" title="Anglo-Iraqi War" label="Anglo-Iraqi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q139708" start="30894" end="30910" title="Mandate of Syria" label="Mandate of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q541369" start="30931" end="30960" title="Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran" label="Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="30988" end="31002" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="31039" end="31050" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q368858" start="31089" end="31104" title="Mustafa Barzani" label="Mustafa Barzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="31237" end="31249" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703337" start="31299" end="31318" title="Al-Wathbah uprising" label="Al-Wathbah uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="31558" end="31579" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q146906" start="31642" end="31659" title="Hussein of Jordan" label="Hussein of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q146713" start="31688" end="31717" title="Arab Federation" label="union of Hāshimite monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q381150" start="31791" end="31803" title="Nuri as-Said" label="Nuri as-Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="31811" end="31817" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="32322" end="32340" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636744" start="32389" end="32401" title="3rd Division (Iraq)" label="3rd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q299732" start="32477" end="32495" title="Abdul-Karim Qassem" label="Abd al-Karīm Qāsim"/>
<link wikidata="Q307494" start="32564" end="32580" title="Abdul Salam Arif" label="Abdul Salam Arif"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988530" start="32581" end="32630" title="14 July Revolution" label="overthrew the Hashemite monarchy on July 14, 1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="32675" end="32683" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q379850" start="32758" end="32770" title="Baghdad Pact" label="Baghdad Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q149724" start="32945" end="32954" title="Faisal II" label="Faisal II"/>
<link wikidata="Q307540" start="32963" end="32974" title="Abd al-Ilah" label="Abd al-Ilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q381150" start="32980" end="32998" title="Nuri al-Sa&amp;#x27;id" label="Nuri al-Sa&amp;#x27;id"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="33245" end="33251" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q299732" start="33320" end="33338" title="Abd al-Karim Qasim" label="Abd al-Karim Qasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567862" start="33408" end="33414" title="Iraqi people" label="Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="33421" end="33427" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567862" start="33465" end="33471" title="Iraqis" label="Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12180107" start="33535" end="33540" title="Kurds in Iraq" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165171" start="33542" end="33550" title="Iraqi Turkmen" label="Turkmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376604" start="33552" end="33561" title="Iraqi-Assyrians" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q200885" start="33563" end="33570" title="Yazidis" label="Yazidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="33572" end="33580" title="Mandeans" label="Mandeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7485854" start="33582" end="33589" title="Yarsanism" label="Yarsans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="33697" end="33708" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="33724" end="33736" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="33741" end="33746" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="33748" end="33753" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="33755" end="33764" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="33770" end="33777" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q332188" start="33986" end="33993" title="Shamash" label="Shamash"/>
<link wikidata="Q209083" start="34052" end="34070" title="Socialist heraldry" label="Socialist heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="34351" end="34369" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q170468" start="34431" end="34451" title="United Arab Republic" label="United Arab Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664596" start="34470" end="34492" title="Abd al-Wahab al-Shawaf" label="Abd al-Wahab al-Shawaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q379850" start="34642" end="34654" title="Baghdad Pact" label="Baghdad Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="34703" end="34707" title="Western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="34749" end="34761" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="34784" end="34790" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862138" start="34911" end="34925" title="Basra vilayet" label="Basra Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480281" start="34976" end="34995" title="Kuwait protectorate" label="Kuwait protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="35014" end="35028" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088785" start="35058" end="35076" title="Iraq–Kuwait border" label="Iraq–Kuwait border"/>
<link wikidata="Q368858" start="35161" end="35176" title="Mustafa Barzani" label="Mustafa Barzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q781221" start="35184" end="35210" title="Kurdistan Democratic Party" label="Kurdistan Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q809687" start="35462" end="35480" title="First Iraqi–Kurdish War" label="escalated into war"/>
<link wikidata="Q179933" start="35649" end="35666" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578241" start="35667" end="35677" title="Ramadan Revolution" label="took power"/>
<link wikidata="Q238046" start="35710" end="35730" title="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr" label="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q307494" start="35760" end="35776" title="Abdul Salam Arif" label="Abdul Salam Arif"/>
<link wikidata="Q831663" start="35891" end="35908" title="military campaign" label="military campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q449436" start="36053" end="36105" title="November 1963 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="a successful coup against the Ba&amp;#x27;ath government"/>
<link wikidata="Q307393" start="36400" end="36417" title="Abdul Rahman Arif" label="Abdul Rahman Arif"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438375" start="36619" end="36642" title="Battle of Mount Handrin" label="Battle of Mount Handrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="36673" end="36684" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120226" start="36738" end="36758" title="17 July Revolution" label="retake power in 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q238046" start="36760" end="36780" title="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr" label="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404717" start="36818" end="36847" title="Revolutionary Command Council (Iraq)" label="Revolutionary Command Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q809687" start="36912" end="36932" title="First Kurdish Iraqi War" label="Kurdish insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004283" start="37378" end="37386" title="Khanaqin" label="Khanaqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116897" start="37438" end="37462" title="Second Kurdish Iraqi War" label="Second Kurdish Iraqi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q321865" start="37493" end="37510" title="1975 Algiers Agreement" label="1975 peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258515" start="37528" end="37532" title="Imperial Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748017" start="37546" end="37567" title="Shatt al-Arab dispute" label="Shatt al-Arab dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q238046" start="37725" end="37755" title="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr" label="President Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="37780" end="37794" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324200" start="37901" end="37907" title="1979 Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party Purge" label="purged"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="38131" end="38148" title="Entente countries" label="Entente countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="38172" end="38186" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="38250" end="38257" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="38319" end="38324" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="38339" end="38345" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="38354" end="38360" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="38365" end="38369" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="38457" end="38461" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="38522" end="38535" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q836844" start="38567" end="38577" title="Battle of al-Qādisiyyah" label="Qādisiyyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q836844" start="38613" end="38623" title="Battle of al-Qādisiyyah" label="Qādisiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q752847" start="38755" end="38777" title="status quo ante bellum" label="status quo ante bellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078001" start="38999" end="39014" title="Territorial dispute" label="border disputes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="39029" end="39033" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="39111" end="39129" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="39184" end="39196" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="39197" end="39202" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q29448" start="39208" end="39246" title="United States support for Iraq during the Iran–Iraq war" label="United States supported Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q18642282" start="39595" end="39616" title="United Nations Security Council Resolutions concerning Iraq" label="calls for a ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="39624" end="39655" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359436" start="39779" end="39825" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 598" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 598"/>
<link wikidata="Q321865" start="40008" end="40030" title="1975 Algiers Agreement" label="1975 Algiers Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="40042" end="40058" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="40359" end="40370" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="40460" end="40474" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q192065" start="40526" end="40537" title="barbed wire" label="barbed wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448030" start="40555" end="40573" title="human wave attacks" label="human wave attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q773403" start="40581" end="40599" title="no-man&amp;#x27;s land" label="no-man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="40622" end="40638" title="chemical weapons" label="chemical weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q81166" start="40647" end="40658" title="mustard gas" label="mustard gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080137" start="40699" end="40705" title="troops" label="troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="40737" end="40741" title="Kurd" label="Kurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="40761" end="40780" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="41231" end="41249" title="invasion of Kuwait" label="invasion of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460058" start="41309" end="41323" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 678" label="Resolution 678"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="41563" end="41571" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="41589" end="41601" title="Desert Storm" label="Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="41781" end="41785" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q897614" start="41840" end="41850" title="Iraqi Army" label="Iraqi Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="41959" end="41966" title="Kurdish people" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q760002" start="41996" end="42016" title="1991 Iraqi uprisings" label="1991 Iraqi uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q179933" start="42073" end="42090" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q531366" start="42280" end="42302" title="Iraqi Republican Guard" label="Iraqi Republican Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q247291" start="42591" end="42602" title="Marsh Arabs" label="Marsh Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608991" start="42627" end="42643" title="Tigris-Euphrates river system" label="Iraqi marshlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q899657" start="42681" end="42699" title="Iraqi no-fly zones" label="Iraqi no-fly zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975001" start="42790" end="42804" title="UN Resolution 661" label="Resolution 661"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="42819" end="42837" title="economic sanctions" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="43141" end="43168" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355527" start="43172" end="43186" title="UN Resolution 687" label="Resolution 687"/>
<link wikidata="Q296745" start="43724" end="43744" title="oil for food program" label="oil for food program"/>
<link wikidata="Q657112" start="43909" end="43915" title="UNSCOM" label="UNSCOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348182" start="43940" end="43954" title="Richard Butler (diplomat)" label="Richard Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="44108" end="44127" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="44494" end="44567" title="September 11 attacks" label="terrorist attacks on New York and Washington in the United States in 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="44631" end="44646" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673271" start="44809" end="44822" title="regime change" label="regime change"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845489" start="45260" end="45287" title="Iraq Liberation Act" label="Iraq Liberation Act of 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="45581" end="45619" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="45636" end="45656" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="45684" end="45698" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="45756" end="45770" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q297275" start="45955" end="45964" title="Hans Blix" label="Hans Blix"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="46366" end="46379" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="46388" end="46402" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208235" start="46522" end="46537" title="UN Security Council Resolution 1441" label="Resolution 1441"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="46568" end="46587" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="46954" end="46967" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="46976" end="46990" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722016" start="47077" end="47100" title="Occupation of Iraq (2003–2011)" label="U.S. occupation of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183365" start="47128" end="47137" title="Iraqi civil war (2006–2008)" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984356" start="47225" end="47236" title="War in Iraq (2013–2017)" label="renewed war"/>
<link wikidata="Q18223185" start="47282" end="47289" title="History of Iraq (2011–present)" label="By 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672351" start="47375" end="47385" title="government of Iraq" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037304" start="47408" end="47437" title="Kurdistan Regional Government" label="Kurdistan Regional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="47466" end="47479" title="Islamic State" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q57890365" start="47536" end="47551" title="ISIL insurgency in Iraq (2017–present)" label="ISIL insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="47784" end="47800" title="Multi-National Force – Iraq" label="Coalition forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q926905" start="48047" end="48063" title="Iraqi insurgency (2003–11)" label="Iraqi insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029552" start="48163" end="48170" title="ad-Dawr" label="ad-Dawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q190131" start="48172" end="48191" title="Saladin Governorate" label="Saladin Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q489037" start="48192" end="48202" title="Jay Garner" label="Jay Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653520" start="48276" end="48285" title="Tim Cross" label="Tim Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q217683" start="48322" end="48333" title="Paul Bremer" label="Paul Bremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q453868" start="48363" end="48378" title="John Negroponte" label="John Negroponte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297120" start="48470" end="48519" title="Iraqi parliamentary election, January 2005" label="A parliamentary election was held in January 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672358" start="48566" end="48580" title="Constitution of Iraq" label="a constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q182532" start="48585" end="48634" title="Iraqi parliamentary election, December 2005" label="a further parliamentary election in December 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="48726" end="48734" title="Al Qaeda" label="Al Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q181049" start="48826" end="48846" title="Abu Musab Al Zarqawi" label="Abu Musab Al Zarqawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q687564" start="49325" end="49339" title="Sunni Triangle" label="Sunni Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076058" start="49535" end="49551" title="Al Qaeda in Iraq" label="Al Qaeda in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q309484" start="49634" end="49650" title="Al Askari Mosque" label="Al Askari Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q170047" start="49654" end="49661" title="Samarra" label="Samarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183365" start="49723" end="49732" title="Iraqi civil war (2006–2008)" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993709" start="49817" end="49841" title="Mujahideen Shura Council (Iraq)" label="Mujahideen Shura Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206631" start="50108" end="50129" title="Islamic State of Iraq" label="Islamic State of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984356" start="50740" end="50767" title="War in Iraq (2013–2017)" label="renewed escalation into war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118977" start="50815" end="50837" title="Withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq (2007–2011)" label="departure of US troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165215" start="50866" end="50886" title="Iraqi insurgency (2011–2013)" label="a renewed insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="50913" end="50929" title="Syrian civil war" label="Syrian civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984356" start="50996" end="50999" title="War in Iraq (2013–2017)" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672351" start="51013" end="51031" title="government of Iraq" label="government of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="51104" end="51140" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15553019" start="51141" end="51153" title="Anbar campaign (2013–14)" label="invaded Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q187334" start="51192" end="51212" title="Al Anbar Governorate" label="Al Anbar Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191170" start="51238" end="51246" title="Fallujah" label="Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353905" start="51248" end="51255" title="Al-Qa&amp;#x27;im (town)" label="Al Qaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q335021" start="51257" end="51267" title="Abu Ghraib" label="Abu Ghraib"/>
<link wikidata="Q192961" start="51286" end="51292" title="Ramadi" label="Ramadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q165444" start="51335" end="51341" title="Tikrit" label="Tikrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="51343" end="51348" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144192" start="51483" end="51502" title="Northern Iraq offensive (June 2014)" label="June 2014 offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q955690" start="51523" end="51529" title="Sinjar" label="Sinjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984373" start="51565" end="51586" title="Northern Iraq offensive (August 2014)" label="August 2014 offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q56388468" start="51611" end="51627" title="December 2014 Sinjar offensive" label="Sinjar offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q932728" start="51665" end="51674" title="Peshmerga" label="Peshmerga"/>
<link wikidata="Q277036" start="51679" end="51682" title="People&amp;#x27;s Protection Units" label="YPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q69783941" start="51768" end="51791" title="2015–2016 Iraqi protests" label="thousands of protesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312431" start="51804" end="51814" title="Green Zone" label="Green Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973075" start="51843" end="51859" title="Council of Representatives of Iraq" label="Iraqi parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q216826" start="52003" end="52018" title="Muqtada Al Sadr" label="Muqtada Al Sadr"/>
<link wikidata="Q205047" start="52261" end="52277" title="Kurdistan Region" label="Kurdistan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206659" start="52295" end="52335" title="2017 Kurdistan Region independence referendum" label="Kurdistan Region independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42161041" start="52357" end="52402" title="2017 Iraqi–Kurdish conflict" label="escalated into armed conflict in October 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q69783941" start="52644" end="52712" title="2018–19 Iraqi protests" label="Protests over deteriorating economic conditions and state corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="52737" end="52744" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q85317569" start="52977" end="52995" title="Mustafa Al-Kadhimi" label="Mustafa al-Kadhimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291634" start="53068" end="53084" title="Sadrist Movement" label="Sadrist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q84080555" start="53120" end="53143" title="2021 Iraqi parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q112762654" start="53180" end="53207" title="2022 Iraqi political crisis" label="2022 Iraqi political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496078" start="53227" end="53245" title="Abdul Latif Rashid" label="Abdul Latif Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q889817" start="53269" end="53286" title="President of Iraq" label="President of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q808173" start="53346" end="53358" title="Barham Salih" label="Barham Salih"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700793" start="53489" end="53512" title="Mohammed Shia&amp;#x27; Al Sudani" label="Mohammed Shia al-Sudani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476165" start="53620" end="53642" title="Prime Minister of Iraq" label="Prime Minister of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="53663" end="53680" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="53683" end="53698" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="53701" end="53708" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="53711" end="53720" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q627531" start="53723" end="53738" title="History of Asia" label="History of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394486" start="53741" end="53759" title="History of Baghdad" label="History of Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q51615" start="53762" end="53788" title="History of the Middle East" label="History of the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284551" start="53791" end="53812" title="List of kings of Iraq" label="List of kings of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864393" start="53815" end="53841" title="List of presidents of Iraq" label="List of presidents of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q14865005" start="53844" end="53875" title="List of prime ministers of Iraq" label="List of prime ministers of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="53878" end="53889" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154038" start="53892" end="53908" title="Politics of Iraq" label="Politics of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="53911" end="53916" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071065" start="53919" end="53938" title="Timeline of Baghdad" label="Timeline of Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963590" start="53941" end="53958" title="Timeline of Basra" label="Timeline of Basra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14665" wikidata="Q966954" url="?curid=14665" title="Geography of Iraq">
<text>The geography of Iraq is diverse and falls into five main regions: the desert (west of the Euphrates), Upper Mesopotamia (between the upper Tigris and Euphrates rivers), the northern highlands of Iraq, Lower Mesopotamia, and the alluvial plain extending from around Tikrit to the Persian Gulf.

The mountains in the northeast are an extension of the alpine system that runs eastward from the Balkans through southern Turkey, northern Iraq, Iran, and Afghanistan, eventually reaching the Himalayas in Pakistan. The desert lies in the southwest provinces along the borders with Saudi Arabia and Jordan and geographically belongs in the Arabian Peninsula.

==Major geographical features==
Most geographers, including those of the Iraqi government, discuss the country&#x27;s geography in terms of four main zones or regions: the desert in the west and southwest; the rolling upland between the upper Tigris and Euphrates rivers (in Arabic the &quot;Dijla&quot; and &quot;Furat&quot;, respectively); the highlands in the north and northeast; and the alluvial plain through which the Tigris and Euphrates flow.
Iraq&#x27;s official statistical reports give the total land area as , whereas a United States Department of State publication gives the area as .

===Upper Mesopotamia===
The uplands region, between the Tigris north of Hamrin Mountains and the Euphrates north of Hit, is known as Al Jazira (the island) and is part of a larger area that extends westward into Syria between the two rivers and into Turkey. Water in the area flows in deeply cut valleys, and irrigation is much more difficult than it is in the lower plain. The southwest areas of this zone are classified as desert or semi-desert. The northern parts, which include such places like the Nineveh Plains, Duhok, Zakho and Amedi, mainly consist of Mediterranean vegetation. The vegetation cyclically dries out and appear brown in the virtually arid summer and flourish in the wet winter.

===Lower Mesopotamia===
An alluvial plain begins north of Baghdad and extends to the Persian Gulf. Here the Tigris and Euphrates rivers lie above the level of the plain in many places, and the whole area is a river delta interlaced by the channels of the two rivers and by irrigation canals. Intermittent lakes, fed by the rivers in flood, also characterize southeastern Iraq. A fairly large area () just above the confluence of the two rivers at Al Qurnah and extending east of the Tigris beyond the Iranian border is marshland, known as Hawr al Hammar, the result of centuries of flooding and inadequate drainage. Much of it is permanent marsh, but some parts dry out in early winter, and other parts become marshland only in years of great flood.

Because the waters of the Tigris and Euphrates above their confluence are heavily silt- laden, irrigation and fairly frequent flooding deposit large quantities of silty loam in much of the delta area. Windborne silt contributes to the total deposit of sediments. It has been estimated that the delta plains are built up at the rate of nearly twenty centimeters in a century. In some areas, major floods lead to the deposit in temporary lakes of as much as thirty centimeters of mud.

The Tigris and Euphrates also carry large quantities of salts. These, too, are spread on the land by sometimes excessive irrigation and flooding. A high water table and poor surface and subsurface drainage tend to concentrate the salts near the surface of the soil. In general, the salinity of the soil increases from Baghdad south to the Persian Gulf and severely limits productivity in the region south of Al Amarah. The salinity is reflected in the large lake in central Iraq, southwest of Baghdad, known as Bahr al Milh (Sea of Salt). There are two other major lakes in the country to the north of Bahr al Milh: Buhayrat ath Tharthar and Buhayrat al Habbaniyah.

===Baghdad area===
Between Upper and Lower Mesopotamia is the urban area surrounding Baghdad. These &quot;Baghdad Belts&quot; can be described as the provinces adjacent to the Iraqi capital and can be divided into four quadrants: northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest. Beginning in the north, the belts include the province of Saladin, clockwise to Baghdad province, Diyala in the northeast, Babil and Wasit in the southeast and around to Al Anbar in the west.

===Highlands===

The northeastern highlands begin just south of a line drawn from Mosul to Kirkuk and extend to the borders with Turkey and Iran. High ground, separated by broad, undulating steppes, gives way to mountains ranging from near the Iranian and Turkish borders. Except for a few valleys, the mountain area proper is suitable only for grazing in the foothills and steppes; adequate soil and rainfall, however, make cultivation possible. Here, too, are the great oil fields near Mosul and Kirkuk. The northeast is the homeland of most Iraqi Kurds.
===Desert===
The desert zone, an area lying west and southwest of the Euphrates River, is a part of the Syrian Desert and Arabian Desert, which covers sections of Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia and most of the Arabian Peninsula.
The region, sparsely inhabited by pastoral Bedouins, consists of a wide stony plain interspersed with rare sandy stretches. A widely ramified pattern of wadis–watercourses that are dry most of the year–runs from the border to the Euphrates. Some wadis are over long and carry brief but torrential floods during the winter rains.

Western and southern Iraq is a vast desert region covering some , almost two-fifths of the country. The western desert, an extension of the Syrian Desert, rises to elevations above . The southern desert is known as Al-Hajarah in the western part and as Al-Dibdibah in the east. Both deserts are part of the Arabian Desert. Al Hajarah has a complex topography of rocky desert, wadis, ridges, and depressions. Al-Dibdibah is a more sandy region with a covering of scrub vegetation. Elevation in the southern desert averages between . A height of is reached at Mount &#x27;Unayzah at the intersection of the borders of Jordan, Iraq and Saudi Arabia. The deep Wadi Al-Batin runs in a northeast–southwest direction through Al-Dibdibah. It has been recognized since 1913 as the boundary between western Kuwait and Iraq.

==Tigris–Euphrates river system==
The Euphrates originates in Turkey, is augmented by the Balikh and Khabur rivers in Syria, and enters Iraq in the northwest. Here it is fed only by the wadis of the western desert during the winter rains. It then winds through a gorge, which varies from two to 16 kilometers in width, until it flows out on the plain at Ar Ramadi. Beyond there the Euphrates continues to the Hindiya Barrage, which was constructed in 1914 to divert the river into the Hindiyah Channel; the present day Shatt al Hillah had been the main channel of the Euphrates before 1914. Below Al Kifl, the river follows two channels to As-Samawah, where it reappears as a single channel to join the Tigris at Al Qurnah.
The Tigris also rises in Turkey but is significantly augmented by several rivers in Iraq, the most important of which are the Khabur, the Great Zab, the Little Zab, and the Adhaim, all of which join the Tigris above Baghdad, and the Diyala, which joins it about thirty-six kilometers below the city. At the Kut Barrage much of the water is diverted into the Shatt al-Hayy, which was once the main channel of the Tigris. Water from the Tigris thus enters the Euphrates through the Shatt al-Hayy well above the confluence of the two main channels at Al Qurnah.

Both the Tigris and the Euphrates break into a number of channels in the marshland area, and the flow of the rivers is substantially reduced by the time they come together at Al Qurnah. Moreover. the swamps act as silt traps, and the Shatt al Arab is relatively silt free as it flows south. Below Basra, however, the Karun River enters the Shatt al Arab from Iran, carrying large quantities of silt that present a continuous dredging problem in maintaining a channel for ocean-going vessels to reach the port at Basra. This problem has been superseded by a greater obstacle to river traffic, however, namely the presence of several sunken hulls that have been rusting in the Shatt al Arab since early in the Iran-Iraq war.

The waters of the Tigris and Euphrates are essential to the life of the country, but they sometimes threaten it. The rivers are at their lowest level in September and October and at flood in March, April, and May when they may carry forty times as much water as at low mark. Moreover, one season&#x27;s flood may be ten or more times as great as that in another year. In 1954, for example, Baghdad was seriously threatened, and dikes protecting it were nearly topped by the flooding Tigris. Since Syria built a dam on the Euphrates, the flow of water has been considerably diminished and flooding was no longer a problem in the mid-1980s. In 1988 Turkey was also constructing a dam on the Euphrates that would further restrict the water flow.

Until the mid-twentieth century, most efforts to control the waters were primarily concerned with irrigation. Some attention was given to problems of flood control and drainage before the revolution of July 14, 1958, but development plans in the 1960s and 1970s were increasingly devoted to these matters, as well as to irrigation projects on the upper reaches of the Tigris and Euphrates and the tributaries of the Tigris in the northeast. During the war, government officials stressed to foreign visitors that, with the conclusion of a peace settlement, problems of irrigation and flooding would receive top priority from the government.

Iraqi coastal waters boast a living coral reef, covering an area of 28 km2 in the Persian Gulf, at the mouth of the Shatt al-Arab river (). The coral reef was discovered by joint Iraqi–German expeditions of scientific scuba divers carried out in September 2012 and in May 2013. Prior to its discovery, it was believed that Iraq lacks coral reefs as the local turbid waters prevented the detection of the potential presence of local coral reefs. Iraqi corals were found to be adapted to one of the most extreme coral-bearing environments in the world, as the seawater temperature in this area ranges between 14 and 34 °C. The reef harbors several living stone corals, octocorals, ophiuroids and bivalves. There are also silica-containing demo-sponges.

==Settlement patterns==
In the rural areas of the alluvial plain and in the lower Diyala region, settlement almost invariably clusters near the rivers, streams, and irrigation canals. The bases of the relationship between watercourse and settlement have been summarized by Robert McCormick Adams, director of the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. He notes that the levees laid down by streams and canals provide advantages for both settlement and agriculture. Surface water drains more easily on the levees&#x27; back-slope, and the coarse soils of the levees are easier to cultivate and permit better subsurface drainage. The height of the levees gives some protection against floods and the frost that often affect low-lying areas and may kill and/or damage winter crops. Above all, those living or cultivating on the crest of a levee have easy access to water for irrigation and household use in a dry, hot country.

Although there are some isolated homesteads, most rural communities are nucleated settlements rather than dispersed farmsteads; that is, the farmer leaves his village to cultivate the fields outside it. The pattern holds for farming communities in the Kurdish highlands of the northeast as well as for those in the alluvial plain. The size of the settlement varies, generally with the volume of water available for household use and with the amount of land accessible to village dwellers. Sometimes, particularly in the lower Tigris and Euphrates valleys, soil salinity restricts the area of arable land and limits the size of the community dependent on it, and it also usually results in large unsettled and uncultivated stretches between the villages.

Fragmentary information suggests that most farmers in the alluvial plain tend to live in villages of over 100 persons. For example, in the mid-1970s a substantial number of the residents of Baqubah, the administrative center and major city of Diyala Governorate, were employed in agriculture.

The Marsh Arabs of the south usually live in small clusters of two or three houses kept above water by rushes that are constantly being replenished. Such clusters often are close together, but access from one to another is possible only by small boat. Here and there a few natural islands permit slightly larger clusters. Some of these people are primarily water buffalo herders and lead a semi-nomadic life. In the winter, when the waters are at a low point, they build fairly large temporary villages. In the summer they move their herds out of the marshes to the river banks.

The war has had its effect on the lives of these denizens of the marshes. With much of the fighting concentrated in their areas, they have either migrated to settled communities away from the marshes or have been forced by government decree to relocate within the marshes. Also, in early 1988, the marshes had become the refuge of deserters from the Iraqi army who attempted to maintain life in the fastness of the overgrown, desolate areas while hiding out from the authorities. These deserters in many instances have formed into large gangs that raid the marsh communities; this also has induced many of the marsh dwellers to abandon their villages.

The war has also affected settlement patterns in the northern Kurdish areas. There, the struggle for a Kurdish state by guerrillas was rejected by the government as it steadily escalated violence against the local communities. Starting in 1984, the government launched a scorched-earth campaign to drive a wedge between the villagers and the guerrillas in the remote areas of two provinces of Kurdistan in which Kurdish guerrillas were active. In the process whole villages were torched and subsequently bulldozed, which resulted in the Kurds flocking into the regional centers of Irbil and As Sulaymaniyah. Also as a &quot;military precaution&quot;, the government has cleared a broad strip of territory in the Kurdish region along the Iranian border of all its inhabitants, hoping in this way to interdict the movement of Kurdish guerrillas back and forth between Iran and Iraq. The majority of Kurdish villages, however, remained intact in early 1988.

In the arid areas of Iraq to the west and south, cities and large towns are almost invariably situated on watercourses, usually on the major rivers or their larger tributaries. In the south this dependence has had its disadvantages. Until the recent development of flood control, Baghdad and other cities were subject to the threat of inundation. Moreover, the dikes needed for protection have effectively prevented the expansion of the urban areas in some directions. The growth of Baghdad, for example, was restricted by dikes on its eastern edge. The diversion of water to the Milhat ath Tharthar and the construction of a canal transferring water from the Tigris north of Baghdad to the Diyala River have permitted the irrigation of land outside the limits of the dikes and the expansion of settlement.

==Climate==

The climate of Iraq is mainly a hot desert climate or a hot semi-arid climate to the northernmost part. Averages high temperatures are generally above at low elevations during summer months (June, July and August) while averages low temperatures can drop to below during the coldest month of the year during winter The all-time record high temperature in Iraq of was recorded near Basra on 22 July 2016. Most of the rainfall occurs from December through April and averages between annually. The mountainous region of northern Iraq receives appreciably more precipitation than the central or southern desert region, where they tend to have a Mediterranean climate.

Roughly 90% of the annual rainfall occurs between November and April, most of it in the winter months from December through March. The remaining six months, particularly the hottest ones of June, July, and August, are extremely dry.

Except in the north and northeast, mean annual rainfall ranges between . Data available from stations in the foothills and steppes south and southwest of the mountains suggest mean annual rainfall between for that area. Rainfall in the mountains is more abundant and may reach a year in some places, but the terrain precludes extensive cultivation. Cultivation on nonirrigated land is limited essentially to the mountain valleys, foothills, and steppes, which have or more of rainfall annually. Even in this zone, however, only one crop a year can be grown, and shortages of rain have often led to crop failures.

Mean minimum temperatures in the winter range from near freezing (just before dawn) in the northern and northeastern foothills and the western desert to in the alluvial plains of southern Iraq. They rise to a mean maximum of about in the western desert and the northeast, and in the south. In the summer mean minimum temperatures range from about and rise to maxima between roughly . Temperatures sometimes fall below freezing and have fallen as low as at Ar Rutbah in the western desert. Such summer heat, even in a hot desert, is high and this can be easily explained by the very low elevations of deserts regions which experience these exceptionally searing high temperatures. In fact, the elevations of cities such as Baghdad or Basra are near the sea level (0 m) because deserts are located predominantly along the Persian Gulf. That is why some Gulf&#x27;s countries like Iraq, Iran and Kuwait experience extreme heat during summer, even more extreme than the normal level. The searing summer heat only exists in low elevations in these countries while mountains and higher elevations know much more moderated summer temperatures.

The summer months are marked by two kinds of wind phenomena. The southern and southeasterly &quot;sharqi&quot;, a dry, dusty wind with occasional gusts of , occurs from April to early June and again from late September through November. It may last for a day at the beginning and end of the season but for several days at other times. This wind is often accompanied by violent duststorms that may rise to heights of several thousand meters and close airports for brief periods. From mid-June to mid-September the prevailing wind, called the shamal, is from the north and northwest. It is a steady wind, absent only occasionally during this period. The very dry air brought by this shamal permits intensive sun heating of the land surface, but the breeze has some cooling effect.

The combination of rain shortage and extreme heat makes much of Iraq a desert. Because of very high rates of evaporation, soil and plants rapidly lose the little moisture obtained from the rain, and vegetation could not survive without extensive irrigation. Some areas, however, although arid, do have natural vegetation in contrast to the desert. For example, in the Zagros Mountains in northeastern Iraq there is permanent vegetation, such as oak trees, and date palms are found in the south.



==Area and boundaries==
In 1922 British officials concluded the Treaty of Mohammara with Abd al Aziz ibn Abd ar Rahman Al Saud, who in 1932 formed the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The treaty provided the basic agreement for the boundary between the eventually independent nations. Also in 1922 the two parties agreed to the creation of the diamond-shaped Neutral Zone of approximately adjacent to the western tip of Kuwait in which neither Iraq nor Saudi Arabia would build dwellings or installations. Bedouins from either country could utilize the limited water and seasonal grazing resources of the zone. In April 1975, an agreement signed in Baghdad fixed the borders of the countries.

Through Algerian mediation, Iran and Iraq agreed in March 1975 to normalize their relations, and three months later they signed a treaty known as the Algiers Accord. The document defined the common border all along the Khawr Abd Allah (Shatt) River estuary as the thalweg. To compensate Iraq for the loss of what formerly had been regarded as its territory, pockets of territory along the mountain border in the central sector of its common boundary with Iran were assigned to it. Nonetheless, in September 1980 Iraq went to war with Iran, citing among other complaints the fact that Iran had not turned over to it the land specified in the Algiers Accord. This problem has subsequently proved to be a stumbling block to a negotiated settlement of the ongoing conflict.

In 1988 the boundary with Kuwait was another outstanding problem. It was fixed in a 1913 treaty between the Ottoman Empire and British officials acting on behalf of Kuwait&#x27;s ruling family, which in 1899 had ceded control over foreign affairs to Britain. The boundary was accepted by Iraq when it became independent in 1932, but in the 1960s and again in the mid-1970s, the Iraqi government advanced a claim to parts of Kuwait. Kuwait made several representations to the Iraqis during the war to fix the border once and for all but Baghdad repeatedly demurred, claiming that the issue is a potentially divisive one that could inflame nationalist sentiment inside Iraq. Hence in 1988 it was likely that a solution would have to wait until the war ended.

Area:&lt;br&gt;
&quot;total:&quot; &lt;br&gt;
&quot;land:&quot; &lt;br&gt;
&quot;water:&quot; 

Land boundaries:&lt;br&gt;
&quot;total:&quot; &lt;br&gt;
&quot;border countries:&quot; Iran , Saudi Arabia , Syria , Turkey , Kuwait , Jordan 

Coastline: 

Maritime claims:&lt;br&gt;
&quot;territorial sea:&quot; 
&quot;continental shelf:&quot; not specified

Terrain:&lt;br&gt; mostly broad plains; reedy marshes along Iranian border in south with large flooded areas; mountains along borders with Iran and Turkey

Elevation extremes:&lt;br&gt;
&quot;lowest point:&quot; Persian Gulf 0 m&lt;br&gt;
&quot;highest point:&quot; Cheekah Dar 

==Resources and land use==
Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, phosphates, sulfur

Land use:&lt;br&gt;
&quot;arable land:&quot; 7.89%&lt;br&gt;
&quot;permanent crops:&quot; 0.53%&lt;br&gt;
&quot;other:&quot; 91.58% (2012)

Irrigated land: (2003)

Total renewable water resources: (2011)

Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):&lt;br&gt;
&quot;total:&quot; 66 km3/yr (7%/15%/79%)&lt;br&gt;
&quot;per capita:&quot; 2,616 m3/yr (2000)

While its proven oil reserves of ranks Iraq fifth in the world behind Iran, the United States Department of Energy estimates that up to 90 percent of the country remains unexplored. Unexplored regions of Iraq could yield an additional . Iraq&#x27;s oil production costs are among the lowest in the world. However, only about 2,000 oil wells have been drilled in Iraq, compared to about 1 million wells in Texas alone.

==Environmental concerns==
Natural hazards: dust storms, sandstorms, floods

Environment - current issues: government water control projects have drained most of the inhabited marsh areas east of An Kshatriya by drying up or diverting the feeder streams and rivers; a once sizable population of Shi&#x27;a Muslims, who have inhabited these areas for thousands of years, has been displaced; furthermore, the destruction of the natural habitat poses serious threats to the area&#x27;s wildlife populations; inadequate supplies of potable water; development of Tigris-Euphrates Rivers system contingent upon agreements with upstream riparian Turkey; air and water pollution; soil degradation (desalination) and erosion; and desertification.

Environment - international agreements:&lt;br&gt;
&quot;party to:&quot; Biodiversity, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection&lt;br&gt;
&quot;signed, but not ratified:&quot; Environmental Modification

:Major regressions:
:*Arabian Desert and East Sahero-Arabian xeric shrublands (PA1303)
:*Mesopotamian shrub desert (PA1320)
:Minor ecoregions:
:*Zagros Mountains forest steppe (PA0446)
:*Middle East steppe (PA0812)
:*Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous broadleaf forests (PA1207)
:*South Iran Nubo-Sindian desert and semi-desert (PA1328)
:*Tigris-Euphrates alluvial salt marsh (PA0906)
:*Red Sea Nubo-Sindian tropical desert and semi-desert (PA1325)
:*Persian Gulf desert and semi-desert (PA1323)

==See also==
* Babylonian Map of the World
* Saudi Arabian–Iraqi neutral zone

==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="17" end="21" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="91" end="100" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q311819" start="103" end="120" title="Upper Mesopotamia" label="Upper Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="140" end="146" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="151" end="160" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q14223170" start="202" end="219" title="Lower Mesopotamia" label="Lower Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q656586" start="229" end="243" title="alluvial plain" label="alluvial plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q165444" start="266" end="272" title="Tikrit" label="Tikrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="280" end="292" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="392" end="399" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="417" end="423" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="440" end="444" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="450" end="461" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="487" end="496" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="500" end="508" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="514" end="520" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="576" end="588" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="593" end="599" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="634" end="651" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="826" end="832" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="1187" end="1220" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646378" start="1326" end="1342" title="Hamrin Mountains" label="Hamrin Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422345" start="1370" end="1373" title="Hit, Iraq" label="Hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q311819" start="1387" end="1396" title="Al-Jazira, Mesopotamia" label="Al Jazira"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1504" end="1510" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="1563" end="1573" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993049" start="1757" end="1771" title="Nineveh Plains" label="Nineveh Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q152831" start="1773" end="1778" title="Duhok" label="Duhok"/>
<link wikidata="Q167800" start="1780" end="1785" title="Zakho" label="Zakho"/>
<link wikidata="Q460736" start="1790" end="1795" title="Amedi" label="Amedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q667552" start="1815" end="1828" title="Mediterranean shrub" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q656586" start="1983" end="1997" title="alluvial plain" label="alluvial plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="2014" end="2021" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="2041" end="2053" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="2165" end="2176" title="river delta" label="river delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="2261" end="2265" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574863" start="2403" end="2412" title="Al Qurnah" label="Al Qurnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668029" start="2495" end="2509" title="Hawr al Hammar" label="Hawr al Hammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="2789" end="2793" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="2802" end="2812" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="3247" end="3251" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="3344" end="3355" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q366010" start="3599" end="3608" title="Al Amarah" label="Al Amarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="3614" end="3622" title="salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007652" start="3702" end="3714" title="Bahr al Milh" label="Bahr al Milh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640519" start="3807" end="3828" title="Buhayrat ath Tharthar" label="Buhayrat ath Tharthar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539972" start="3833" end="3855" title="Buhayrat al Habbaniyah" label="Buhayrat al Habbaniyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="3943" end="3950" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841805" start="3964" end="3977" title="Baghdad Belts" label="Baghdad Belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q190131" start="4194" end="4201" title="Saladin Governorate" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217075" start="4234" end="4240" title="Diyala Governorate" label="Diyala"/>
<link wikidata="Q59202" start="4259" end="4264" title="Babil Governorate" label="Babil"/>
<link wikidata="Q189747" start="4269" end="4274" title="Wasit Governorate" label="Wasit"/>
<link wikidata="Q187334" start="4306" end="4314" title="Al Anbar Governorate" label="Al Anbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="4411" end="4416" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q173310" start="4420" end="4426" title="Kirkuk" label="Kirkuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="4458" end="4464" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4469" end="4473" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="4519" end="4525" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="4879" end="4883" title="Kurd" label="Kurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q339162" start="4990" end="5003" title="Syrian Desert" label="Syrian Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q208299" start="5008" end="5022" title="Arabian Desert" label="Arabian Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="5049" end="5054" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="5056" end="5062" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="5068" end="5080" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="5097" end="5114" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="5159" end="5166" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187971" start="5269" end="5273" title="wadi" label="wadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q187971" start="5362" end="5366" title="wadi" label="wadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="6243" end="6249" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q815591" start="6351" end="6357" title="Balikh River" label="Balikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q685344" start="6362" end="6368" title="Khabur (Euphrates)" label="Khabur"/>
<link wikidata="Q192961" start="6615" end="6624" title="Ar Ramadi" label="Ar Ramadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619329" start="6670" end="6685" title="Hindiya Barrage" label="Hindiya Barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531376" start="6858" end="6865" title="Al Kifl" label="Al Kifl"/>
<link wikidata="Q750679" start="6901" end="6911" title="As-Samawah" label="As-Samawah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574863" start="6974" end="6983" title="Al Qurnah" label="Al Qurnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q607977" start="7111" end="7117" title="Khabur (Tigris)" label="Khabur"/>
<link wikidata="Q756018" start="7123" end="7132" title="Great Zab" label="Great Zab"/>
<link wikidata="Q954645" start="7138" end="7148" title="Little Zab" label="Little Zab"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143945" start="7158" end="7164" title="Adhaim" label="Adhaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q304413" start="7218" end="7224" title="Diyala River" label="Diyala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091644" start="7292" end="7303" title="Kut Barrage" label="Kut Barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076850" start="7343" end="7356" title="Shatt al-Hayy" label="Shatt al-Hayy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="7842" end="7847" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q461557" start="7862" end="7873" title="Karun River" label="Karun River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166966" start="7885" end="7898" title="Shatt al Arab" label="Shatt al Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="8697" end="8702" title="Dyke (construction)" label="dikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="9660" end="9674" title="coastal waters" label="coastal waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="9690" end="9700" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="9736" end="9748" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q166966" start="9770" end="9783" title="Shatt al-Arab" label="Shatt al-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q132680" start="10321" end="10331" title="octocorals" label="octocorals"/>
<link wikidata="Q59256" start="10333" end="10343" title="ophiuroids" label="ophiuroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="10348" end="10356" title="bivalves" label="bivalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="10373" end="10379" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="10745" end="10766" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="11593" end="11597" title="Kurd" label="Kurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="11897" end="11910" title="soil salinity" label="soil salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q270821" start="12286" end="12293" title="Baqubah" label="Baqubah"/>
<link wikidata="Q156169" start="12493" end="12499" title="Juncaceae" label="rushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42710" start="12747" end="12760" title="Domestic buffalo" label="water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="12785" end="12790" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="13685" end="13689" title="Kurd" label="Kurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="13743" end="13753" title="guerrillas" label="guerrillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="13965" end="13975" title="guerrillas" label="guerrillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41470" start="14016" end="14025" title="Kurdistan" label="Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132754" start="14204" end="14209" title="Irbil" label="Irbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q191204" start="14214" end="14229" title="As Sulaymaniyah" label="As Sulaymaniyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="14360" end="14364" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="14520" end="14524" title="Kurd" label="Kurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="14859" end="14866" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="14940" end="14945" title="Dike (construction)" label="dikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="15062" end="15069" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q304413" start="15270" end="15282" title="Diyala River" label="Diyala River"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="15432" end="15450" title="hot desert climate" label="hot desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="15456" end="15477" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="15781" end="15786" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="16041" end="16062" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="16744" end="16751" title="steppes" label="steppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="17635" end="17642" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="17646" end="17651" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="17733" end="17745" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="17791" end="17795" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="17797" end="17801" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="17806" end="17812" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q967685" start="18592" end="18598" title="shamal (wind)" label="shamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="19199" end="19205" title="Zagros" label="Zagros"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="19276" end="19279" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q25292" start="19291" end="19300" title="date palm" label="date palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q31711" start="19448" end="19455" title="Al Saud" label="Al Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="19827" end="19834" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="19970" end="19977" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="20023" end="20030" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q321865" start="20165" end="20179" title="1975 Algiers Agreement" label="Algiers Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118315" start="20234" end="20249" title="Khawr Abd Allah" label="Khawr Abd Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="20264" end="20271" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q944672" start="20279" end="20286" title="thalweg" label="thalweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="20549" end="20553" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q321865" start="20656" end="20670" title="1975 Algiers Agreement" label="Algiers Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="20812" end="20818" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="20894" end="20908" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="20913" end="20920" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155457" start="20951" end="20978" title="Politics of Kuwait" label="Kuwait&amp;#x27;s ruling family"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="21218" end="21224" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="21322" end="21329" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="21727" end="21731" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="21734" end="21746" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="21749" end="21754" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="21757" end="21763" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="21766" end="21772" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="21775" end="21781" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068860" start="22166" end="22177" title="Cheekah Dar" label="Cheekah Dar"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827361" start="22656" end="22668" title="oil reserves" label="oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="22709" end="22713" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="22719" end="22753" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q587682" start="22970" end="22978" title="oil well" label="oil well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="23044" end="23049" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045071" start="23730" end="23746" title="soil retrogression and degradation" label="soil degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="23779" end="23794" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="23869" end="23881" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="23883" end="23897" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="23899" end="23921" title="Ozone Layer Protection" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q488546" start="23970" end="23996" title="Environmental Modification" label="Environmental Modification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24020" end="24084" title="Ecoregion PA1303" label="Arabian Desert and East Sahero-Arabian xeric shrublands (PA1303)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24087" end="24121" title="Ecoregion PA1320" label="Mesopotamian shrub desert (PA1320)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24143" end="24182" title="Zagros Mountains#Ecology" label="Zagros Mountains forest steppe (PA0446)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24185" end="24212" title="Ecoregion PA0812" label="Middle East steppe (PA0812)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24215" end="24286" title="Ecoregion PA1207" label="Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous broadleaf forests (PA1207)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24289" end="24344" title="Ecoregion PA1328" label="South Iran Nubo-Sindian desert and semi-desert (PA1328)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608991" start="24347" end="24392" title="Tigris–Euphrates river system" label="Tigris-Euphrates alluvial salt marsh (PA0906)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24395" end="24456" title="Ecoregion PA1325" label="Red Sea Nubo-Sindian tropical desert and semi-desert (PA1325)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24459" end="24503" title="Ecoregion PA1323" label="Persian Gulf desert and semi-desert (PA1323)"/>
<link wikidata="Q279559" start="24520" end="24547" title="Babylonian Map of the World" label="Babylonian Map of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710" start="24550" end="24582" title="Saudi Arabian–Iraqi neutral zone" label="Saudi Arabian–Iraqi neutral zone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14666" wikidata="Q3044242" url="?curid=14666" title="Demographics of Iraq">
<text>The Iraqi people (; ; Syriac: ܥܡܐ ܥܝܪܩܝܐ; Turkish: &quot;Iraklılar&quot;) are people originating from the country of Iraq.

Iraqi Arabs are the largest ethnic group in Iraq, followed by Iraqi Kurds, then Iraqi Turkmen as the third largest ethnic group in the country. Studies indicate that Mesopotamian Arabs, who make up the overwhelming majority of Iraq&#x27;s population, are genetically distinct from other Arab populations in the Arabs of the Arabian peninsula.

The population was estimated to be 46,118,554 in 2024 Turkmens (3 million), Assyrians (0.5 million), Yazidis (500,000), Armenians, Marsh Arabs, and Shabaks (250,000). Other minorities include Mandaeans (3,000), Roma (50,000) and Circassians (2,000). The most spoken languages are Mesopotamian Arabic, Kurdish, Assyrian Syriac and Iraqi Turkmen dialects. The percentages of different ethno-religious groups residing in Iraq vary from source to source due to the last Iraqi census having taken place over 30 years ago. A new census of Iraq was planned to take place in 2020, but this was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It was rescheduled to November 2022 but was postponed again with an &quot;electronic national population census&quot; planned in the last quarter of 2023.

A new national census was held on 20 and 21 November 2024, with a total number of 120,000 field researchers who executed the census in all governorates on the set date. The detailed results were announced on 24 February 2025. Which showed that the Iraqi population has risen to about 46 million and 118 thousands. With 101 Male for every 100 Female.

==Population==

39,650,145 (2021 estimate), ( estimate), up from 31,234,000 (April 2009 IMF estimate)

===Structure of the population===

Structure of the population (1 July 2013) (Estimates):
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020):
==Vital statistics==
===UN estimates (based on UN WPP Revision 2022) ===
Note: This table uses the sticky table format to make scrolling easier. If you prefer, you can disable it. 



===Total fertility rate ===


===Life expectancy at birth===
Average life expectancy at birth of the total population.


==Ethnicity==

Iraq&#x27;s dominant ethnic group is Arabs, who account for more than three-quarters of the population.

According to the CIA World Factbook, citing a 1987 Iraqi government estimate, the population of Iraq is formed of 75-80% Arabs (including Marsh Arabs) followed by 15-20% Kurds and other minorities form 5% of the country&#x27;s population, including the Turkmen, Kaka&#x27;i, Bedouins, Roma, Assyrians, Circassians, Mandaeans, and Persians.

However, the International Crisis Group points out that figures from the 1987 census, as well as the 1967, 1977, and 1997 censuses, &quot;are all considered highly problematic, due to suspicions of regime manipulation&quot; because Iraqi citizens were only allowed to indicate belonging to either the Arab or Kurdish ethnic groups; consequently, this skewed the number of other ethnic minorities, such as Iraq&#x27;s third largest ethnic group – the Turkmen.

==Languages==

Arabic and Kurdish are the two official languages of Iraq. Arabic is taught across all schools in Iraq, however in the north the Kurdish language is the most spoken. Eastern Aramaic languages, such as Syriac and Mandaic are spoken, as well as the Iraqi Turkmen language, and various other indigenous languages.

Kurdish, including several dialects, is the second largest language and has regional language status in the north of the country. Aramaic, in antiquity spoken throughout the whole country, is now only spoken by the Assyrian minority, in distinct dialects that differ from church affiliation and geographic origin. The Iraqi Turkmen dialect is spoken in parts of northern Iraq, numerous languages of the Caucasus are also spoken by minorities, notably the Chechen community.

==Religions==

The CIA World Factbook estimated in 2015 that between 95-98% of Iraqis followed Islam, with 61-64% being Shia and 29-34% being Sunni. Christianity accounted for 2%, and the rest (1-4%) practiced Yazidism, Mandaeism, and other religions.

While there has been voluntary relocation of many Christian families to northern Iraq, recent reporting indicates that the overall Christian population may have dropped by as much as 50 percent since the fall of Saddam Hussein in 2003, with many fleeing to Syria, Jordan, and Lebanon (2010 estimate). The percentage of Christians has fallen from 6% in 1991 or 1.5 million to about one third of this. Estimates say there are 500,000 Christians in Iraq.

Nearly all Iraqi Kurds identify as Sunni Muslims. A 2014 survey in Iraq concluded that &quot;98% of Kurds in Iraq identified themselves as Sunnis and only 2% identified as Shias&quot;. The religious differences between Sunni Arabs and Sunni Kurds are small. While 98 percent of Shia Arabs believe that visiting the shrines of saints is acceptable, 71 percent of Sunni Arabs did and 59 percent of Sunni Kurds support this practice. About 94 percent of the population in Iraqi Kurdistan is Muslim.

==See also==
*Armenians in Iraq
*Homelessness in Iraq
*Iraqi diaspora
*Youth in Iraq

==References==

==Further reading==
*Zubaida, Sami. &quot;Jews &amp; Others in Iraq .&quot; ISIM review 22 (2008): 6–7.

==External links==
* populationpyramid
*The World Factbook – Iraq
*Linguist List partial inventory of languages and dialects of Iraq </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3044242" start="4" end="16" title="Demographics of Iraq" label="Iraqi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="22" end="28" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="42" end="49" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="117" end="121" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q12180107" start="186" end="197" title="Kurds in Iraq" label="Iraqi Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165171" start="204" end="217" title="Iraqi Turkmen" label="Iraqi Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="435" end="465" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabs of the Arabian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165171" start="522" end="530" title="Iraqi Turkmen" label="Turkmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="544" end="553" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q200885" start="569" end="576" title="Yazidis" label="Yazidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="588" end="597" title="Armenian people" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q247291" start="599" end="610" title="Marsh Arabs" label="Marsh Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515909" start="616" end="623" title="Shabak people" label="Shabaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="660" end="669" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656122" start="679" end="683" title="Dom people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12218703" start="697" end="708" title="Circassians in Iraq" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q56232" start="748" end="767" title="Mesopotamian Arabic" label="Mesopotamian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="769" end="776" title="Kurdish languages" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410322" start="787" end="793" title="Eastern Aramaic languages" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="798" end="811" title="Iraqi Turkmen#Language" label="Iraqi Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="1075" end="1092" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q841753" start="1389" end="1401" title="Governorates of Iraq" label="governorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="2104" end="2119" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="2208" end="2213" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="2293" end="2311" title="The World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q247291" start="2414" end="2425" title="Marsh Arabs" label="Marsh Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12180107" start="2446" end="2451" title="Kurds in Iraq" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165171" start="2529" end="2536" title="Iraqi Turkmen" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7485854" start="2538" end="2549" title="Kaka&amp;#x27;i" label="Kaka&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="2551" end="2559" title="Bedouins" label="Bedouins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120654" start="2561" end="2565" title="Gypsies in Iraq" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376604" start="2567" end="2576" title="Assyrians in Iraq" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12218703" start="2578" end="2589" title="Circassians in Iraq" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="2591" end="2600" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375652" start="2606" end="2614" title="Ajam of Iraq" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072857" start="2630" end="2656" title="International Crisis Group" label="International Crisis Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165171" start="3067" end="3074" title="Iraqi Turkmen" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="3092" end="3098" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="3103" end="3110" title="Kurdish languages" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410322" start="3258" end="3283" title="Eastern Aramaic languages" label="Eastern Aramaic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="3293" end="3299" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q33500" start="3304" end="3311" title="Mandaic language" label="Mandaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q770220" start="3480" end="3497" title="regional language" label="regional language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3722" end="3743" title="Iraqi Turkmen#Language" label="Iraqi Turkmen dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237297" start="3790" end="3815" title="languages of the Caucasus" label="languages of the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="3902" end="3916" title="The World Factbook" label="World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3974" end="3979" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q650875" start="4028" end="4040" title="Christianity in Iraq" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670106" start="4089" end="4097" title="Yazidism" label="Yazidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="4099" end="4108" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="4344" end="4358" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="4620" end="4632" title="Sunni Muslim" label="Sunni Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="4810" end="4815" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="4947" end="4958" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q66711956" start="5054" end="5069" title="Iraqi Kurdistan" label="Iraqi Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793323" start="5096" end="5113" title="Armenians in Iraq" label="Armenians in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844404" start="5115" end="5135" title="Homelessness in Iraq" label="Homelessness in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117148" start="5137" end="5151" title="Iraqi diaspora" label="Iraqi diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q18560088" start="5153" end="5166" title="Youth in Iraq" label="Youth in Iraq"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14667" wikidata="Q1154038" url="?curid=14667" title="Politics of Iraq">
<text>Iraq is a federal parliamentary representative democratic republic. It is a multi-party system whereby the executive power is exercised by the Prime Minister of the Council of Ministers as the head of government, the President of Iraq as the head of state, and legislative power is vested in the Council of Representatives.

The current President of Iraq is Abdul Latif Rashid, who holds most of the executive authority and appointed the Council of Ministers, which acts as a cabinet and/or government.

==Government==

===Federal government===

The federal government of Iraq is defined under the current constitution as an Islamic, democratic, federal parliamentary republic. The federal government is composed of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, as well as numerous independent commissions.

The legislative branch is composed of the Council of Representatives and a Federation Council. The executive branch is composed of the president, the prime minister, and the Council of Ministers. The federal judiciary is composed of the Supreme Judicial Council, the Court of Cassation, the Supreme Court, the Public Prosecution Department, the Judiciary Oversight Commission, and other federal courts that are regulated by law. One such court is the Central Criminal Court.

The Independent High Commission for Human Rights, the Independent High Electoral Commission, and the Commission on Integrity are independent commissions subject to monitoring by the Council of Representatives. The Central Bank of Iraq, the Board of Supreme Audit, the Communications and Media Commission, and the Endowment Commission are financially and administratively independent institutions. The Foundation of Martyrs is attached to the Council of Ministers. The Federal Public Service Council regulates the affairs of the federal public service, including appointment and promotion.

===Local government===
The basic subdivisions of the country are the regions and the governorates. Both regions and governorates are given broad autonomy with regions given additional powers such as control of internal security forces for the region such as police, security forces, and guards. The last local elections for the governorates were held in the 2009 Iraqi governorate elections on 31 January 2009.

====Federal regions====

The constitution requires that the Council of Representatives enact a law which provides the procedures for forming a new region 6 months from the start of its first session. A law was passed 11 October 2006 by a unanimous vote with only 138 of 275 representatives present, with the remaining representatives boycotting the vote. Legislators from the Iraqi Accord Front, Sadrist Movement and Islamic Virtue Party all opposed the bill.

Under the law, a region can be created out of one or more existing governorates or two or more existing regions, and a governorate can also join an existing region to create a new region. A new region can be proposed by one third or more of the council members in each affected governorate plus 500 voters or by one tenth or more voters in each affected governorate. A referendum must then be held within three months, which requires a simple majority in favour to pass. In the event of competing proposals, the multiple proposals are put to a ballot and the proposal with the most supporters is put to the referendum. In the event of an affirmative referendum a Transitional Legislative Assembly is elected for one year, which has the task of writing a constitution for the Region, which is then put to a referendum requiring a simple majority to pass. The President, Prime Minister and Ministers of the region are elected by simple majority, in contrast to the Iraqi Council of Representatives which requires two thirds support.

The northern Kurdistan Region emerged in 1992 with its own local government and parliament officially recognised in 2005 following the adoption of the new constitution.

====Provinces====


Iraq is divided into 18 governorates, which are further divided into districts:

==Political parties==
===Parliamentary alliances and parties===
* National Iraqi Alliance (mainly Shi&#x27;a Islamist) 
** Supreme Islamic Iraqi Council (&quot;al-Majlis al-alalith-thaura l-islamiyya fil-Iraq&quot;) – led by Ammar al-Hakim
** Sadrist Movement – led by Muqtada al-Sadr
** Islamic Dawa Party – Iraq Organisation (&quot;Hizb al-Da&#x27;wa al-Islami Tendeem al-Iraq&quot;) – led by Kasim Muhammad Taqi al-Sahlani
** Islamic Dawa Party (&quot;Hizb al-Da&#x27;wa al-Islamiyya&quot;) – led by Nouri al-Maliki
** Tribes of Iraq Coalition – led by Hamid al-Hais
** Islamic Fayli Grouping in Iraq – led by Muqdad Al-Baghdadi
* Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan
** Kurdistan Democratic Party (&quot;Partiya Demokrat a Kurdistanê&quot;) – led by Massoud Barzani
** Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (&quot;Yaketi Nishtimani Kurdistan&quot;) – led by Jalal Talabani
** Kurdistan Islamic Union (&quot;Yekîtiya Islamiya Kurdistan&quot;)
** Movement for Change (&quot;Bizutnaway Gorran&quot;) – led by Nawshirwan Mustafa
** Kurdistan Toilers&#x27; Party (&quot;Parti Zahmatkeshan Kurdistan&quot;)
** Kurdistan Communist Party (&quot;Partiya Komunîst Kurdistan&quot;)
** Feyli Kurd Democratic Union (Yeketîa Demokrata Kurden Feylî)
** Assyrian Patriotic Party
* Civil Democratic Alliance (secular, nonsectarian)
** People&#x27;s Party led by Faiq Al Sheikh Ali.
** Iraqi Ummah Party led by Mithal Al-Alusi.
** Iraqi Liberal Party
** National Democratic Action Party
* Iraqi List (&quot;al-Qayimaal Iraqia&quot;) (mainly secular Shia)
** Iraqi National Accord – led by Iyad Allawi
* The Iraqis – led by Ghazi al-Yawer (allegedly Sunni)
* Iraqi Turkmen Front (&quot;Irak Türkmen Cephesi)&quot;) (same as Alliance of the Turkomen Front of Iraq?) (ethnic group of Iraqi Turkmen)
* National Independent Cadres and Elites (Shia)
* People&#x27;s Union (&quot;Ittihad Al Shaab&quot;)
** Iraqi Communist Party – led by Hamid Majid Mousa
* Islamic Kurdish Society – led by Ali Abd-al Aziz
* Islamic Labour Movement in Iraq
* National Democratic Party (&quot;Hizb al Dimuqratiyah al Wataniyah&quot;) – led by Samir al-Sumaidai
* National Rafidain List
** Assyrian Democratic Movement (&quot;Zowaa Dimuqrataya Aturaya&quot;) – led by Yonadam Kanna
* Reconciliation and Liberation Bloc
* The Upholders of the Message (&quot;Al-Risaliyun&quot;)
* Mithal al-Alusi List
* Yazidi Movement for Reform and Progress

===Other parties===
* Communist Party of Iraq
* Worker-Communist Party of Iraq
* Leftist Worker-Communist Party of Iraq
* Alliance of Independent Democrats – led by Adnan Pachachi
* National Democratic Party – Naseer al-Chaderchi
* Green Party of Iraq
* Iraqi Democratic Union 
* Iraqi National Accord 
* Constitutional Monarchy Movement – led by Sharif Ali Bin al-Hussein
* Assyrian Patriotic Party – on the Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan list
* Assyria Liberation Party
* Kurdistan Conservative Party
* Turkmen People&#x27;s Party
* Iraqi Islamic Party – led by Ayad al-Samarrai
* Al Neshoor Party

===Illegal parties===
* Hizb ut-Tahrir
* Arab Socialist Ba&#x27;ath Party (Regional Command National Command)

==Elections==
===Iraqi parliamentary election, January 2005===
Elections for the National Assembly of Iraq were held on January 30, 2005, in Iraq. The 275-member National Assembly was a parliament created under the Transitional Law during the Occupation of Iraq. The newly elected transitional Assembly was given a mandate to write the new and permanent Constitution of Iraq and exercised legislative functions until the new Constitution came into effect, and resulted in the formation of the Iraqi Transitional Government.

The United Iraqi Alliance, tacitly backed by Shia Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, led with some 48% of the vote. The Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan was in second place with some 26% of the vote. Prime Minister Ayad Allawi&#x27;s party, the Iraqi List, came third with some 14%. In total, twelve parties received enough votes to win a seat in the assembly.

Low Arab Sunni turnout threatened the legitimacy of the election, which was as low as 2% in Anbar province. More than 100 armed attacks on polling places took place, killing at least 44 people (including nine suicide bombers) across Iraq, including at least 20 in Baghdad.

===Iraqi parliamentary election, December 2005===
Following the ratification of the Constitution of Iraq on 15 October 2005, a general election was held on 15 December to elect the permanent 275-member Iraqi Council of Representatives.

The elections took place under a list system, whereby voters chose from a list of parties and coalitions. 230 seats were apportioned among Iraq&#x27;s 18 governorates based on the number of registered voters in each as of the January 2005 elections, including 59 seats for Baghdad Governorate. The seats within each governorate were allocated to lists through a system of Proportional Representation. An additional 45 &quot;compensatory&quot; seats were allocated to those parties whose percentage of the national vote total (including out of country votes) exceeds the percentage of the 275 total seats that they have been allocated. Women were required to occupy 25% of the 275 seats. The change in the voting system gave more weight to Arab Sunni voters, who make up most of the voters in several provinces. It was expected that these provinces would thus return mostly Sunni Arab representatives, after most Sunnis boycotted the last election.

Turnout was high (79.6%). The White House was encouraged by the relatively low levels of violence during polling, with one insurgent group making good on a promised election day moratorium on attacks, even going so far as to guard the voters from attack. President Bush frequently pointed to the election as a sign of progress in rebuilding Iraq. However, post-election violence threatened to plunge the nation into civil war, before the situation began to calm in 2007. The election results themselves produced a shaky coalition government headed by Nouri al-Maliki.

===Iraqi parliamentary election, 2010===

A parliamentary election was held in Iraq on 7 March 2010. The election decided the 325 members of the Council of Representatives of Iraq who will elect the Iraqi Prime Minister and President. The election resulted in a partial victory for the Iraqi National Movement, led by former Interim Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, which won a total of 91 seats, making it the largest alliance in the council. The State of Law Coalition, led by incumbent Prime Minister Nouri Al-Maliki, was the second largest grouping with 89 seats.

The election was rife with controversy. Prior to the election, the Supreme Court in Iraq ruled that the existing electoral law/rule was unconstitutional, and a new elections law made changes in the electoral system. On 15 January 2010, the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) banned 499 candidates from the election due to alleged links with the Ba&#x27;ath Party. Before the start of the campaign on 12 February 2010, IHEC confirmed that most of the appeals by banned candidates had been rejected and 456 of the initially banned candidates would not be allowed to run for the election. There were numerous allegations of fraud, and a recount of the votes in Baghdad was ordered on 19 April 2010. On May 14, IHEC announced that after 11,298 ballot boxes had been recounted, there was no sign of fraud or violations.

The new parliament opened on 14 June 2010. After months of fraught negotiations, an agreement was reached on the formation of a new government on November 11. Talabani would continue as president, Al-Maliki would stay on as prime minister and Allawi would head a new security council.

===Iraqi parliamentary election, 2014===

Parliamentary elections were held in Iraq on 30 April 2014. The elections decided the 328 members of the Council of Representatives who will in turn elect the Iraqi President and Prime Minister.

===Iraqi parliamentary election, 2018===
=== Iraqi parliamentary election, 2021 ===

On 30 November 2021, the political bloc led by Shia leader Muqtada al-Sadr was confirmed the winner of the October parliamentary election. His Sadrist Movement, won a total of 73 out of the 329 seats in the parliament. The Taqadum, or Progress Party-led by Parliament Speaker Mohammed al-Halbousi, a Sunni – secured 37 seats. Former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki’s State of Law party got 33 seats in parliament. Al-Fatah alliance, whose main components are militia groups affiliated with the Iran-backed Popular Mobilisation Forces, sustained its crushing loss and snatched 17 seats. The Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) received 31 seats, and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) gained 18.

==== After the election 2022– ====

In June 2022, 73 members of parliament from the Sadrist movement, resigned.
On 27 October 2022, Mohammed Shia al-Sudani, close ally of former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, took the office to succeed Mustafa al-Kadhimi as new Prime Minister of Iraq.

==Issues==

===Corruption===

According to Transparency International, Iraq&#x27;s is the most corrupt government in the Middle East, and is described as a &quot;hybrid regime&quot; (between a &quot;flawed democracy&quot; and an &quot;authoritarian regime&quot;). The 2011 report &quot;Costs of War&quot; from Brown University&#x27;s Watson Institute for International Studies concluded that U.S. military presence in Iraq has not been able to prevent this corruption, noting that as early as 2006, &quot;there were clear signs that post-Saddam Iraq was not going to be the linchpin for a new democratic Middle East.&quot;

=== Elite cartel ruling Iraq by &quot;muhasasa&quot; ===

During the regime of Saddam Hussein (1979–2003), several Iraqi opposition groups created a quota system by which Sunni Islamic, Shia Islamic, Kurdish and other religious or ethnic groups would be proportionally represented in a future new government. The U.S. in July 2003 selected the members of the Iraqi Governing Council, the forerunner of the first post–Hussein sovereign Iraqi (interim) government, according to that ethno-sectarian quota system.

Also in 2003, a &quot;pact&quot; (&quot;muhasasa ta’ifa&quot;) was struck by &quot;the elite&quot;, holding that after a national election, the winning parties divide the ministerial positions in direct relationship to their success at the ballot box. After 2003, a second agreement (&quot;muhasasa&quot;) was made, holding that ministries and their budgets and other political positions must be proportionally placed under the &quot;control&quot; of &quot;religious [or sectarian or ethnic] groups&quot;, &quot;depending mostly on a group’s size&quot;, presuming such &quot;groups&quot; to be fully represented by one or several parties or lists taking part in the elections, or that national governments should &quot;represent the different ethnic, religious and sectarian identities that make up the Iraqi society&quot;, presuming that such &quot;identities&quot; are expressed or represented by existing political parties. Such agreements between members of the elite to collude in order to avoid competition, improve their own profits, and dominate the market (of voters in a democracy), have been labeled &quot;elite cartel&quot;. The political parties themselves, once they win any ministry through the &quot;muhasasa&quot; system, benefit financially from state contracts awarded by them to companies run by their party members (see below, section Clientelism, patronage) what makes it even harder for them to step out of the &quot;muhasasa&quot; arrangements. Or, as a researcher phrased it in 2020: &quot;Such elite pacts are notoriously resistant to reform, particularly if any proposed change is perceived to undermine elite interests (…)&quot;.

Although the system functions informally, a group of Norwegian researchers in late 2020 asserted—while citing other researchers but not a basic source—that 54% of the ministry posts would &#x27;normally&#x27; go to the Shia, 24% to the Sunni, 18% to the Kurds, and 4% to minorities including the Christians. They suggested that the &quot;muhasasa&quot; system leads to &quot;a closed system of elite rule… recycling the political elites irrespective of their performance&quot;, not urging or inciting the Iraqi politicians to act transparently or accountably or to respond to citizen demands and deliver benefits to the Iraqi population as a whole, but instead making them easily susceptible to corruption, nepotism, clientelism and patronage while focusing on their own (group&#x27;s) interests and (elite&#x27;s) survival and consolidation.

This &quot;muhasasa&quot; elite cartel (and connected problems) led to massive protests in Iraq in 2011, 2012–2013, 2015, 2016, 2018 and 2019–2021. Analysts have seen this &quot;muhasasa&quot; system to exist until at least late 2020. The Abdul Mahdi Government of 2018 broke with elements of &quot;muhasasa&quot;. Although his anti-&quot;muhasasa&quot; Sadrist Movement retained plurality in the 2021 election, inability to form a government eventually led to the party&#x27;s withdrawal from Parliament, allowing the rival parties to form another &quot;muhasasa&quot;-based government.

==== Incompetent government ====
Those two &quot;muhasasa&quot; agreements in and after 2003 (see above) had the effect that, starting with the first post–2003 Iraqi government after elections in 2006, if a party &quot;controlled&quot; a ministry, it appointed also the top positions in their civil services to their party followers and faction members; also the positions for senior public service were distributed on the basis of &quot;ethnic, religious and/or party affiliation&quot; rather than merit, professional competence or experience. This incompetence caused mismanagement in the successive Iraqi governments of Al-Maliki (2006–2014), Al-Abadi (2014–2018), and also Abdul-Mahdi (2018–2020), leading to hundreds of billions of dollars being wasted on failed projects and the neglect of electricity networks, the transportation sector, economic legislation, and other infrastructure, as well as citizen demands not being responded to. Such incompetence – next to other forms of political turmoil like corruption (see next subsection) and instability – is considered by many analysts to have also fostered the rise of ISIL, in 2014. (During the formation of the Abdul Mahdi Government in 2018, this new prime minister attempted to break through the traditional &quot;muhasasa&quot; procedures, but there&#x27;s no clear information as to how far he succeeded in that, or whether the Iraqi governments since 2018 worked more competently or less corruptly.)

==== Clientelism, patronage ====
Civil services being staffed – under these &quot;muhasasa&quot; agreements (see above) – according to party loyalty had the effect that state contracts would only be awarded by them to &quot;party-affiliated companies and businesspeople&quot;, who would be paid handsomely for their contracted services; even if they hardly, or not at all, actually delivered those services. Such manner of spending state finances has been labeled governmental contracting fraud and structural political corruption: not the general public but privileged companies were being served by the government. This culture of clientelism and &quot;systemic political patronage&quot; produced a new class of entrepreneurs, getting rich through close relations with government officials and their lush government contracts. Meanwhile, politicians themselves lived in wealth, self-enrichment and massive personal protection.

==== Stagnant economy ====
The infrastructure not being maintained or modernized due to governmental incompetence and mismanagement (see above) severely hampered the development of private economic activity, therefore meaning the private sector could not absorb the half million of young people entering the job market every year. This &quot;muhasasa&quot;-style &#x27;cartel&#x27; government, due to its lack of accountability – politicians being &quot;recycled ... irrespective of their performance&quot; – provided too little incentives for those politicians to build a diversified and competitive economy or &quot;deliver benefits to the population&quot;.

===Lack of commitment to federalism===
Since the adoption of the new Iraqi constitution in 2005, federalism with a heavy emphasis on decentralisation has been the official model of governance in Iraq. However, certain constitutional stipulations, such as those related to the creation of the Federation Council (the upper house of the legislature) have not been implemented, which remains an issue undermining the full implementation of federalism in the country. In September 2017, a one-sided referendum was held in Iraq’s Kurdistan Region regarding Kurdish independence, which resulted in 92% (of those participating in the region) voting in favor of independence. The referendum was rejected by the federal government and ruled as illegal by the Federal Supreme Court. Following this, an armed conflict ensued between the federal government and the Kurdistan Regional Government which resulted in Kurdish defeat and capitulation; Kurdistan Region subsequently lost territory it had previously occupied, and the president of Kurdistan Region officially resigned, and finally, the regional government announced that it would respect the Federal Supreme Court&#x27;s ruling that no Iraqi province is allowed to secede, effectively abandoning the referendum. According to a report published by The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, a U.S-based think tank, since Kurdistan Region’s failed bid to gain independence, the federal government has been severely punishing it both politically and economically. In gradual steps, the federal government has consistently weakened Kurdistan Region’s ability to administer its own affairs by revoking crucial authorities that had previously defined its autonomy. Furthermore, since it won a pivotal ICC arbitration case, the federal government has also been refusing Kurdistan Region access to its most important source of income, namely, oil exports, and the latter has had no other option but to concede. Some have argued that this signals the Iraqi government’s intention to abandon federalism and return to a centralized political system, and in a leaked letter sent in 2023 to the U.S president, the prime minister of Kurdistan region wrote of an impending collapse of Kurdistan Region.

==See also==
* Assyrian politics in Iraq
* History of Iraq (2003–2011)
* Reconstruction of Iraq
* Human rights in post-invasion Iraq

==References==
==Further reading==
* Who Are Iraq&#x27;s New Leaders? What Do They Want? U.S. Institute of Peace Special Report, March 2006
* BBC Report: Who&#x27;s Who in Post-Saddam Iraq 
* Video Seminar on Iraq Coalition Politics : April 20, 2005, sponsored by the Program in Arms Control, Disarmament, and International Security at the University of Illinois.
* M. Ismail Marcinkowski, &quot;Religion and Politics in Iraq. Shiite Clerics between Quietism and Resistance&quot;, with a foreword by Professor Hamid Algar of the University of California at Berkeley. Singapore: Pustaka Nasional, 2004 ()
* State and society in Iraq ten years after regime change: the rise of a new authoritarianism &quot;International Affairs&quot; (2013)

==External links==
* Global Justice Project: Iraq </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="0" end="4" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="10" end="17" title="Federation" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="18" end="31" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="32" end="57" title="Representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="58" end="66" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="76" end="94" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="107" end="122" title="executive power" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476165" start="143" end="157" title="Prime Minister of Iraq" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118391" start="165" end="185" title="Council of Ministers of Iraq" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="193" end="211" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q889817" start="217" end="234" title="President of Iraq" label="President of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="242" end="255" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="261" end="278" title="legislative power" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973075" start="296" end="322" title="Council of Representatives of Iraq" label="Council of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496078" start="358" end="376" title="Abdul Latif Rashid" label="Abdul Latif Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="550" end="557" title="Federalism" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="558" end="568" title="Forms of government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="572" end="576" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672358" start="606" end="618" title="Constitution of Iraq" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="625" end="630" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="634" end="644" title="Representative democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="646" end="653" title="Federation" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="654" end="667" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="668" end="676" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="720" end="729" title="Executive branch" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="731" end="742" title="Legislative branch" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="748" end="756" title="judicial branch" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973075" start="855" end="881" title="Council of Representatives of Iraq" label="Council of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q132156617" start="888" end="906" title="Federation Council of Iraq" label="Federation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q889817" start="948" end="957" title="President of Iraq" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476165" start="963" end="977" title="Prime Minister of Iraq" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118391" start="987" end="1007" title="Council of Ministers of Iraq" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851713" start="1013" end="1030" title="judiciary of Iraq" label="federal judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12239043" start="1050" end="1074" title="Supreme Judicial Council of Iraq" label="Supreme Judicial Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1080" end="1098" title="Court of Cassation of Iraq" label="Court of Cassation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001100" start="1104" end="1117" title="Supreme Court of Iraq" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1123" end="1152" title="Public Prosecution Department of Iraq" label="Public Prosecution Department"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1158" end="1188" title="Judiciary Oversight Commission of Iraq" label="Judiciary Oversight Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060676" start="1264" end="1286" title="Central Criminal Court of Iraq" label="Central Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1293" end="1337" title="Independent High Commission for Human Rights" label="Independent High Commission for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016663" start="1343" end="1380" title="Independent High Electoral Commission" label="Independent High Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12250266" start="1390" end="1413" title="Commission on Integrity" label="Commission on Integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778674" start="1503" end="1523" title="Central Bank of Iraq" label="Central Bank of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1529" end="1551" title="Board of Supreme Audit" label="Board of Supreme Audit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791614" start="1557" end="1592" title="Iraqi Communications and Media Commission" label="Communications and Media Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1602" end="1622" title="Endowment Commission" label="Endowment Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1690" end="1711" title="Foundation of Martyrs" label="Foundation of Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1757" end="1787" title="Federal Public Service Council" label="Federal Public Service Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068136" start="2237" end="2269" title="2009 Iraqi governorate elections" label="2009 Iraqi governorate elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067949" start="2667" end="2685" title="Iraqi Accord Front" label="Iraqi Accord Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291634" start="2687" end="2703" title="Sadrist Movement" label="Sadrist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408639" start="2708" end="2728" title="Islamic Virtue Party" label="Islamic Virtue Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q841753" start="2819" end="2831" title="Governorates of Iraq" label="governorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973075" start="3715" end="3747" title="Iraqi Council of Representatives" label="Iraqi Council of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q205047" start="3797" end="3813" title="Kurdistan Region" label="Kurdistan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="3974" end="3978" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q841753" start="3998" end="4010" title="governorates of Iraq" label="governorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117798" start="4043" end="4052" title="districts of Iraq" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377438" start="4121" end="4144" title="National Iraqi Alliance" label="National Iraqi Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="4153" end="4163" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="4164" end="4172" title="Islamist" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q718723" start="4178" end="4207" title="Supreme Islamic Iraqi Council" label="Supreme Islamic Iraqi Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616887" start="4280" end="4294" title="Ammar al-Hakim" label="Ammar al-Hakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291634" start="4298" end="4314" title="Sadrist Movement" label="Sadrist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q216826" start="4324" end="4339" title="Muqtada al-Sadr" label="Muqtada al-Sadr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056207" start="4343" end="4381" title="Islamic Dawa Party – Iraq Organisation" label="Islamic Dawa Party – Iraq Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374537" start="4450" end="4480" title="Kasim Muhammad Taqi al-Sahlani" label="Kasim Muhammad Taqi al-Sahlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048242" start="4484" end="4502" title="Islamic Dawa Party" label="Islamic Dawa Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57673" start="4558" end="4573" title="Nouri al-Maliki" label="Nouri al-Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840396" start="4577" end="4601" title="Tribes of Iraq Coalition" label="Tribes of Iraq Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4611" end="4624" title="Hamid al-Hais" label="Hamid al-Hais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674128" start="4628" end="4658" title="Islamic Fayli Grouping in Iraq" label="Islamic Fayli Grouping in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4668" end="4686" title="Muqdad Al-Baghdadi" label="Muqdad Al-Baghdadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419636" start="4689" end="4731" title="Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan" label="Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q781221" start="4735" end="4761" title="Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iraq" label="Kurdistan Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q315927" start="4815" end="4830" title="Massoud Barzani" label="Massoud Barzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q677505" start="4834" end="4862" title="Patriotic Union of Kurdistan" label="Patriotic Union of Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57306" start="4914" end="4928" title="Jalal Talabani" label="Jalal Talabani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666358" start="4932" end="4955" title="Kurdistan Islamic Union" label="Kurdistan Islamic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q852347" start="5001" end="5020" title="Movement for Change" label="Movement for Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145192" start="5062" end="5080" title="Nawshirwan Mustafa" label="Nawshirwan Mustafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278373" start="5084" end="5113" title="Kurdistan Toilers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Kurdistan Toilers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297449" start="5160" end="5185" title="Kurdistan Communist Party" label="Kurdistan Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5230" end="5257" title="Feyli Kurd Democratic Union" label="Feyli Kurd Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810444" start="5294" end="5318" title="Assyrian Patriotic Party" label="Assyrian Patriotic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829730" start="5321" end="5346" title="Civil Democratic Alliance" label="Civil Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="5348" end="5355" title="Secularism" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049579" start="5357" end="5369" title="Nonsectarianism" label="nonsectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210815" start="5374" end="5393" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Iraq)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5424" end="5441" title="Iraqi Ummah Party" label="Iraqi Ummah Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5449" end="5464" title="Mithal Al-Alusi" label="Mithal Al-Alusi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5469" end="5488" title="Iraqi Liberal Party" label="Iraqi Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068050" start="5527" end="5537" title="Iraqi List" label="Iraqi List"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627514" start="5596" end="5617" title="Iraqi National Accord" label="Iraqi National Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q313816" start="5627" end="5638" title="Iyad Allawi" label="Iyad Allawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233379" start="5641" end="5651" title="The Iraqis (party)" label="The Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180911" start="5661" end="5675" title="Ghazi al-Yawer" label="Ghazi al-Yawer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424473" start="5696" end="5715" title="Iraqi Turkmen Front" label="Iraqi Turkmen Front"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5761" end="5799" title="Alliance of the Turkomen Front of Iraq" label="Alliance of the Turkomen Front of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165171" start="5819" end="5832" title="Iraqi Turkmen" label="Iraqi Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973495" start="5836" end="5874" title="National Independent Cadres and Elites" label="National Independent Cadres and Elites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297375" start="5884" end="5903" title="People&amp;#x27;s Union (Iraq)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672366" start="5938" end="5959" title="Iraqi Communist Party" label="Iraqi Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120369" start="5969" end="5986" title="Hamid Majid Mousa" label="Hamid Majid Mousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675595" start="5989" end="6012" title="Islamic Kurdish Society" label="Islamic Kurdish Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6022" end="6037" title="Ali Abd-al Aziz" label="Ali Abd-al Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082526" start="6040" end="6071" title="Islamic Labour Movement in Iraq" label="Islamic Labour Movement in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972234" start="6074" end="6099" title="National Democratic Party (Iraq)" label="National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6157" end="6174" title="Samir al-Sumaidai" label="Samir al-Sumaidai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975174" start="6177" end="6199" title="National Rafidain List" label="National Rafidain List"/>
<link wikidata="Q745905" start="6203" end="6231" title="Assyrian Democratic Movement" label="Assyrian Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120413" start="6281" end="6294" title="Yonadam Kanna" label="Yonadam Kanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302733" start="6297" end="6331" title="Reconciliation and Liberation Bloc" label="Reconciliation and Liberation Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771777" start="6334" end="6362" title="The Upholders of the Message" label="The Upholders of the Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881583" start="6392" end="6412" title="Mithal al-Alusi List" label="Mithal al-Alusi List"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050619" start="6415" end="6454" title="Yazidi Movement for Reform and Progress" label="Yazidi Movement for Reform and Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229744" start="6478" end="6501" title="Communist Party of Iraq" label="Communist Party of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142403" start="6504" end="6534" title="Worker-Communist Party of Iraq" label="Worker-Communist Party of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366195" start="6537" end="6575" title="Leftist Worker-Communist Party of Iraq" label="Leftist Worker-Communist Party of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808699" start="6578" end="6611" title="Assembly of Independent Democrats" label="Alliance of Independent Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q359766" start="6621" end="6635" title="Adnan Pachachi" label="Adnan Pachachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972234" start="6638" end="6663" title="National Democratic Party (Iraq)" label="National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682260" start="6666" end="6685" title="Naseer al-Chaderchi" label="Naseer al-Chaderchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603004" start="6688" end="6707" title="Green Party of Iraq" label="Green Party of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067988" start="6761" end="6793" title="Constitutional Monarchy Movement" label="Constitutional Monarchy Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489658" start="6803" end="6828" title="Sharif Ali Bin al-Hussein" label="Sharif Ali Bin al-Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810444" start="6831" end="6855" title="Assyrian Patriotic Party" label="Assyrian Patriotic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419636" start="6865" end="6907" title="Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan" label="Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772704" start="6915" end="6939" title="Assyria Liberation Party" label="Assyria Liberation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445784" start="6942" end="6970" title="Kurdistan Conservative Party" label="Kurdistan Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855420" start="6973" end="7000" title="Turkmen People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Turkmen People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618800" start="7003" end="7022" title="Iraqi Islamic Party" label="Iraqi Islamic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830811" start="7032" end="7048" title="Ayad al-Samarrai" label="Ayad al-Samarrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q493302" start="7093" end="7107" title="Hizb ut-Tahrir" label="Hizb ut-Tahrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878844" start="7144" end="7160" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Iraq Region" label="Regional Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q14150312" start="7161" end="7177" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party (Iraqi-led faction)" label="National Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973075" start="7261" end="7286" title="National Assembly of Iraq" label="National Assembly of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="7321" end="7325" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="7366" end="7376" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503363" start="7395" end="7411" title="Law of Administration for the State of Iraq for the Transitional Period" label="Transitional Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722016" start="7423" end="7441" title="History of Iraq (2003–2011)" label="Occupation of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672358" start="7534" end="7554" title="Constitution of Iraq" label="Constitution of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413658" start="7673" end="7702" title="Iraqi Transitional Government" label="Iraqi Transitional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377438" start="7709" end="7730" title="United Iraqi Alliance" label="United Iraqi Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="7750" end="7754" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19641" start="7755" end="7770" title="Grand Ayatollah" label="Grand Ayatollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q337489" start="7771" end="7785" title="Ali al-Sistani" label="Ali al-Sistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419636" start="7822" end="7864" title="Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan" label="Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068050" start="7957" end="7967" title="Iraqi List" label="Iraqi List"/>
<link wikidata="Q187334" start="8166" end="8171" title="Al Anbar Governorate" label="Anbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="8338" end="8345" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454906" start="8412" end="8424" title="Iraqi constitution ratification vote, 2005" label="ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672358" start="8432" end="8452" title="Constitution of Iraq" label="Constitution of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973075" start="8550" end="8582" title="Iraqi Council of Representatives" label="Iraqi Council of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116873" start="8659" end="8674" title="list of political parties in Iraq" label="list of parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q841753" start="8724" end="8751" title="Governorates of Iraq" label="Iraq&amp;#x27;s 18 governorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297120" start="8811" end="8833" title="January 2005 Iraqi legislative election" label="January 2005 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q191075" start="8858" end="8877" title="Baghdad Governorate" label="Baghdad Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="8957" end="8984" title="Proportional Representation" label="Proportional Representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="9329" end="9334" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="9564" end="9575" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="9799" end="9803" title="George Walker Bush" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q57673" start="10085" end="10100" title="Nouri al-Maliki" label="Nouri al-Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="10182" end="10186" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973075" start="10248" end="10282" title="Council of Representatives of Iraq" label="Council of Representatives of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476165" start="10308" end="10322" title="Prime Minister of Iraq" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q889817" start="10327" end="10336" title="President of Iraq" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572765" start="10389" end="10412" title="Iraqi National Movement" label="Iraqi National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q313816" start="10451" end="10462" title="Ayad Allawi" label="Ayad Allawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971776" start="10546" end="10568" title="State of Law Coalition" label="State of Law Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q57673" start="10602" end="10617" title="Nouri Al-Maliki" label="Nouri Al-Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016663" start="10907" end="10944" title="Independent High Electoral Commission" label="Independent High Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q216826" start="12161" end="12176" title="Muqtada al-Sadr" label="Muqtada al-Sadr"/>
<link wikidata="Q84080555" start="12217" end="12239" title="2021 Iraqi parliamentary election" label="parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291634" start="12245" end="12261" title="Sadrist Movement" label="Sadrist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q101210235" start="12337" end="12351" title="Progress Party (Iraq)" label="Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q47008930" start="12378" end="12398" title="Mohamed Al-Halbousi" label="Mohammed al-Halbousi"/>
<link wikidata="Q57673" start="12450" end="12465" title="Nouri al-Maliki" label="Nouri al-Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971776" start="12468" end="12480" title="State of Law Coalition" label="State of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q47487535" start="12515" end="12532" title="Fatah Alliance" label="Al-Fatah alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610107" start="12607" end="12634" title="Popular Mobilization Forces" label="Popular Mobilisation Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q781221" start="12691" end="12717" title="Kurdistan Democratic Party" label="Kurdistan Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q677505" start="12751" end="12779" title="Patriotic Union of Kurdistan" label="Patriotic Union of Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291634" start="12882" end="12898" title="Sadrist Movement" label="Sadrist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700793" start="12930" end="12953" title="Mohammed Shia&amp;#x27; Al Sudani" label="Mohammed Shia al-Sudani"/>
<link wikidata="Q85317569" start="13035" end="13053" title="Mustafa Al-Kadhimi" label="Mustafa al-Kadhimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476165" start="13061" end="13083" title="Prime Minister of Iraq" label="Prime Minister of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="13129" end="13155" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="13207" end="13218" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424254" start="13248" end="13261" title="hybrid regime" label="hybrid regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182575" start="13285" end="13301" title="flawed democracy" label="flawed democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="13321" end="13341" title="authoritarian regime" label="authoritarian regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704413" start="13372" end="13384" title="Costs of War Project" label="Costs of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="13396" end="13412" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974826" start="13420" end="13462" title="Watson Institute for International Studies" label="Watson Institute for International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108185" start="13779" end="13785" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Iraq" label="regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="13789" end="13803" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="13881" end="13892" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="13896" end="13906" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Islam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13910" end="13917" title="Kurds#Iraq" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672361" start="14069" end="14092" title="Iraqi Governing Council" label="Iraqi Governing Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q187332" start="14145" end="14171" title="Iraqi Interim Government" label="Iraqi (interim) government"/>
<link wikidata="Q192797" start="15188" end="15193" title="elite" label="elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q701521" start="15197" end="15204" title="Collusion" label="collude"/>
<link wikidata="Q179216" start="15345" end="15351" title="cartel" label="cartel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15578" end="15600" title="#Clientelism, patronage" label="Clientelism, patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149030" start="16824" end="16828" title="2011 Iraqi protests" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432684" start="16830" end="16839" title="2012–2013 Iraqi protests" label="2012–2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q69783941" start="16841" end="16857" title="2015–2018 Iraqi protests" label="2015, 2016, 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q72367808" start="16862" end="16871" title="2019–2021 Iraqi protests" label="2019–2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q57899413" start="16964" end="16986" title="Abdul Mahdi Government" label="Abdul Mahdi Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291634" start="17079" end="17095" title="Sadrist Movement" label="Sadrist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q112762654" start="17137" end="17167" title="2021–2022 Iraqi political crisis" label="inability to form a government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17412" end="17417" title="#Elite cartel ruling Iraq by muhasasa" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112523" start="17464" end="17506" title="Al Maliki I Government" label="post–2003 Iraqi government after elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q57673" start="17937" end="17958" title="Nouri al-Maliki" label="Al-Maliki (2006–2014)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639013" start="17960" end="17980" title="Haider al-Abadi" label="Al-Abadi (2014–2018)"/>
<link wikidata="Q357116" start="17991" end="18014" title="Adil Abdul-Mahdi" label="Abdul-Mahdi (2018–2020)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18340" end="18355" title="#Clientelism, patronage" label="next subsection"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18428" end="18453" title="Iraq#2014–2017: War against the Islamic State" label="the rise of ISIL, in 2014"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18467" end="18514" title="Abdul Mahdi Government#Background" label="formation of the Abdul Mahdi Government in 2018"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18892" end="18897" title="#Elite cartel ruling Iraq by muhasasa" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543464" start="19412" end="19423" title="clientelism" label="clientelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="19453" end="19462" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19846" end="19851" title="#Incompetent government" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087476" start="19890" end="19915" title="Economy of Iraq" label="private economic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="20503" end="20519" title="decentralisation" label="decentralisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206659" start="20865" end="20875" title="2017 Kurdistan Region independence referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q205047" start="20895" end="20911" title="Kurdistan Region" label="Kurdistan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057435" start="20922" end="20942" title="Kurdish nationalism" label="Kurdish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001100" start="21120" end="21141" title="Federal Supreme Court of Iraq" label="Federal Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q42161041" start="21162" end="21176" title="2017 Iraqi-Kurdish conflict" label="armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037304" start="21223" end="21252" title="Kurdistan Regional Government" label="Kurdistan Regional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778471" start="21664" end="21709" title="The Washington Institute for Near East Policy" label="The Washington Institute for Near East Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q848633" start="22116" end="22119" title="International Chamber of Commerce" label="ICC"/>
<link wikidata="Q25585330" start="22430" end="22458" title="Centralized government" label="centralized political system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810458" start="22625" end="22650" title="Assyrian politics in Iraq" label="Assyrian politics in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722016" start="22653" end="22680" title="History of Iraq (2003–2011)" label="History of Iraq (2003–2011)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303223" start="22683" end="22705" title="Reconstruction of Iraq" label="Reconstruction of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5938509" start="22708" end="22742" title="Human rights in post-invasion Iraq" label="Human rights in post-invasion Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130893" start="23448" end="23469" title="International Affairs (journal)" label="International Affairs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14668" wikidata="Q2087476" url="?curid=14668" title="Economy of Iraq">
<text>The economy of [[Iraq]] is dominated by the oil sector, which provided 89% of foreign exchange earnings in 2024. During its modern history, the oil sector has provided about 99.7% of foreign exchange earnings. Agrarian economy underwent rapid development following the 14 July Revolution in 1958 which overthrew the Hashemite monarchy. It had become the third-largest economy in the Middle East by 1980. This occurred in part because of the industrialization and infrastructure development initiatives led by Saddam Hussein in the 1970s, which included irrigation projects, railway and highway construction, and rural electrification.

In the 1980s, financial problems caused by massive expenditures in the Iran-Iraq War and damage to oil export facilities by Iran&#x27;s military led the Ba&#x27;athist government to implement austerity measures, to borrow heavily, and to later reschedule foreign debt payments. Iraq suffered economic losses of at least $80 billion from the war. In 1988, the hostilities ended. Oil exports gradually increased with the construction of new pipelines and restoration of damaged facilities, but again underwent a sharp decline after the Persian Gulf War. GDP dropped to one-fourth of the country&#x27;s 1980 GDP and continued to decline under postwar international sanctions, until receiving aid from the U.N. Oil-for-Food Programme in 1997. Iraq experienced a modest growth by 2000, when the government attempted to make improvements and reorganizations in the economic system.

The Coalition Provisional Authority made efforts to modernize the economy after the 2003 U.S.-led invasion, through privatization and reducing the country&#x27;s foreign debt. As a result Iraq&#x27;s economy expanded rapidly during this time, though growth was stunted by the insurgency, civil war, economic mismanagement, and oil shortages caused by outdated technology. Since mid-2009, oil export earnings have returned to levels seen before Operation New Dawn. Government revenues rebounded, along with global oil prices. In 2011, Iraq increased oil exports above their then-current level of per day as a result of new contracts with international oil companies. The export was thought likely to fall short of the per day forecasting in the budget. Iraq&#x27;s contracts with major oil companies had the potential to greatly expand oil revenues, but Iraq needed to upgrade its oil processing, pipeline, and export infrastructure to enable these deals to reach their potential.

An improved security environment and an initial wave of foreign investment helped to spur economic activity, particularly in the energy, construction, and retail sectors. Broader economic improvement, long-term fiscal health, and sustained increases in the standard of living still depended on the government passing major policy reforms and the continued development of Iraq&#x27;s massive oil reserves. Although foreign investors viewed Iraq with increasing interest in 2010, most were still hampered by difficulties acquiring land for projects and other regulatory impediments.

== Economic growth ==

Nominal GDP grew by 213% in the 1960s, 1325% in the 1970s, 2% in the 1980s, −47% in the 1990s, and 317% in 2000s.

Real GDP per capita (measured in $1990 ) increased significantly during the 1950s, 60s and 70s, which can be explained by both higher oil production levels as well as oil prices, which famously peaked in the 1970s due to the OPEC&#x27;s oil embargo, causing the 1973 oil crisis. In the following two decades, however, GDP per capita in Iraq dropped substantially because of multiple wars, namely the 1980-88 war with Iran, the 1990-1991 Gulf War.

=== Iran-Iraq War ===
Before the outbreak of the war with Iran in September 1980, the economic outlook was positive. In 1979, oil production reached a level of 560,000 m³ (3.5 million barrels) per day, and oil revenues were 21 billion dollars in 1979 and $27 billion in 1980 due to record oil prices. Iraq had amassed an estimated $35 billion in foreign exchange reserves. It was believed to have one of the best education and health care systems in the Middle East, and thousands of migrant workers from Egypt, Somalia, and the Indian subcontinent were employed in construction projects. The Iran–Iraq War and the 1980s oil glut depleted Iraq&#x27;s foreign exchange reserves, devastated its economy and left the country with a foreign debt of more than $40 billion. Oil exports gradually increased as new pipelines were constructed and damaged facilities were restored.

=== Sanctions ===
Iraq&#x27;s seizure of Kuwait in August 1990, subsequent international economic sanctions on Iraq, and damage from military action by an international coalition beginning in January 1991, drastically reduced economic activity. The regime exacerbated shortages by supporting large military and internal security forces and by allocating resources to key supporters of the Ba&#x27;ath Party. The implementation of the UN&#x27;s Oil for Food program in December 1996 helped improve economic conditions. For the first six six-month phases of the program, Iraq was allowed to export increasing amounts of oil in exchange for food, medicine, and other humanitarian goods. In December 1999, the UN Security Council authorized Iraq to export as much oil as required to meet humanitarian needs. Per capita, food imports increased substantially, while medical supplies and health care services steadily improved, though per capita economic production and living standards were still well below their prewar level.

Iraq changed its oil reserve currency from the U.S. dollar to the euro in 2000. However, 28% of Iraq&#x27;s export revenues under the program were deducted to meet UN Compensation Fund and UN administrative expenses. The drop in GDP in 2001 was largely the result of the global economic slowdown and lower oil prices.

=== After the invasion of Iraq in 2003 ===

The removal of sanctions on 24 May 2003 and rising oil prices in the mid-to-late 2000s led to a doubling in oil production from a low of 1.3 mbpd during the turbulence of 2003 to a high of 2.6 mbpd in 2011. Furthermore, reduced inflation and violence since 2007 have translated to real increases in living standards for Iraqis.

One of the key economic challenges was Iraq&#x27;s immense foreign debt, estimated at $130 billion. Although some of this debt was derived from normal export contracts that Iraq had failed to pay for, some was a result of military and financial support during Iraq&#x27;s war with Iran.

The Jubilee Iraq campaign argued that much of these debts were odious (illegitimate). However, as the concept of odious debt is not accepted, trying to deal with the debt on those terms would have embroiled Iraq in legal disputes for years. Iraq decided to deal with its debt more pragmatically and approached the Paris Club of official creditors.

In a December 2006 &quot;Newsweek International&quot; article, a study by Global Insight in London was reported to show &quot;that Civil war or not, Iraq has an economy, and—mother of all surprises—it&#x27;s doing remarkably well. Real estate is booming. Construction, retail and wholesale trade sectors are healthy, too, according to [the report]. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce reports 34,000 registered companies in Iraq, up from 8,000 three years ago. Sales of secondhand cars, televisions and mobile phones have all risen sharply. Estimates vary, but one from Global Insight puts GDP growth at 17 per cent last year and projects 13 per cent for 2006. The World Bank has it lower: at 4 per cent this year. But, given all the attention paid to deteriorating security, the startling fact is that Iraq is growing at all.&quot;

== Industry ==
Since 1974, after the Iraqi Government took direct control of Iraq’s largest private oil production operations, Mosul Oil and Basra Oil, most of Iraq&#x27;s manufacturing activity has been closely connected to the oil industry. The major industries in that category have been petroleum refining and the manufacture of chemicals and fertilizers. Before 2003, diversification was hindered by limitations on privatization and the effects of the international sanctions of the 1990s. Since 2003, security problems have blocked efforts to establish new enterprises. The construction industry is an exception; in 2000 cement was the only major industrial product not based on hydrocarbons. The construction industry has profited from the need to rebuild after Iraq&#x27;s several wars. In the 1990s, the industry benefited from government funding of extensive infrastructure and housing projects and elaborate palace complexes.

== Primary sectors ==
=== Agriculture ===
Agriculture contributes just 3.3% to the gross national product but employs a fifth of the labor force.

Historically, 50 to 60 per cent of Iraq&#x27;s arable land was under cultivation. Under the UN Oil for Food program, Iraq imported large quantities of grains, meat, poultry, and dairy products. In 1981, the government abolished its collective farming program. During the Gulf War, Iraqi agriculture was disrupted physically and suffered from economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations. Imports were curtailed, petroleum exports were cut off and agricultural production with potential military application was halted. The Iraqi government responded by monopolizing grain and oilseed marketing, imposing production quotas, and instituting a Public Distribution System for basic foodstuffs. By mid-1991, the government supplied a &quot;basket&quot; of foodstuffs that provided about one-third of the caloric daily requirement and cost consumers about five percent of its market value. With subsidies for agricultural inputs diminished, the government&#x27;s prices failed to cover their costs. Tax on agricultural production reached 20 to 35 percent by the mid-1990s. In October 1991 the Baghdad regime withdrew personnel from the northern region controlled by two Kurdish parties. Kurdistan Region was described as &quot;... a market economy essentially left alone by a fragile governing structure, but heavily influenced by substantial international humanitarian aid flows.&quot;

In December 1996, under an &quot;Oil for Food Program&quot; negotiated with the United Nations, Iraq started exporting petroleum and used the proceeds to import foodstuffs. Grain imports averaged $828 million from 1997 to 2001, an increase of over 180 percent from the previous five-year period. Due to foreign competition, Iraqi production declined (29 percent for wheat, 31 percent for barley, and 52 percent for maize). Because the government had neglected the production of forage crops, fruits, vegetables, and livestock other than poultry, those sectors were less buffeted by international affairs. Nevertheless, they were affected by severe drought, an outbreak of screwworm, and an epizootic of foot-and-mouth disease As the Oil for Food Program expanded to cover more agricultural inputs and machinery, the productivity of Iraqi agriculture stabilized around 2002.

After the U.S. invasion in March 2003, many Iraqis became dependent on government-subsidized food. The US-funded agricultural reconstruction program thus focused on increased productivity under the aegis of Agricultural Reconstruction and Development Iraq (ARDI). Another program was run by Development Alternatives, Inc. (DAI) of Bethesda, Maryland. The restoration of Iraq&#x27;s irrigation systems was largely funded by Bechtel International.

ARDI conducted trials to improve farming practices and crop varieties of winter cereals (wheat and barley), summer cereals (rice, maize, and sorghum), potatoes, and tomatoes. Feed supplements and veterinary treatments were introduced to increase ovulation, conception, and birth weights of livestock. Surveys were conducted of poultry growers and apple farmers. Nurseries were established for date palms and grapes. ARDI had projects promoting trade associations and producers&#x27; co-ops and supported extension as an appropriate governmental function. The contract eventually cost over $100 million and lasted through December 2006. Under its Community Action Program, USAID also funded an analysis of markets for sheep and wool. It awarded a contract to the University of Hawaii to revitalize higher education in agriculture. It awarded a contract for $120 million to the Louis Berger Group to promote Iraq&#x27;s private sector, including agriculture.

Starting in 2006, Provincial Reconstruction Teams were sent in to promote goodwill and sap the insurgency. &quot;PRTs&quot; allowed military commanders to identify local needs and, with few bureaucratic hurdles, to dispense up to $500,000. Civilians from many agencies within the U.S. Department of Agriculture, as well as USAID, served tours on PRTs. Some participants criticized the absence of a national agricultural strategy, or clear direction on the design of projects. Others complained that projects emphasized &quot;American-style, 21st-century agricultural technologies and methodologies...&quot; that were inappropriate for Iraq.

Agricultural production did not rebound from the reconstruction program. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), between 2002 and 2013, the production of wheat increased 11 percent and milled rice 8 percent, but barley had decreased 13 percent and maize 40 percent. Scaled in &quot;international dollars&quot; (2004-2006 base equaling 100) Iraq&#x27;s per capita food production was 135 in 2002, 96 in 2007, and 94 in 2012. The agricultural sector shed workers. In those same years, production per worker was 117, 106, and 130, respectively.

The international Oil-for-Food program (1997–2003) further reduced farm production by supplying artificially priced foreign foodstuffs. Because of favorable weather conditions, grain production was 22 percent higher than in 2002. Although growth continued in 2004, experts predicted that Iraq would be an importer of agricultural products for the foreseeable future. Long-term plans call for investment in agricultural machinery and materials and more prolific crop varieties—improvements that did not reach Iraq&#x27;s farmers under the Hussein regime. In 2004, the main crops were wheat, barley, corn, rice, vegetables, dates, and cotton, and the main livestock outputs were cattle and sheep.

The Agricultural Cooperative Bank, capitalized at nearly 1 G$ - by 1984, targets its low-interest, low-collateral loans to private farmers for mechanization, poultry projects, and orchard development. Large modern cattle, dairy, and poultry farms are under construction. Obstacles to agricultural development include labor shortages, inadequate management and maintenance, salinization, urban migration, and dislocations resulting from previous land reform and collectivization programs.

In 2011, an agricultural adviser to the Iraqi government, Layth Mahdi, summarized the forced United States agricultural reconstruction: Before 2003, Iraq had imported about 30 per cent of its food needs annually. The decline in agricultural production after this period, created the need for importing 90 per cent of the food at a cost estimated at more than $12 billion annually. Due to the sudden shift in the agricultural policy from subsidized assistance to an immediate shift to a free market policy, the outcomes led to a decline in production. The observed outcome resulted in many farmers abandoning the land and agriculture. The impact on natural resources results in an exploited and degraded environment leaving the land destitute and the people impoverished, unemployed [and] experiencing a sense of losing their human dignity.Importation of foreign workers and increased entry of women into traditionally male labour roles have helped compensate for agricultural and industrial labour shortages exacerbated by the war. A disastrous attempt to drain the southern marshes and introduce irrigated farming to this region merely destroyed a natural food producing area, while concentration of salts and minerals in the soil due to the draining left the land unsuitable for agriculture. 

In the Mada&#x27;in Qada region east of Baghdad, hundreds of small farmers united to form the Green Mada&#x27;in Association for Agricultural Development, an agricultural cooperative that provides its members with drip irrigation and greenhouses as well as access to credit. 

In recent years, farmers have been confronted with reduced rainfall and high temperatures. Particularly affected are small scale farmers who, unable to withstand lower water levels, are forced to leave their lands in search of different ways to fulfill their livelihoods.

=== Forestry, fishing, and mining ===
Throughout the twentieth century, human exploration, shifting agriculture, forest fires, and uncontrolled grazing denuded large areas of Iraq&#x27;s natural forests, which in 2005 were almost exclusively confined to the northeastern highlands. Most of the trees found in that region are not suitable for lumbering. In 2002, a total of 112,000 cubic meters of wood were harvested, nearly half of which was used as fuel.

Despite its notable large rivers, Iraq&#x27;s fishing industry has remained relatively small and based largely on marine species in the Persian Gulf. In 2001, the approximate yield was 8,000 tons (compared to 18,000/t during the period between 1981-1997) according to official government estimates.

Aside from hydrocarbons, Iraq&#x27;s mining industry has been confined to extraction of relatively small amounts of phosphates (at Akashat), salt, and sulfur (near Mosul). Since a productive period in the 1970s, the mining industry has been hampered by the Iran–Iraq War (1980–88), the sanctions of the 1990s, and the economic collapse of 2003.

=== Energy ===

Iraq is one of the most oil-rich countries in the world. The country holding the fifth largest proven crude oil reserves, totaling 147.22 billion barrels at the end of 2017. Most of this oil—4 million barrels per day out of 4.3 million barrels produced daily—is exported, making Iraq the third-largest exporter of oil. Despite its ongoing civil war, Iraq was able to increase oil production during 2015 and 2016, with production dipping by 3.5 per cent in 2017 due to conflict with the Kurdistan Regional Government and OPEC production limits. By world standards, production costs for Iraqi oil are relatively low. However, four wars—the 1980–1988 Iraq-Iran War, 1991 Gulf War, the 2003–2011 War in Iraq, and the civil war—and the 1991–2003 UN sanctions have left the industry&#x27;s infrastructure in poor condition, and the de facto independence of oil-rich Kurdistan Region have limited production.
In the 1970s, Iraq produced over 3.5 million barrels of oil per day. Production began to fall during the Iran-Iraq War, before plummeting 85 per cent after the 1991 invasion of Kuwait. UN sanctions prevented the export of oil until 1996, and then allowed exports only in exchange for humanitarian aid in the Oil-for-Food Programme.
The 2003 lifting of sanctions enabled production—and exports—to restart. Production has since recovered to pre-Gulf War levels, and most of Iraq&#x27;s oil infrastructure has been repaired, despite persistent sabotage by the Islamic State (ISIL) and others. In 2004, Iraq had eight oil refineries, the largest of which were at Baiji, Basra, and Daura.

Despite its oil wealth, sabotage and technical problems at refineries have forced Iraq to import petroleum, other refined oil products, and electricity from the neighbouring countries, especially Iran. In 2004, for example, Iraq spent $60 million per month for imported gasoline. Sabotage
In late 2004 and early 2005, regular sabotage of plants and pipelines reduced export and domestic distribution of oil, particularly to Baghdad. Nationwide fuel shortages and power outages resulted. Persistent ISIL sabotage of pipelines, power plants and power lines, and theft of oil and electricity have also contributed to the July 2018 protests in southern Iraq.

In 2004, plans called for increased domestic utilization of natural gas to replace oil and for use in the petrochemical industry. However, because most of Iraq&#x27;s gas output is associated with oil, output growth depends on developments in the oil industry.

Half of Iraq&#x27;s power plants were destroyed in the Persian Gulf War of 1991, and full recovery never occurred. In mid-2004, Iraq had an estimated 5,000 megawatts of power-generating capacity, compared with 7,500 megawatts of demand. At that time, the transmission system included 17,700 kilometers of line. In 2004, plans called for construction of two new power plants and restoration of existing plants and transmission lines to ease the blackouts and economic hardship caused by this shortfall, but sabotage and looting kept capacity below 6,000 megawatts. The ongoing civil war, sabotage of transmission lines, and government corruption caused the electricity shortage to worsen: by 2010 demand outstripped supply by 6000 megawatts.

Oil continues to dominate Iraq&#x27;s economy. , oil is responsible for over 65 per cent of GDP and 90 per cent of total government revenue. Petroleum constitutes 94% of Iraq&#x27;s exports with a value of $59.73 billion in 2017. The central government hopes to diversify the economy away from oil, and has had some success: non-oil GDP growth, which was below the regional average from 2014 to 2016, pushed above the average in 2017. Despite this, the percentage of government spending going to non-oil investment has continued to decline since 2013 and now stands at only 34 per cent.

==== 2009 oil services contracts ====

Between June 2009 and February 2010 the Ministry of Oil tendered for the award of Service Contracts to develop Iraq&#x27;s existing oil fields. The results of the tender, which were broadcast live on Iraqi television, are as follows for all major fields awarded but excluding the Kurdistan Region where Production Sharing Contracts have been awarded that are currently being disputed by the Baghdad government. All contracts are awaiting final ratification of the awards by the Iraqi government. Company shares are subject to change as a result of commercial negotiations between parties.

&quot;Notes:&quot;

# &quot;Field shares are as a % of the total. The Iraqi state retains a 25% share in all fields for which service contracts have been awarded.&quot;
# &quot;Production increase share is the millions of bbls per day that will attract the service fee for the company.&quot;
# &quot;Gross revenue at plateau is the total payment each company will receive upon reaching their declared target plateau production rate (in between 5 and 8 years, depending on the field), before deduction of any operating costs, in addition to recovery of all development costs as billions of US dollars per annum. The total gross revenue for all companies, after recovery of capital costs, is at plateau production of an additional 9.4 mb/d, 4.34 bn US per annum, at a $70 bbl oil price. The 2010 Iraq govt budget is $60 billion. $300 billion is approximately $10,000 per annum for each Iraqi citizen.&quot;

In summary the shares by region in the increased production are:

== Services ==
=== Finance ===
Iraq&#x27;s financial services have been the subject of post-Saddam reforms. The 17 private banks established during the 1990s were limited to domestic transactions and attracted few private depositors. Those banks and two main state banks were badly damaged by the international embargo of the 1990s. To further privatize and expand the system, in 2003 the Coalition Provisional Authority removed restrictions on international bank transactions and freed the Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) from government control. In its first year of independent operation, the CBI received credit for limiting Iraq&#x27;s inflation. In 2004, three foreign banks (HSBC, Standard Chartered, National Bank of Kuwait) were the first to receive licenses to do business in Iraq.

==== Banking ====
=== Private security ===
Because of the danger posed by Iraq&#x27;s ongoing insurgency, the security industry has been a uniquely prosperous part of the services sector. Often run by former US military personnel, in 2005 at least 26 companies offered personal and institutional protection, surveillance, and other forms of security.

=== Retail ===

In the early post-Hussein period, a freewheeling retail trade in all types of commodities straddled the line between legitimate and illegitimate commerce, taking advantage of the lack of income tax and import controls.

=== Tourism ===
The Iraq tourism industry, which in peaceful times has profited from Iraq&#x27;s many places of cultural interest (earning US$14 million in 2001), has been dormant since 2003. Despite conditions, in 2005 the Iraqi Tourism Board maintained a staff of 2,500 and 14 regional offices. Between 2009 and 2010, 165 tourists from 16 countries entered Iraq to visit historic sites; as of January 2011, a U.S. State Department grant provided $2 million to help preserve Babylon, supporting the re-opening of one of the site&#x27;s two museums.

=== Telecommunications ===
From 2003 to 2008, mobile phone subscriptions had expanded over hundred-fold to ten million nationwide, according to the Brookings Institution.

== Labor force ==
In 2002, Iraq&#x27;s labour force was estimated at 6.8 million people.

In 1996, some 66.4 per cent of the labour force worked in services, 17.5 per cent in industry, and 16.1 per cent in agriculture. 2004 estimates of Iraq&#x27;s unemployment ranged from 30 per cent to 60 per cent.

The CPA has referred to a 25% unemployment rate, the Iraqi Ministry of Planning mentioned a 30% unemployment rate, whereas the Iraqi Ministry of Social Affairs claims it to be 48%. Other sources are claiming a 20% unemployment rate and a probably 60% under-employment rate. The actual figure is problematic because of high participation in black-market activities and poor security conditions in many populous areas. In central Iraq, security concerns discouraged the hiring of new workers and the resumption of regular work schedules. At the same time, the return of Iraqis from other countries increased the number of job seekers. In late 2004, most legitimate jobs were in the government, the army, the oil industry, and security-related enterprises. Under Saddam Hussein&#x27;s reign, many of the highest-paid workers were employed by the greatly overstaffed government, whose overthrow disrupted the input of these people to the economy. In 2004, the U.S. Agency for International Development committed US$1 billion for a worker-training program. In early 2004, the minimum wage was US$72 per month.

== External trade ==

Iraq is a founding member of OPEC. Petroleum constitutes 99,7% of Iraq&#x27;s exports with a value of $43,8 billion in 2016.

From the 1990s until 2003, the international trade embargo restricted Iraq&#x27;s export activity almost exclusively to oil. In 2003, oil accounted for about US$7.4 billion of Iraq&#x27;s total US$7.6 billion of export value, and statistics for earlier years showed similar proportions. After the end of the trade embargo in 2003 expanded the range of exports, oil continued to occupy the dominant position: in 2004 Iraq&#x27;s export income doubled (to US$16.5 billion), but oil accounted for all but US$340 million (2 per cent) of the total. In late 2004, sabotage significantly reduced oil output, and experts forecast that output, hence exports, would be below capacity in 2005 as well. In 2004, the chief export markets were the United States (which accounted for nearly half), Italy, France, Jordan, Canada, and the Netherlands. In 2004, the value of Iraq&#x27;s imports was US$21.7 billion, incurring a trade deficit of about US$5.2 billion. In 2003, the main sources of Iraq&#x27;s imports were Turkey, Jordan, Vietnam, the United States, Germany, and Britain. Because of Iraq&#x27;s inactive manufacturing sector, the range of imports was quite large, including food, fuels, medicines, and manufactured goods. By 2010, exports rose to US$50.8 billion and imports rose to US$45.2 billion. Chief 2009 export partners were: U.S., India, Italy, South Korea, Taiwan, China, Netherlands, and Japan. Chief 2009 import partners were: Turkey, Syria, U.S., China, Jordan, Italy, and Germany.

In March 2022, Iran-Iraq trade reached a volume of 10 billion USD, as joint ventures increased significantly but were still limited due to sanctions against Iran. Especially goods originating from Iran were subject to a trade embargo imposed by the United States and the European Union. Iran and Iraq signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on economic cooperation in January 2021.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Iraq Inter-Agency Information &amp; Analysis Unit Reports, Maps and Assessments of Iraq from the UN Inter-Agency Information &amp; Analysis Unit
* Map of Iraq&#x27;s oil and gas infrastructure </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2087476" start="4" end="23" title="Economy of Iraq" label="economy of [[Iraq]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="124" end="138" title="modern history" label="modern history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988530" start="269" end="287" title="14 July Revolution" label="14 July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774915" start="316" end="325" title="Hashemites" label="Hashemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q149805" start="326" end="334" title="Kingdom of Iraq" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="383" end="394" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="441" end="458" title="Industrialisation" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="509" end="523" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="553" end="563" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587607" start="612" end="633" title="rural electrification" label="rural electrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="707" end="720" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran-Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="760" end="764" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108185" start="789" end="814" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Iraq" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="828" end="846" title="austerity measures" label="austerity measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="1170" end="1186" title="Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1241" end="1244" title="gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099093" start="1284" end="1307" title="Sanctions against Iraq" label="international sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q296745" start="1338" end="1365" title="Oil-for-Food Programme" label="U.N. Oil-for-Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q965174" start="1517" end="1548" title="Coalition Provisional Authority" label="Coalition Provisional Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="1602" end="1619" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="U.S.-led invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="1629" end="1642" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068132" start="1785" end="1799" title="Iraqi insurgency (2003–2006)" label="the insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1957" end="1975" title="Iraq War#2010: US drawdown and Operation New Dawn" label="Operation New Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="2751" end="2769" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="3439" end="3450" title="OPEC" label="OPEC&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="3476" end="3491" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q317617" start="4008" end="4033" title="foreign exchange reserves" label="foreign exchange reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341042" start="4075" end="4084" title="Education in Iraq" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q24909623" start="4089" end="4108" title="Healthcare in Iraq" label="health care systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="4116" end="4127" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324296" start="4146" end="4161" title="Migrant workers in the Gulf Cooperation Council region" label="migrant workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4167" end="4172" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477220" start="4174" end="4181" title="Somali Democratic Republic" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="4191" end="4210" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="4255" end="4268" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q615231" start="4277" end="4291" title="1980s oil glut" label="1980s oil glut"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="4576" end="4582" title="Invasion of Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099093" start="4610" end="4650" title="Iraq sanctions" label="international economic sanctions on Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878844" start="4924" end="4941" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Iraq Region" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="4969" end="4971" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q296745" start="4979" end="4999" title="Oil for Food program" label="Oil for Food program"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="5241" end="5260" title="United Nations Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q756202" start="5579" end="5595" title="reserve currency" label="reserve currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="5605" end="5616" title="United States dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="5624" end="5628" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="5787" end="5790" title="Gross Domestic Product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326574" start="5829" end="5853" title="Early 2000s recession" label="global economic slowdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000852" start="5965" end="5982" title="World oil market chronology from 2003" label="rising oil prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518365" start="6601" end="6607" title="odious debt" label="odious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518365" start="6651" end="6662" title="odious debt" label="odious debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q461736" start="6852" end="6862" title="Paris Club" label="Paris Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="6912" end="6934" title="Newsweek International" label="Newsweek International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570420" start="6961" end="6975" title="Global Insight" label="Global Insight"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6979" end="6985" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183365" start="7018" end="7027" title="Iraqi civil war (2006–2008)" label="Civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800288" start="7240" end="7264" title="United States Chamber of Commerce" label="U.S. Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="7943" end="7955" title="oil industry" label="oil industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="8134" end="8147" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="8294" end="8315" title="Construction" label="construction industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="8341" end="8347" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="8399" end="8410" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="8735" end="8757" title="gross national product" label="gross national product"/>
<link wikidata="Q296745" start="8894" end="8914" title="Oil for Food program" label="Oil for Food program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="8950" end="8955" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="8958" end="8962" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178559" start="8964" end="8971" title="poultry" label="poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="8977" end="8990" title="dairy product" label="dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="9031" end="9049" title="collective farming" label="collective farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="9141" end="9159" title="economic sanctions" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q60901" start="9444" end="9470" title="Public Distribution System" label="Public Distribution System"/>
<link wikidata="Q205047" start="9984" end="10000" title="Kurdistan Region" label="Kurdistan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="10030" end="10044" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121076" start="10857" end="10866" title="Cochliomyia" label="screwworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126331" start="10875" end="10884" title="epizootic" label="epizootic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152401" start="10888" end="10910" title="foot-and-mouth disease" label="foot-and-mouth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q584451" start="11391" end="11409" title="Bethesda, Maryland" label="Bethesda, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q813639" start="11483" end="11504" title="Bechtel" label="Bechtel International"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="12269" end="12289" title="University of Hawaiʻi" label="University of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345348" start="12304" end="12335" title="Agricultural education" label="higher education in agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686750" start="12383" end="12401" title="Louis Berger Group" label="Louis Berger Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072780" start="12483" end="12513" title="Provincial Reconstruction Team" label="Provincial Reconstruction Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="12745" end="12775" title="U.S. Department of Agriculture" label="U.S. Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="12788" end="12793" title="USAID" label="USAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057127" start="13019" end="13044" title="Agricultural technology" label="agricultural technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="13197" end="13230" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q296745" start="13686" end="13706" title="Oil-for-Food program" label="Oil-for-Food program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693879" start="14368" end="14397" title="Agricultural Cooperative Bank of Iraq" label="Agricultural Cooperative Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q14096331" start="14586" end="14591" title="dairy farming" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="14751" end="14766" title="urbanization" label="urban migration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14911" end="14922" title="Layth Mahdi" label="Layth Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="16189" end="16196" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602839" start="16243" end="16302" title="Green Mada&amp;#x27;in Association for Agricultural Development" label="Green Mada&amp;#x27;in Association for Agricultural Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q746694" start="16363" end="16378" title="drip irrigation" label="drip irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="16383" end="16393" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="16812" end="16824" title="Wildfire" label="forest fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608991" start="17169" end="17189" title="Tigris–Euphrates river system" label="notable large rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="17573" end="17583" title="phosphates" label="phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120497" start="17588" end="17595" title="Akashat" label="Akashat"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="17621" end="17626" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="17714" end="17727" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037304" start="18305" end="18334" title="Kurdistan Regional Government" label="Kurdistan Regional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="18467" end="18480" title="Iraq-Iran War" label="Iraq-Iran War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="18487" end="18495" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644969" start="18511" end="18522" title="War in Iraq" label="War in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984356" start="18532" end="18541" title="Iraqi Civil War (2014–2017)" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q205047" start="18679" end="18695" title="Kurdistan Region" label="Kurdistan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q296745" start="19029" end="19051" title="Oil-for-Food Programme" label="Oil-for-Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="19278" end="19291" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q803712" start="19380" end="19385" title="Baiji, Iraq" label="Baiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="19387" end="19392" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20024" end="20042" title="2015–2018 Iraqi protests#2018" label="July 2018 protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q16070574" start="20168" end="20190" title="petrochemical industry" label="petrochemical industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="20379" end="20403" title="Persian Gulf War of 1991" label="Persian Gulf War of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833868" start="20947" end="20968" title="corruption in Iraq" label="government corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178972" start="21207" end="21216" title="Petroleum industry in Iran" label="Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867432" start="21733" end="21748" title="Ministry of Oil (Iraq)" label="Ministry of Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q205047" start="21973" end="21989" title="Kurdistan Region" label="Kurdistan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q965174" start="23644" end="23675" title="Coalition Provisional Authority" label="Coalition Provisional Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778674" start="23746" end="23766" title="Central Bank of Iraq" label="Central Bank of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q190464" start="23932" end="23936" title="HSBC" label="HSBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q548278" start="23938" end="23956" title="Standard Chartered" label="Standard Chartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045072" start="23958" end="23981" title="National Bank of Kuwait" label="National Bank of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="24153" end="24161" title="Security (finance)" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293233" start="24447" end="24456" title="freewheel" label="freewheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12188652" start="24651" end="24672" title="Tourism in Iraq" label="Iraq tourism industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="25107" end="25114" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="25330" end="25351" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16126966" start="25710" end="25736" title="Ministry of Planning (Iraq)" label="Iraqi Ministry of Planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="26618" end="26654" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="26814" end="26818" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966931" start="26820" end="26829" title="Petroleum industry in Iraq" label="Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="26956" end="26969" title="trade embargo" label="trade embargo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14670" wikidata="Q591018" url="?curid=14670" title="Transport in Iraq">
<text>Transport in [[Iraq]] consists of railways, highways, waterways, pipelines, ports and harbors, marines and airports.

== Railways ==
&quot;total:&quot;
2,272 km
&lt;br&gt;&quot;standard gauge:&quot;
2,272 km 

For more than two decades there have been plans for building a metro system in Baghdad. It is possible that part of the tunnels have been built, but that they are now used for military, shelter, hiding, and escaping purposes. U.N. inspectors have heard of the tunnels for years, but have not found their entrances. map In November, 2008, an overground service dubbed the Baghdad Metro began service. Local government in Baghdad is arranging feasibility studies for the construction of two new underground lines

A 37 km monorail is planned in Najaf, which would link three Shi&#x27;ite holy sites.

The first Iraqi Republic Railways train to Basra since the overthrow of Saddam Hussein&#x27;s regime arrived on 26 April 2003. British troops hope to use the 68 km long railway to transport much-needed aid supplies from the port town of Umm Qasr to Basra.

In June 2011, it was announced that planning had begun for a new high-speed rail line between Baghdad and Basra, with a memorandum of understanding with Alstom having been signed.

===Maps===
* UNHCR Atlas Map
* UN Map

===Railway links with adjacent countries===
All adjacent countries generally use , but may vary in couplings. Neighbours with electrified railways – Turkey and Iran – both use the world standard 25 kVAC

* Turkey – via Syria
* Iran – one link partially under construction and a second link planned
** Iraq-Iran Basra-Shalamcheh line – almost complete (2006)
** Kermanshah, Iran, and the Iraqi province of Diyala – construction commenced. 
* Kuwait – no railways
* Saudi Arabia -
* Jordan – partially constructed – break of gauge / gauge
* Syria – same gauge – at Rabiaa/al-Ya&#x27;rubiya

== Road Transport ==
An overland trans-desert bus service between Beirut, Haifa, Damascus and Baghdad was established by the &quot;Nairn Transport Company&quot; of Damascus in 1923.

===Roads===
&quot;total:&quot;
44,900 km 
&lt;br&gt;&quot;paved:&quot;
37,851 km,
&lt;br&gt;&quot;unpaved:&quot;
7,049 km (2002)

==Waterways==
5,729 km (Euphrates River (2,815 km), Tigris River 1,899 km, Third River (565 km)); Shatt al Arab is usually navigable by maritime traffic for about 130 km. The channel has been dredged to 3 m and is in use. The Tigris and Euphrates Rivers have navigable sections for shallow-draft watercraft; the Shatt al Basrah canal was navigable by shallow-draft craft before closing in 1991 because of the Gulf War.

==Pipelines==
crude oil 5,432 km; natural gas 2,455 km; refined products 1,637 km; liquid petroleum gas 913 km

==Ports and harbors==

=== Persian Gulf ===
* Umm Qasr Port
* Khawr az Zubayr
* Al Basrah has limited functionality
* Grand Faw Port (Under construction)

==Merchant marine==
&quot;total:&quot;
32 ships (with a volume of or over) totaling /
&lt;br&gt;&quot;ships by type:&quot;
cargo ship 14, passenger ship 1, passenger/cargo 1, petroleum tanker 13, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off ship 2 (1999 est.)

==Airports==
Iraq has about 104 airports as of 2012. Major airports include:
*Baghdad International Airport
*Basra International Airport
*Mosul International Airport
*Erbil International Airport
*Sulaimaniyah International Airport
*Najaf International Airport

===Airports – with paved runways===

===Airports – with unpaved runways===

===Heliports===
20 (2012)

==See also==
* Iraq
* Iraqi Republic Railways

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q591018" start="0" end="21" title="Transport in Iraq" label="Transport in [[Iraq]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="273" end="278" title="rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="289" end="296" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="330" end="336" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618814" start="581" end="594" title="Baghdad Metro" label="Baghdad Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q907655" start="819" end="842" title="Iraqi Republic Railways" label="Iraqi Republic Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="852" end="857" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="881" end="895" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q842407" start="1046" end="1054" title="Umm Qasr" label="Umm Qasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q788432" start="1131" end="1151" title="Baghdad–Basra high-speed rail line" label="high-speed rail line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="1186" end="1213" title="memorandum of understanding" label="memorandum of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q309084" start="1219" end="1225" title="Alstom" label="Alstom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501648" start="1385" end="1394" title="Railway coupling" label="couplings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412243" start="1481" end="1488" title="25kVAC" label="25 kVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q765503" start="1492" end="1498" title="Transportation in Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q583413" start="1513" end="1517" title="Transportation in Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1587" end="1618" title="Iraqi Republic Railways#Iraq-Iran Basra-Shalamcheh line" label="Iraq-Iran Basra-Shalamcheh line"/>
<link wikidata="Q180078" start="1647" end="1657" title="Kermanshah" label="Kermanshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1659" end="1663" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q217075" start="1691" end="1697" title="Diyala Governorate" label="Diyala"/>
<link wikidata="Q988960" start="1727" end="1733" title="Transportation in Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835069" start="1750" end="1762" title="Transportation in Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444312" start="1767" end="1773" title="Transportation in Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959245" start="1800" end="1814" title="break of gauge" label="break of gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997836" start="1825" end="1830" title="Transportation in Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278703" start="1849" end="1855" title="Rabia, Iraq" label="Rabiaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971503" start="1856" end="1873" title="Al-Yaarubiyah" label="al-Ya&amp;#x27;rubiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="1941" end="1947" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="1949" end="1954" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="1956" end="1964" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="1969" end="1976" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128443" start="2006" end="2029" title="Nairn Transport Company" label="Nairn Transport Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="2212" end="2221" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="2240" end="2252" title="Tigris River" label="Tigris River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2263" end="2274" title="Third River (Iraq)" label="Third River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881645" start="2766" end="2779" title="Umm Qasr Port" label="Umm Qasr Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402303" start="2782" end="2797" title="Khor Al Zubair" label="Khawr az Zubayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="2800" end="2809" title="Al Basrah" label="Al Basrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702392" start="2838" end="2852" title="Grand Faw Port" label="Grand Faw Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="2998" end="3008" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055880" start="3013" end="3027" title="passenger ship" label="passenger ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="3050" end="3066" title="oil tanker" label="petroleum tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="3093" end="3114" title="roll-on/roll-off ship" label="roll-on/roll-off ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q304438" start="3208" end="3237" title="Baghdad International Airport" label="Baghdad International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418829" start="3239" end="3266" title="Basra International Airport" label="Basra International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432089" start="3268" end="3295" title="Mosul International Airport" label="Mosul International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q648423" start="3297" end="3324" title="Erbil International Airport" label="Erbil International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q326468" start="3326" end="3360" title="Sulaimaniyah International Airport" label="Sulaimaniyah International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499545" start="3362" end="3389" title="Al Najaf International Airport" label="Najaf International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="3509" end="3513" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q907655" start="3516" end="3539" title="Iraqi Republic Railways" label="Iraqi Republic Railways"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14672" wikidata="Q4118597" url="?curid=14672" title="Foreign relations of Iraq">
<text>Since 1980, the foreign relations of [[Iraq]] have been influenced by a number of controversial decisions by the Saddam Hussein administration. Hussein had good relations with the Soviet Union and a number of western countries such as France and Germany, who provided him with advanced weapons systems. He also developed a tenuous relation with the United States, who supported him during the Iran–Iraq War. However, the Invasion of Kuwait that triggered the Gulf War brutally changed Iraq&#x27;s relations with the Arab World and the West. Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Syria and others were among the countries that supported Kuwait in the UN coalition. After the Hussein administration was toppled by the 2003 U.S. invasion, the governments that succeeded it have now tried to establish relations with various nations.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Iraq maintains diplomatic relations with:
== Bilateral relations ==
===Africa===

===Americas===

===Asia===

===Europe===

In September 2005, a joint political declaration between the European Union and Iraq was signed which forms the basis of regular political dialogue. A Trade and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and Iraq is in the process of being negotiated and will probably be concluded during 2008.

July 2005 saw the introduction of EUJUST LEX, the European Union&#x27;s rule of law operation intended to train Iraqi police and legal officials in human rights along with other issues. Over 1,400 Iraqis have already taken part in training courses.

=== Oceania ===
==Member of international organizations==
Iraq belongs to the following international organizations: Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development, Arab League, Arab Monetary Fund, Council of Arab Economic Unity, Customs Cooperation Council, Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, G-77, International Atomic Energy Agency, International Monetary Fund, International Maritime Organization, Interpol, International Organization for Standardization, International Telecommunication Union, Non-Aligned Movement, Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, United Nations, Universal Postal Union, World Health Organization and World Bank, MENAFATF.

==Ministry of Foreign Affairs==
Iraq&#x27;s relations with other countries and with international organizations are supervised by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In 1988 the minister of foreign affairs was Tariq Aziz, who was an influential leader of the Ba&#x27;ath Party and had served in that post since 1983. Aziz, Saddam Hussein, and the other members of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) formulated Iraq&#x27;s foreign policy, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs bureaucracy implemented RCC directives. The Baath maintained control over the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and over all Iraqi diplomatic missions abroad.

Since the overthrow of Saddam Hussein in 2003, Hoshyar Zebari was first appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Iraqi Governing Council in Baghdad on 3 September 2003. On 28 June 2004, he was reappointed as Minister of Foreign Affairs by the Iraqi Interim Government, under Prime Minister Ayad Allawi. On 3 May 2005 he was sworn in as Minister of Foreign Affairs by the Iraqi Transitional Government, under Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari. On 20 May 2006, he was delegated in for the fourth consecutive time as Foreign Minister in the government of Nouri Al-Maliki.

==International disputes==
Iran and Iraq restored diplomatic relations in 1990 but are still trying to work out written agreements settling outstanding disputes from their eight-year war concerning border demarcation, prisoners-of-war, and freedom of navigation and sovereignty over the Shatt al-Arab waterway; in November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the United Nations-demarcated border with Kuwait which had been spelled out in Security Council Resolutions 687 (1991), 773 (1992), and 883 (1993); this formally ends earlier claims to Kuwait and to Bubiyan and Warbah islands although the government continues periodic rhetorical challenges; dispute over water development plans by Turkey for the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.

==See also==
* Territorial disputes in the Persian Gulf
* Disarmament of Iraq
* Iraq and the European Union
* Foreign relations of Kurdistan Region
* List of diplomatic missions of Iraq
* List of diplomatic missions in Iraq
* Visa requirements for Iraqi citizens

==References==
==External links==
* Iraq – Trade and Diplomatic Relations with the EU</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4118597" start="16" end="45" title="Foreign relations of Iraq" label="foreign relations of [[Iraq]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="113" end="127" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="180" end="192" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424167" start="235" end="241" title="France–Iraq relations" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552191" start="246" end="253" title="Germany–Iraq relations" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q322753" start="259" end="301" title="International aid to combatants in the Iran–Iraq War" label="provided him with advanced weapons systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q29448" start="368" end="381" title="United States support for Iraq during the Iran–Iraq war" label="supported him"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="393" end="406" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="421" end="439" title="Invasion of Kuwait" label="Invasion of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="459" end="467" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="516" end="526" title="Arab World" label="Arab World"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="541" end="546" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="548" end="560" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="562" end="567" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846411" start="1313" end="1323" title="EUJUST LEX" label="EUJUST LEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1329" end="1343" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137381" start="1646" end="1691" title="Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development" label="Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="1693" end="1704" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q624307" start="1706" end="1724" title="Arab Monetary Fund" label="Arab Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q12239049" start="1726" end="1756" title="Council of Arab Economic Unity" label="Council of Arab Economic Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="1758" end="1785" title="Customs Cooperation Council" label="Customs Cooperation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355485" start="1787" end="1834" title="Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia" label="Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="1836" end="1840" title="Group of 77" label="G-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="1842" end="1876" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="1878" end="1905" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="1907" end="1942" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="1944" end="1952" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="1954" end="2000" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="2002" end="2039" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="2041" end="2061" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="2063" end="2108" title="Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries" label="Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052077" start="2110" end="2160" title="Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries" label="Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="2162" end="2197" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2199" end="2213" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="2215" end="2237" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="2239" end="2264" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="2269" end="2279" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2281" end="2289" title="MENAFATF" label="MENAFATF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867009" start="2426" end="2453" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Iraq)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q315214" start="2499" end="2509" title="Tariq Aziz" label="Tariq Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179933" start="2548" end="2565" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404717" start="2657" end="2686" title="Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council" label="Revolutionary Command Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566894" start="2887" end="2919" title="Diplomatic missions of Iraq" label="Iraqi diplomatic missions abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q982410" start="2969" end="2983" title="Hoshyar Zebari" label="Hoshyar Zebari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="3066" end="3073" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q313816" start="3216" end="3227" title="Ayad Allawi" label="Ayad Allawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q316495" start="3349" end="3367" title="Ibrahim al-Jaafari" label="Ibrahim al-Jaafari"/>
<link wikidata="Q57673" start="3478" end="3493" title="Nouri Al-Maliki" label="Nouri Al-Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q166966" start="3783" end="3796" title="Shatt al-Arab" label="Shatt al-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355527" start="3956" end="3959" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 687" label="687"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121829" start="3968" end="3971" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 773" label="773"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="4047" end="4054" title="Bubiyan" label="Bubiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285416" start="4059" end="4065" title="Warbah" label="Warbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="4195" end="4201" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="4206" end="4215" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q983876" start="4240" end="4280" title="Territorial disputes in the Persian Gulf" label="Territorial disputes in the Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433190" start="4283" end="4302" title="Disarmament of Iraq" label="Disarmament of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068235" start="4305" end="4332" title="Iraq and the European Union" label="Iraq and the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510820" start="4335" end="4372" title="Foreign relations of Kurdistan Region" label="Foreign relations of Kurdistan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566894" start="4375" end="4410" title="List of diplomatic missions of Iraq" label="List of diplomatic missions of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616388" start="4413" end="4448" title="List of diplomatic missions in Iraq" label="List of diplomatic missions in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935467" start="4451" end="4487" title="Visa requirements for Iraqi citizens" label="Visa requirements for Iraqi citizens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14676" wikidata="Q2345263" url="?curid=14676" title="Demographics of the Republic of Ireland">
<text>Ireland had an estimated population of 5,380,000 as of 1 April 2024.

== Demographic history ==

The island of Ireland&#x27;s population has fluctuated over history. In the 18th and early 19th centuries, Ireland experienced a major population boom as a result of the Agricultural and Industrial Revolutions. In the 50-year period 1790–1840, the population of the island doubled from 4 million to 8 million. At its peak, Ireland&#x27;s population density was similar to that of England and continental Europe.

This changed dramatically with the Great Famine of the mid-19th century, which led to mass starvation and consequent mass emigration. In the area covering the present day Republic of Ireland, the population reached about 6.5 million in the mid-1840s. Ten years later it was down to 5 million. The population continued a slow decline well into the 20th century, with the Republic recording a low of 2.8 million in the 1961 census.

During the 1960s, the population started to grow once more, although slowly as emigration was still common. In the 1990s the country entered a period of rapid economic growth as a result of the Celtic Tiger Irish economic boom, and the Republic started to receive immigration. Many former Irish emigrants returned home, and Ireland became an attractive destination for immigrants, from other member states EU such as Central Europe, but also from outside the EU such as Africa, Asia and elsewhere. With the 2008 onset of the Irish economic and banking crisis, the state&#x27;s economy suffered, and Ireland has once again been experiencing net emigration of its citizens, but immigration remains high.

In November 2013, Eurostat reported that the Republic had the largest net emigration rate of any member state, at 7.6 emigrants per 1,000 population. However, it has the youngest population of any European Union member state and its population size is predicted to grow for many decades, in contrast with the declining population predicted for most European countries. A report published in 2008 predicted that the population would reach 6.7 million by 2060. The Republic has also been experiencing a baby boom, with increasing birth rates and overall fertility rates. Despite this, the total fertility rate is still below replacement depending on when the measurement is taken. The Irish fertility rate is still the highest of any European country. This increase is significantly fuelled by non-Irish immigration – in 2009, one-quarter of all babies born in Ireland were born to foreign-born mothers.



== Population ==
The population of Ireland was 5,123,536 people in 2022.
Demographic statistics as of 2019.
*One birth every 8 minutes
*One death every 16 minutes
*One net migrant every 90 minutes
*Net gain of one person every 14 minutes

; Geographic Population Distribution

Urban population (&quot;areas with &gt;1,500 people&quot;): 62.0% (2011)

Rural population: 38.0% (2011)

=== Fertility ===
The total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman.

Birth rate; 13.8 births/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 137th

Total fertility rate; 1.96 children born/woman (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 125th

Mother&#x27;s mean age at first birth; 30.7 years (2015 est.)

=== Life expectancy ===

Death rate; 6.6 deaths/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 140th

Source: &quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;

=== Age structure ===

Age structure

:&quot;0–14 years:&quot; 21.37% (male 554,110 /female 529,067)
:&quot;15–24 years:&quot; 11.92% (male 306,052 /female 297,890)
:&quot;25–54 years:&quot; 42.86% (male 1,091,495 /female 1,080,594)
:&quot;55–64 years:&quot; 10.53% (male 267,255 /female 266,438)
:&quot;65 years and over:&quot; 13.32% (male 312,694 /female 362,455) (2018 est.)

Median age; total: 37.1 years

: male: 36.8 years
: female: 37.5 years (2018 est.)

== Vital statistics ==

c = Census results.

===Current vital statistics===


===Structure of the population===



== Ethnic groups ==

== Immigration ==
Ireland&#x27;s immigration history (and of one of a multi-ethnic society) is most of that of a country of emigration, remaining exclusively homogeneous for the vast majority of 20th century history, rather than one of net migration and increased ethnic and racial diversity.

However, from the 1990s, with the rise of the &#x27;Celtic Tiger&#x27;, the nation shifted to one of a net receiver of immigration at a rapid pace, changing from one of the most &#x27;homogeneous countries in the EU, to a country with a rate of change almost unparalleled in speed and scale&#x27;. The Celtic Tiger economic boom saw a large expansion of the labour market, which contributed to the large increase of immigration towards the country, with the additional enlargement of the European Union in 2004 and the further 2007 enlargement contributing to increased levels of immigration.

Additionally, asylum seekers rose dramatically as well: from 364 in 1994 to 11,634 in 2002, before falling off towards the end of the decade.

* Net migration rate: 6.8 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2023 est.)
* Country comparison to the world: 13th

===Nationalities===

Ireland contains several immigrant communities, especially in Dublin and other cities across the country. The largest immigrant groups, with over 10,000 people, being Poles, British, Indians, Romanians, Lithuanians, Brazilians, Italians, Latvians, Spaniards, French, Croats, Americans, Chinese, Germans and Ukrainians.

==== Nationality of mothers ====
Of the 57,540 births in 2022, there were 43,651 babies (76%) born to mothers of Irish nationality compared to 45,381 (78%) in 2021. There were 8.3% of births to mothers of EU15 to EU27 nationality, 1.9% of mothers were of UK nationality, and 2.3% were of EU14 nationality (excluding Ireland). Mothers of nationalities other than Ireland, UK and the EU accounted for 12% of total births registered. There were 0.01% of mothers where the nationality was not stated.

===Migration data for Ireland, 1987-present===


=== Country of birth ===

In 2022, 20% of the usually resident population in Ireland were born elsewhere, an increase of 3% since 2016. This represented 1,017,437 people, an increase of 207,031 from six years previously.
*

=== Support and opposition ===
Migrants are supported/represented by the Immigrant Council of Ireland, Irish Refugee Council, Movement of Asylum Seekers in Ireland, Nasc and the state&#x27;s Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service. They are managed by the International Protection Accommodation Service under the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth (DCEDIY) as well being policed by the Garda National Immigration Bureau. 

Some minor parties have voiced opposition to immigration in the country and its capability to continue to let refugees in; that &quot;Ireland is full&quot;. They include the National Party and the Irish Freedom Party. In May 2023, a Red C/The Business Post poll found that 75% of people thought that Ireland is taking in too many refugees.

The DCEDIY projected a shortfall of 15,000 beds for refugees in December 2022 and admitted that there was mounting pressure to house 65,000 people.

Approximately 7,400 refugee adults and children were projected to be living in 38 &quot;direct provision&quot; centres across 17 counties in Ireland by the end of April 2020. The government of Ireland have said that they project to end direct provision by 2024 and are looking towards alternative forms of accommodation.

== Religion ==
Ireland is a predominantly Christian country. The majority are Catholic; however, the number of people who declare themselves Catholic has been declining in recent years. Irreligion has increased since 2016 with 14% declaring &#x27;No Religion&#x27; in 2022, meaning this is the second largest religious affiliation in Ireland. Immigration has also brought other faiths, with Islam at 1.7%, or over 83,000 people. As well as Hinduism, with 33,043 Hindus in the state.

== Languages ==

English is the most commonly used language, with 84% of the population calling it their mother tongue. Irish is the first official language of the state, with 11% calling it their mother tongue. Irish is the main language of the Gaeltacht regions, where 102,973 people lived as of 2022. The main sign language used is Irish Sign Language.

== Education ==
Literacy rate; &quot;definition:&quot; age 15 and over who can read and write
:&quot;total population:&quot; 99%
:&quot;male:&quot; 99%
:&quot;female:&quot; 99% (2003 est.)
School life expectancy (primary to tertiary education); total: 19 years
:male: 19 years
:female: 19 years (2016)

== Employment and income ==

For November 2022 the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was:

Unchanged at 4.3% for males from October 2022, and down from 5.3% in November 2021.

Unchanged at 4.6% for females from October 2022, and down from 5.2% in November 2021.

Unchanged at 12.1% for persons aged 15–24 years (youth unemployment rate) from a revised rate of 12.1% in October 2022.

Down to 3.3% for persons aged 25–74 years from 3.4% in October 2022.

The median household disposable income in 2020 was €46,471, an increase of €2,556 (+5.8%) from the previous year. Disposable household income is gross household income less total tax, social insurance contributions, pension contributions and inter-household transfers paid.

==See also==

*Demographics of Northern Ireland
*2011 census of Ireland
*2016 census of Ireland
*Historical population of Ireland
*Irish diaspora
*Stamp 4

Groups:
*Americans in Ireland
*Brazilians in Ireland
*Black people in Ireland
*Chinese people in Ireland
*Lithuanians in Ireland
*Polish minority in Ireland
*Romani people in Ireland
*South Asians in Ireland
*Turks in Ireland

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Irish Central Statistics Office
*Historical Census Data
*Marketing Ireland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="0" end="7" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="232" end="247" title="population boom" label="population boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18293488" start="267" end="279" title="British Agricultural Revolution" label="Agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="284" end="294" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="545" end="557" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="681" end="700" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q855736" start="1135" end="1147" title="Celtic Tiger" label="Celtic Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384234" start="1154" end="1167" title="economic boom" label="economic boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q972891" start="1466" end="1499" title="Post-2008 Irish economic downturn" label="Irish economic and banking crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="1662" end="1670" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q610548" start="2145" end="2154" title="baby boom" label="baby boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="2954" end="2974" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="4059" end="4073" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q855736" start="4387" end="4399" title="Celtic Tiger" label="Celtic Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="4804" end="4845" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="enlargement of the European Union in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q23609046" start="4850" end="4878" title="2007 enlargement of the European Union" label="the further 2007 enlargement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="5262" end="5268" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="5367" end="5372" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q862086" start="5383" end="5390" title="Indian people" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="5392" end="5401" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q186192" start="5403" end="5414" title="Lithuanians" label="Lithuanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q873625" start="5416" end="5426" title="Brazilians" label="Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="5428" end="5436" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="5438" end="5446" title="Latvians" label="Latvians"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="5448" end="5457" title="Spaniards" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="5459" end="5465" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="5467" end="5473" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="5475" end="5484" title="Americans" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="5486" end="5493" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="5495" end="5502" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="5507" end="5517" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381980" start="6364" end="6392" title="Immigrant Council of Ireland" label="Immigrant Council of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q96382864" start="6394" end="6415" title="Irish Refugee Council" label="Irish Refugee Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394144" start="6417" end="6454" title="Movement of Asylum Seekers in Ireland" label="Movement of Asylum Seekers in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55454027" start="6456" end="6460" title="Nasc (NGO)" label="Nasc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071037" start="6482" end="6526" title="Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service" label="Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302359" start="6552" end="6598" title="International Protection Accommodation Service" label="International Protection Accommodation Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294576" start="6609" end="6676" title="Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth" label="Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522136" start="6715" end="6748" title="Garda National Immigration Bureau" label="Garda National Immigration Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6783" end="6823" title="Opposition to immigration#Ireland" label="opposition to immigration in the country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6886" end="6901" title="2022–present Irish anti-immigration protests#Slogans" label="Ireland is full"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195250" start="6926" end="6940" title="National Party (Ireland, 2016)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087288" start="6949" end="6968" title="Irish Freedom Party" label="Irish Freedom Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522922" start="6995" end="7008" title="Business Post" label="Business Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817470" start="7281" end="7289" title="Refugee children" label="children"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984475" start="7330" end="7346" title="direct provision" label="direct provision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="7421" end="7442" title="government of Ireland" label="government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q640866" start="7642" end="7650" title="Catholic Church in Ireland" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7705" end="7713" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="7750" end="7760" title="Irreligion" label="Irreligion"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7955" end="7960" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="8004" end="8012" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="8153" end="8166" title="mother tongue" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q158490" start="8294" end="8303" title="Gaeltacht" label="Gaeltacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q14183" start="8383" end="8402" title="Irish Sign Language" label="Irish Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619323" start="9456" end="9488" title="Demographics of Northern Ireland" label="Demographics of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058983" start="9490" end="9512" title="2011 census of Ireland" label="2011 census of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980642" start="9514" end="9536" title="2016 census of Ireland" label="2016 census of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071718" start="9538" end="9570" title="Historical population of Ireland" label="Historical population of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574155" start="9572" end="9586" title="Irish diaspora" label="Irish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085064" start="9588" end="9595" title="Stamp 4" label="Stamp 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745636" start="9606" end="9626" title="Americans in Ireland" label="Americans in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535322" start="9628" end="9649" title="Brazilians in Ireland" label="Brazilians in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240911" start="9651" end="9674" title="Black people in Ireland" label="Black people in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28187167" start="9676" end="9701" title="Chinese people in Ireland" label="Chinese people in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648508" start="9703" end="9725" title="Lithuanians in Ireland" label="Lithuanians in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210048" start="9727" end="9753" title="Polish minority in Ireland" label="Polish minority in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361506" start="9755" end="9779" title="Romani people in Ireland" label="Romani people in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259037" start="9781" end="9804" title="South Asians in Ireland" label="South Asians in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071650" start="9806" end="9822" title="Turks in Ireland" label="Turks in Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14677" wikidata="Q1155264" url="?curid=14677" title="Politics of the Republic of Ireland">
<text>Ireland is a parliamentary, representative democratic republic and a member state of the European Union. While the head of state is the popularly elected President of Ireland, it is a largely ceremonial position, with real political power being vested in the Taoiseach, who is nominated by the Dáil and is the head of the government.

Executive power is exercised by the government, which consists of no more than 15 cabinet ministers, inclusive of the Taoiseach and Tánaiste (the deputy head of government). Legislative power is vested in the Oireachtas, the bicameral national parliament, which consists of Dáil Éireann, Seanad Éireann and the President of Ireland. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The head of the judiciary is the Chief Justice, who presides over the Supreme Court.

Ireland has a multi-party system. Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael, historically opposed and competing entities, which both occupy the traditional centre ground, trace their roots to the opposing sides of the Irish Civil War. All governments since 1932 have been led by one or the other party, with Fianna Fáil having had sufficient support at many elections to govern alone. Fluctuations in seat levels allowed changes in governments through different coalitions. From 1932 to 2011, the parties were stable in their support, with Fianna Fáil the largest at each election, Fine Gael the second largest, and on all but two occasions, the Labour Party the third party. The last three elections, however, have each had more volatile results. At the 2011 election, the largest parties in order were Fine Gael, Labour and Fianna Fáil; at the 2016 election, the largest parties in order were Fine Gael, Fianna Fáil and Sinn Féin; and at the 2020 election, the largest parties were Fianna Fáil first in seats (second in votes), Sinn Féin second in seats (first in votes), and then Fine Gael. The result was historically good for Sinn Féin.

In June 2020, leader of Fianna Fáil, Micheál Martin, became the new Taoiseach (head of government). He formed a historic three-party coalition consisting of Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael and the Green Party. It was the first time in history that Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael were in the same government. The previous Taoiseach and leader of Fine Gael, Leo Varadkar, became the Tánaiste (deputy head of government). Martin led the country as Taoiseach until 17 December 2022, when he changed posts with Varadkar.

 According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Ireland was the &quot;7th most electoral democratic country&quot; in the world in 2023.

==Constitution==

The state operates under the Constitution of Ireland () which was adopted in 1937 by means of a plebiscite. The constitution falls within the liberal democratic tradition. It defines the organs of government and guarantees certain fundamental rights. The Constitution can only be amended by means of a referendum. Important constitutional referendums have concerned issues such as abortion, the status of the Catholic Church, divorce, the European Union and same-sex marriage.

==President==

The head of state is the President of Ireland. In keeping with the state&#x27;s parliamentary system of government, the President exercises a mainly ceremonial role but does possess certain specific powers. The presidency is open to all Irish citizens who are at least 35. They are directly elected by secret ballot under the alternative vote. A candidate may be nominated for election as president by no fewer than 20 members of the Oireachtas or by four or more of Ireland&#x27;s 31 County and City Councils. A retiring President may nominate themselves as a candidate for re-election. If only one valid candidate is nominated for election, for example if there is consensus among the political parties to nominate a single candidate, it is unnecessary to proceed to a ballot and that candidate is deemed elected. The President is elected to a seven-year term of office and no person may serve more than two terms.

In carrying out certain of their constitutional functions, the President is aided by the Council of State. There is no vice-president in Ireland. If for any reason the President is unable to carry out their functions, or if the Office of President is vacant, the duties of the President are carried out by the Presidential Commission.

The President may not veto bills passed by the Oireachtas but may, after consultation with the Council of State, refer them to the Supreme Court of Ireland for a ruling on whether they comply with the constitution. The President may refuse a request of the Taoiseach for a dissolution of Dáil Éireann, although no request for a dissolution has ever been refused.

==Legislative branch==

Article 15 of the Constitution of Ireland established the Oireachtas as the national parliament of Ireland. The Oireachtas consists of the President of Ireland and two elected houses: Dáil Éireann (the House of Representatives) and Seanad Éireann (the Senate). As the Oireachtas also consists of the President, the title of the two law-making houses is the Houses of the Oireachtas. The Dáil is by far the dominant house of the legislature.

===Dáil Éireann===
Members of the Dáil are directly elected at least once in every five years under the single transferable vote form of proportional representation from multi-seat constituencies. Membership of the house is open to all Irish citizens who are at least 21 and permanently resident in the State. The electorate consists of all Irish and British citizens resident in Ireland over the age of 18. Members of the Dáil are known as Teachta Dála or TDs. As of 2021, there are 160 TDs, of which one, the Ceann Comhairle (Presiding Officer), is automatically returned at an election. The Taoiseach, Tánaiste and the Minister for Finance must be members of the Dáil. The Dáil is the only House which can introduce and amend money bills (i.e. financial and tax legislation). Since the early 1980s, no single party has had a majority in Dáil Éireann, so that coalition governments have been the norm.

===Seanad Éireann===

The Seanad is a largely advisory body. It consists of sixty members called Senators. An election for the Seanad must take place no later than 90 days after a general election for the members of the Dáil. Eleven Senators are nominated by the Taoiseach while a further six are elected by certain national universities. The remaining 43 are elected from special vocational panels of candidates, the electorate for which consists of the 60 members of the outgoing Senate, the 160 TDs of the incoming Dáil and the 883 elected members of 31 local authorities. The Seanad has the power to delay legislative proposals and is allowed 90 days to consider and amend bills sent to it by the Dáil (excluding money bills). The Seanad is only allowed 21 days to consider money bills sent to it by the Dáil. The Seanad cannot amend money bills but can make recommendations to the Dáil on such bills. No more than two members of a government may be members of the Seanad, and only twice since 1937 have members of the Seanad been appointed to government.

==Executive branch==

Executive authority is exercised by a cabinet known simply as &quot;the Government&quot;. Article 28 of the Constitution states that the Government may consist of no less than seven and no more than fifteen members, namely the Taoiseach (prime minister), the Tánaiste (deputy prime minister) and up to thirteen other ministers. The Minister for Finance is the only other position named in the Constitution. The Taoiseach is appointed by the President, after being nominated by Dáil Éireann. The remaining ministers are nominated by the Taoiseach and appointed by the President following their approval by the Dáil. The Government must enjoy the confidence of Dáil Éireann and, in the event that they cease to enjoy the support of the lower house, the Taoiseach must either resign or request the President to dissolve the Dáil, in which case a general election follows.

==Judicial branch==

Ireland is a common law jurisdiction. The judiciary consists of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and the High Court established by the Constitution and other lower courts established by statute law. Judges are appointed by the President after being nominated by the Government and can be removed from office only for misbehaviour or incapacity, and then only by resolution of both houses of the Oireachtas. The final court of appeal is the Supreme Court, which consists of the Chief Justice, nine ordinary judges and, the Presidents of the Court of Appeal and the High Court. The Supreme Court rarely sits as a full bench and normally hears cases in chambers of three, five or seven judges.

The courts established by the constitution have the power of judicial review and may declare to be invalid both laws and acts of the state which are repugnant to the constitution.

==Public sector==
The Government, through the civil and public services and state-sponsored bodies, is a significant employer in the state; these three sectors are often called the &quot;public sector&quot;. Management of these various bodies vary, for instance in the civil service there will be clearly defined routes and patterns whilst among public services a sponsoring minister or the Minister for Finance may appoint a board or commission. Commercial activities, where the state involves itself, are typically through the state-sponsored bodies which are usually organised in a similar fashion to private companies.

A 2005 report on public sector employment, showed that in June 2005 the numbers employed in the public sector stood at 350,100; of these by sector they were 38,700 (civil service), 254,100 (public service) and 57,300 (state-sponsored). The total workforce of the state was 1,857,400 that year, thus the public sector represents approximately 20% of the total workforce.

===Civil service===
The civil service of Ireland consists of two broad components, the &quot;Civil Service of the Government&quot; and the &quot;Civil Service of the State&quot;. Whilst these two components are largely theoretical, they do have some fundamental operational differences. The civil service is expected to maintain the political impartiality in its work, and some sections of it are entirely independent of Government decision making.

===Public service===
The public service is a relatively broad term and is not clearly defined and sometimes is taken to include the civil service. The public service proper consists of Government agencies and bodies which provide services on behalf of the Government but are not the core civil service. For instance local authorities, Education and Training Boards and Garda Síochána are considered to be public services.

==Local government==

Article 28A of the constitution of Ireland provides a constitutional basis for local government. The Oireachtas is empowered to establish the number, size and powers of local authorities by law. Under Article 28A, members of local authorities must be directly elected by voters at least once every five years.

Local government in Ireland is governed by a series of Local Government Acts, beginning with the Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898. The most significant of these is the Local Government Act 2001, which established a two-tier structure of local government. The Local Government Reform Act 2014 abolished the bottom tier, the town councils, leaving 31 local authorities. There are 26 County Councils (County Dublin having been divided into three council areas), 3 City Councils (Dublin, Cork and Galway), and 2 City and County Councils (Limerick and Waterford).

==Political parties==

A number of political parties are represented in the Dáil and coalition governments are common. The Irish electoral system has been historically characterised as a two-and-a-half party system, with two large catch-all parties, this being the centre-right Fine Gael and the centrist Fianna Fáil, dominating, and the &quot;half-party&quot;, being Labour. This changed after the 2011 general election, following the large drop in support for Fianna Fáil and the rise in support for other parties. Ireland&#x27;s political landscape changed dramatically after the 2020 general election, when Sinn Féin made gains to become the joint-largest party in the Dáil, making Ireland a three party system.

Fianna Fáil, a traditionally Irish republican party founded in 1927 by Éamon de Valera, is the joint-largest party in the Dáil and considered centrist in Irish politics. It first formed a government on the basis of a populist programme of land redistribution and national preference in trade and republican populism remains a key part of its appeal. It has formed government seven times since Ireland gained independence: 1932–1948, 1951–1954, 1957–1973, 1977–1981, 1982, 1987–1994, and 1997–2011. Fianna Fáil was the largest party in the Dáil from 1932 to 2011. It lost a huge amount of support in the 2011 general election, going from 71 to 20 seats, its lowest ever. Its loss in support was mainly due to its handling of the 2008 economic recession. It has since regained some support, but is yet to recover to its pre-2011 levels.

The other joint-largest party is Sinn Féin, established in its current form in 1970 as a breakaway faction from the original political party of the same name (the remaining part has had several changes of name since, and is now known as the Workers&#x27; Party). The original Sinn Féin party played a major role in the Irish War of Independence and the First Dáil, and both Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil trace their origins to this party, having split from it in 1922 and 1926, respectively. The current-day party split from this older Sinn Féin in a dispute over political ideology and a perceived lack of support for the so-called “armed struggle” against British rule in Northern Ireland, and as a result the newer party has been historically linked to the Provisional IRA. The party is a Republican party which takes a strongly left wing stance on economics and social policy, placing it to the left of the Labour party. Sinn Féin received the highest share of first-preference votes in the 2020 general election, but finished level with Fianna Fáil in overall seats once vote transfers had been counted.

The third-largest party in the Dáil is Fine Gael, which has its origins in the pro-Treaty faction of Michael Collins in the Irish Civil War. Traditionally regarded as the party of law and order, it is associated with strong belief in pro-enterprise and reward. Despite expressions of Social Democracy by previous leader Garret FitzGerald, today, it remains a Christian democratic, economically liberal party along European lines, with a strongly pro-European outlook. Fine Gael was formed in 1933 out of a merger of Cumann na nGaedheal (which had split from the original Sinn Féin in 1922), the National Centre Party and the paramilitary Blueshirts organisation. In more recent years it has generally been associated with a liberal, progressive, outlook. Fine Gael has formed governments in the periods 1922–1932 (as Cumann na nGaedheal), 1948–1951, 1954–1957, 1973–1977, 1981–1982, 1982–1987, 1994–1997, and from 2011 to present. In the 2011 general election, Fine Gael won 78 seats, its highest ever total, and a massive increase from the previous election.

The fourth-largest party in the Dáil is the Green Party, which made significant gains at the 2020 general election.

The fifth largest party in the Dáil is the centre-left Labour Party which was founded by James Connolly and Jim Larkin in 1912. Labour has formal links with the trade union movement and has governed in seven coalition governments – six led by Fine Gael and one by Fianna Fáil. This recurring role as a junior coalition partner has led to Labour being classed as the &quot;half&quot; party in Ireland&#x27;s &quot;two-and-a-half party system&quot;. Labour won a record number of seats, 37, at the 2011 general election, becoming the second-largest party for the first time in its history, following the collapse in support for Fianna Fáil. In 2011, Labour went into coalition with Fine Gael, who had also won a record number of seats. Labour retained its place as one of Ireland&#x27;s three largest parties up until the 2016 general election, when it suffered the worst general election defeat in its history, gaining just 7 seats. Much of this was due to being part of a government that had introduced unpopular austerity measures to deal with the economic crisis.

The sixth-largest Dáil party is the centre-left Social Democrats. The Social Democrats were founded in 2015 and made gains at the 2020 general election.

The People Before Profit–Solidarity electoral alliance, consisting of People Before Profit and Solidarity, is the 7th-largest party grouping within Dáil Éireann. Formed in 2015, the group represents a left-wing, socialist viewpoint.

Aontú, a party formed in 2019 by politicians who left Sinn Féin, has one TD, as does Right to Change, a left-wing, socialist political party formed after the 2020 election.

Nineteen of the 160 TDs in the 33rd Dáil are Independent.

===Party details===

===Party representation===



==Foreign relations==

Ireland&#x27;s foreign relations are substantially influenced by its membership of the European Union, although bilateral relations with the United States and United Kingdom are also important to the country. It is one of the group of smaller nations in the EU, and has traditionally followed a non-aligned foreign policy.

===Military neutrality===
Ireland tends towards independence in foreign policy, thus it is not a member of NATO and has a longstanding policy of military neutrality.

This policy has helped the Irish Defence Forces to be successful in their contributions to UN peace-keeping missions since 1960 (in the Congo Crisis ONUC) and subsequently in Cyprus (UNFICYP), Lebanon (UNIFIL), Iran/Iraq Border (UNIIMOG), Bosnia and Herzegovina (SFOR &amp; EUFOR Althea), Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), Liberia (UNMIL), East Timor (INTERFET), Darfur and Chad (EUFOR Tchad/RCA).

==Northern Ireland==
Northern Ireland has been a major factor in Irish politics since the island of Ireland was divided between Northern Ireland and what is now the Republic in 1920. The creation of Northern Ireland led to conflict between northern nationalists (mostly Roman Catholic) who seek unification with the Republic and Unionists (mostly Protestant) who opposed British plans for Irish Home Rule and wished for Northern Ireland to remain within the United Kingdom. After the formation of Northern Ireland in 1921 following its opt out from the newly formed Irish Free State, many Roman Catholics and Republicans were discriminated against. The abolition of Proportional Representation and the gerrymandering of constituency boundaries led to Unionists being over-represented at Stormont and at Westminster. Even James Craig who was prime minister of Northern Ireland boasted of his Protestant Parliament for a Protestant People. In the 1960s NICRA was set up to end discrimination between Catholics and Protestants. There was a massive backlash to this from sections of the Unionist community. This conflict exploded into violence in the late sixties with the beginning of the Troubles, involving groups such as the Provisional IRA, loyalist paramilitaries, the police and the British army, the latter originally drafted in to protect Catholic communities from loyalist violence. These clashes were to result in the suspension of the Stormont Parliament and unsuccessful efforts by the British Government to encourage a power-sharing Executive in Northern Ireland which were only realised following the Good Friday Agreement in 1998. The Troubles caused thousands of deaths in Northern Ireland but also spilled over into bombings and acts of violence in England and the Republic.

Since its foundation it has been the stated long-term policy of governments of what is now the Republic to bring an end to the conflict in Northern Ireland and to bring about a united Ireland. Northern Ireland has also, in the past, often been a source of tension between the Irish Government and the government of the United Kingdom. To find a solution to the Troubles the Irish Government became a partner in the Good Friday Agreement in 1998.

While Sinn Féin have long organised in both Northern Ireland and the Republic, Fianna Fáil did not register as a party in Derry until December 2007, when it also began recruiting members at Queen&#x27;s University, Belfast although both are extremely small.

===North/South Ministerial Council===
Under the Good Friday Agreement and Article 3 of the Constitution a North-South Ministerial Council and six North-South Implementation Bodies co-ordinate activities and exercise a limited governmental role within certain policy areas across the whole island of Ireland. The Implementation Bodies have limited executive authority in six policy areas. Meetings of the Council take the form of meetings between ministers from both the Republic&#x27;s Government and the Northern Ireland Executive. The council was suspended from 2002 to 2007. However, with the resumption of devolved government in Northern Ireland in May 2007, the council has now re-assumed its duties.

==See also==

*:Ireland
*History of the Republic of Ireland
*History of Ireland
*Elections in the Republic of Ireland
*List of Dáil by-elections
*Politics of Northern Ireland
*Dáil constituencies

==Further reading==
* John Coakley &amp; Michael Gallagher (Editors) &quot;Politics in the Republic of Ireland&quot; (Routledge, 2004)
* Sean Dooney &amp; John O&#x27;Toole &quot;Irish Government Today&quot; (Gill &amp; Macmillan Ltd., 1998)
* Neil Collins &amp; Terry Cradden &quot;Irish Politics Today&quot; (Manchester University Press, 2001)
* Noel Whelan &quot;Politics, Elections and the Law&quot; (Blackhall Publishing, 2000)

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*ElectionsIreland.org – Irish election results from 1920 to today.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="0" end="7" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="13" end="26" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="28" end="53" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="89" end="103" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="115" end="128" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="154" end="174" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="259" end="268" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="294" end="298" title="Dáil" label="Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="322" end="332" title="Government of Ireland" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="335" end="350" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="371" end="381" title="Irish government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146214" start="467" end="475" title="Tánaiste" label="Tánaiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="509" end="526" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821" start="544" end="554" title="Oireachtas" label="Oireachtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="560" end="569" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="609" end="621" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="623" end="637" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="646" end="666" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="672" end="681" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059233" start="685" end="696" title="Judicial independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072323" start="768" end="781" title="Chief Justice of Ireland" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q153617" start="805" end="818" title="Supreme Court of Ireland" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="835" end="853" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="855" end="866" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="871" end="880" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="1023" end="1038" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="1451" end="1463" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q767723" start="1560" end="1573" title="2011 Irish general election" label="2011 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021043" start="1651" end="1664" title="2016 Irish general election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="1727" end="1736" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23000966" start="1749" end="1762" title="2020 Irish general election" label="2020 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q920403" start="1985" end="1999" title="Micheál Martin" label="Micheál Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728820" start="2290" end="2302" title="Leo Varadkar" label="Leo Varadkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="2469" end="2492" title="V-Dem Democracy indices" label="V-Dem Democracy indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="2742" end="2760" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467578" start="2880" end="2887" title="Amendments to the Constitution of Ireland" label="amended"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708125" start="2981" end="2989" title="Abortion in the Republic of Ireland" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q640866" start="2995" end="3024" title="Catholic Church in Ireland" label="status of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447443" start="3026" end="3033" title="Fifteenth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="3039" end="3053" title="Ireland and the European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772277" start="3058" end="3075" title="Same-sex marriage in the Republic of Ireland" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="3173" end="3193" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="3419" end="3435" title="instant-runoff voting" label="alternative vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074936" start="3560" end="3602" title="Local government in the Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s 31 County and City Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152244" start="4100" end="4116" title="Council of State (Ireland)" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986727" start="4321" end="4344" title="Presidential Commission (Ireland)" label="Presidential Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q153617" start="4478" end="4502" title="Supreme Court of Ireland" label="Supreme Court of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="4635" end="4647" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="4753" end="4776" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="4874" end="4894" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="5281" end="5305" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="5314" end="5341" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="5618" end="5630" title="Teachta Dála" label="Teachta Dála"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052201" start="5688" end="5703" title="Ceann Comhairle" label="Ceann Comhairle"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="6039" end="6059" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074936" start="6636" end="6656" title="Local government in the Republic of Ireland" label="31 local authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="7392" end="7401" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146214" start="7424" end="7432" title="Tánaiste" label="Tánaiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294945" start="7497" end="7517" title="Minister for Finance (Ireland)" label="Minister for Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376784" start="7629" end="7654" title="Dáil vote for Taoiseach" label="nominated by Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="8069" end="8079" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q153617" start="8124" end="8137" title="Supreme Court of Ireland" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511526" start="8143" end="8158" title="Court of Appeal (Ireland)" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q671721" start="8167" end="8177" title="High Court (Ireland)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="8815" end="8830" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294945" start="9326" end="9346" title="Minister for Finance (Ireland)" label="Minister for Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="10405" end="10419" title="public services" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074936" start="10696" end="10713" title="Local government in the Republic of Ireland" label="local authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100251" start="10715" end="10743" title="Education and Training Board" label="Education and Training Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366959" start="10749" end="10763" title="Garda Síochána" label="Garda Síochána"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664026" start="11233" end="11268" title="Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898" label="Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664078" start="11307" end="11332" title="Local Government Act 2001" label="Local Government Act 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100431" start="11398" end="11430" title="Local Government Reform Act 2014" label="Local Government Reform Act 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q173500" start="11537" end="11550" title="County Dublin" label="County Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810766" start="11615" end="11621" title="Dublin City Council" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170762" start="11623" end="11627" title="Cork City Council" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519477" start="11632" end="11638" title="Galway City Council" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16886590" start="11673" end="11681" title="Limerick City and County Council" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16886769" start="11686" end="11695" title="Waterford City and County Council" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="11775" end="11779" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="11784" end="11804" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350504" start="11886" end="11913" title="two-and-a-half party system" label="two-and-a-half party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="11977" end="11986" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="12004" end="12015" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="12161" end="12172" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q23000966" start="12282" end="12303" title="2020 Irish general election" label="2020 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="12310" end="12319" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="12416" end="12427" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="12445" end="12461" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="12487" end="12502" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="12633" end="12641" title="Populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="12914" end="12925" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q767723" start="13019" end="13040" title="2011 Irish general election" label="2011 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="13144" end="13167" title="Great Recession" label="2008 economic recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="13285" end="13294" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860218" start="13493" end="13512" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Ireland)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866515" start="13519" end="13543" title="History of Sinn Féin" label="original Sinn Féin party"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="13571" end="13596" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356572" start="13605" end="13615" title="First Dáil" label="First Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="13626" end="13635" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="13640" end="13651" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="14008" end="14023" title="Provisional IRA" label="Provisional IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="14040" end="14050" title="Irish Republicanism" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052408" start="14213" end="14235" title="First preference votes" label="first-preference votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="14324" end="14338" title="Single transferable vote" label="vote transfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="14397" end="14406" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="14482" end="14497" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797815" start="14538" end="14551" title="Law and order (politics)" label="law and order"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="14642" end="14658" title="Social Democracy" label="Social Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="14717" end="14737" title="Christian democratic" label="Christian democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143631" start="14874" end="14893" title="Cumann na nGaedheal" label="Cumann na nGaedheal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432611" start="14953" end="14974" title="National Centre Party (Ireland)" label="National Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q689733" start="14996" end="15006" title="Blueshirts" label="Blueshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q767723" start="15296" end="15317" title="2011 Irish general election" label="2011 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q831015" start="15463" end="15474" title="Green Party (Ireland)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="15591" end="15603" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q213374" start="15625" end="15639" title="James Connolly" label="James Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583571" start="15644" end="15654" title="Jim Larkin" label="Jim Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q767723" start="16032" end="16053" title="2011 Irish general election" label="2011 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="16201" end="16210" title="Coalition government" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021043" start="16356" end="16377" title="2016 Irish general election" label="2016 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="16549" end="16558" title="austerity" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="16585" end="16600" title="Great Recession" label="economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20682633" start="16651" end="16667" title="Social Democrats (Ireland)" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q21218940" start="16761" end="16792" title="People Before Profit–Solidarity" label="People Before Profit–Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545406" start="16827" end="16847" title="People Before Profit" label="People Before Profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000050" start="16852" end="16862" title="Solidarity (Ireland)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q61090509" start="16991" end="16996" title="Aontú" label="Aontú"/>
<link wikidata="Q96314860" start="17076" end="17091" title="Right to Change" label="Right to Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q84757447" start="17196" end="17205" title="33rd Dáil" label="33rd Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769254" start="17210" end="17221" title="Independent politician (Ireland)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="17385" end="17399" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="17729" end="17733" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17744" end="17756" title="The Emergency (Ireland)#Neutrality" label="longstanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q327063" start="17816" end="17836" title="Irish Defence Forces" label="Irish Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773926" start="17925" end="17937" title="Congo Crisis" label="Congo Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q699009" start="17938" end="17942" title="ONUC" label="ONUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="17964" end="17970" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q694772" start="17972" end="17979" title="UNFICYP" label="UNFICYP"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="17982" end="17989" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="17991" end="17997" title="UNIFIL" label="UNIFIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549011" start="18018" end="18025" title="UNIIMOG" label="UNIIMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="18028" end="18050" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="18052" end="18056" title="SFOR" label="SFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q691042" start="18063" end="18075" title="EUFOR Althea" label="EUFOR Althea"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="18078" end="18086" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="18091" end="18098" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q487381" start="18100" end="18105" title="UNMEE" label="UNMEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="18108" end="18115" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278645" start="18117" end="18122" title="UNMIL" label="UNMIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="18125" end="18135" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q402096" start="18137" end="18145" title="INTERFET" label="INTERFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q46733" start="18148" end="18154" title="Darfur" label="Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="18159" end="18163" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276250" start="18165" end="18180" title="EUFOR Tchad/RCA" label="EUFOR Tchad/RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280915" start="18205" end="18221" title="Politics of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="18433" end="18445" title="Irish nationalism" label="nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="18454" end="18468" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="18513" end="18522" title="Unionist (Ireland)" label="Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="18531" end="18541" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="18681" end="18697" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="18750" end="18766" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="18773" end="18788" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="18793" end="18804" title="Irish republicanism" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="18850" end="18877" title="Proportional Representation" label="Proportional Representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="18886" end="18900" title="gerrymandering" label="gerrymandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q336809" start="19005" end="19016" title="James Craig, 1st Viscount Craigavon" label="James Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="19043" end="19059" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659062" start="19075" end="19120" title="A Protestant Parliament for a Protestant People" label="Protestant Parliament for a Protestant People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121855" start="19135" end="19140" title="NICRA" label="NICRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="19267" end="19275" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="19370" end="19378" title="The Troubles" label="Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="19409" end="19424" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="19426" end="19434" title="Ulster loyalism" label="loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482143" start="19455" end="19461" title="Royal Ulster Constabulary" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="19470" end="19482" title="British army" label="British army"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="19796" end="19817" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752036" start="20151" end="20165" title="united Ireland" label="united Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="20389" end="20410" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="20543" end="20548" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q877925" start="20611" end="20634" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University Belfast" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="20636" end="20643" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="20728" end="20749" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800913" start="20754" end="20783" title="Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Article 3 of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="21185" end="21211" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Ireland Executive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21402" end="21410" title=":Ireland" label=":Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403781" start="21412" end="21446" title="History of the Republic of Ireland" label="History of the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q205157" start="21448" end="21466" title="History of Ireland" label="History of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q765896" start="21468" end="21504" title="Elections in the Republic of Ireland" label="Elections in the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574538" start="21506" end="21531" title="List of Dáil by-elections" label="List of Dáil by-elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280915" start="21533" end="21561" title="Politics of Northern Ireland" label="Politics of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761117" start="21563" end="21582" title="Dáil constituencies" label="Dáil constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="21702" end="21711" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14679" wikidata="Q16152262" url="?curid=14679" title="Telecommunications in the Republic of Ireland">
<text>Telecommunications in Ireland operate in a regulated competitive market that provides customers with a wide array of advanced digital services. This article explores Ireland&#x27;s telecommunications infrastructure including: fixed and mobile networks, The voice, data and Internet services, cable television, developments in next-generation networks and broadcast networks for radio and television.

==Regulation==
Telecommunications, including radio frequency spectrum licensing and the postal sector, are regulated by the Commission for Communications Regulation (ComReg). ComReg was established on 1 December 2002. The Broadcasting Authority of Ireland (BAI) () is the regulator of both public and commercial broadcasting sector in Ireland. It was established on 1 October 2009, replacing the Broadcasting Commission of Ireland (BCI) ().

The Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment has overall responsibility for national policy and regulation of both telecommunications and broadcasting.

The telecommunications market in Ireland was opened to competition in 1998.

Eir&#x27;s dominance has reduced and by Q3 2019 operators other than eir accounted for 61% of the Irish fixed voice market retail revenue and 54.7% market share by fixed-line retail and wholesale revenue and 80.9% of the mobile market (excluding mobile broadband and machine-to-machine subscriptions) or 84.4% of total subscriptions. Other operators accounted for 68.6% of retail fixed broadband subscriptions (comprising cable, FTTH, FTTC/VDSL and ADSL) and 57.3% of retail FTTP subscriptions

Eir remains the largest telecommunications company in Ireland, offering fixed, mobile, and broadband services. As Bord Telecom Éireann, the company was state owned until 1999, when it was floated on the Irish and New York Stock Exchanges.

==Infrastructure==
Ireland&#x27;s telecommunications network is a modern digital system connected by an extensive national fibre optic network with multiple high-capacity fibre optic links to the UK, Continental Europe, North America and with dedicated capacity on routes to Asia and other parts of the globe.
There is an open and competitive telecommunications market regulated by ComReg. However, the fixed-line market is still dominated by the incumbent operator Eir.

Several companies operate national fibre optic networks including Eir, BT Ireland, ESB Group and Virgin Media Ireland. Eir&#x27;s fibre network is the most extensive covering most parts of the country with 12,000 km of fibre routes (&gt;40,000 km of fibres)

Eir&#x27;s Next Generation Network upgrade rolled out dense wavelength-division multiplexing (DWDM) which is capable of delivering up to 320 Gbit/s along a single fibre route.
This upgrade also sees Eir&#x27;s core infrastructure moving to an all-IP network. It has major aggregation nodes at 140 locations around Ireland and onward fibre connections to another 470 central office sites.

Ireland also has major connections to multiple international fibre optic networks.

94 Irish towns and cities also have access to publicly owned, carrier-neutral metropolitan fibre networks managed by Enet.

These networks can be used by any licensed Irish telecommunications operator to provide commercial or residential end users with products.

For residential and small business providers, most major urban areas have access to Virgin Media Ireland&#x27;s HFC network which provides speeds of up to 1 Gbit/s using EuroDOCSIS 3.1 cable modem technology.

Open Eir is also in the process of rolling out FTTH which provides speeds of up to 1 Gbit/s down and 100 Mbit/s up. They also provide an extensive vectored VDSL2 based FTTC access network, using the legacy copper network. This offers speeds of up to 100 Mbit/s down and 20 Mbit/s up.

Retail services using this next-generation access infrastructure are provided by approximately 15 operators.

SIRO, a joint venture between ESB Group and Vodafone Ireland, provides another open access fibre to home network, used by multiple ISPs to deliver service. Fibre is run alongside ESB Networks 230 V/400 V LV electricity distribution system, sharing underground ducts and poles, with fibre typically entering premises next to the electricity meter. This, similar to Eir&#x27;s FTTH network, delivers speeds of up to 1 Gbit/s and is capable of delivery of 10 Gbit/s in the future.

Ireland has three mobile networks that own and operate their own network infrastructure and a number of MVNO operators that operate mobile phone services using one of these infrastructure providers&#x27; radio networks. The three infrastructure owning networks are Eir Mobile, Three, and Vodafone.

Meteor and Eir Mobile were the first to launch 4G LTE services in Ireland on 26 September 2013, followed by Vodafone on 14 October 2013, and Three on 27 January 2014. O2 was due to launch its 4G services later in 2014, but plans were put on hold when its acquisition by Three was approved in May, and from the time of the merger in 2015, previous O2 customers gained 4G coverage through Three&#x27;s network, albeit with initial service problems.

In 2016, 41.9% of Ireland&#x27;s mobile subscriptions were using 4G technology. 3G remained the dominant technology with 44.6% share, however, it is likely to be overtaken by 4G in 2017.

==Telephone system==
* Fixed telephone lines in use 1,168,591 (Q3 2020, ComReg)
* Mobile cellular telephones: 5,182,682 (Q3 2020, ComReg)
* Country code: 353

As mobile phone services become more price competitive, more Irish customers are opting to drop landline services. This is reflected by a sharp fall in the number of fixed line channels in use and an equivalent increase in mobile subscriptions. Details are tracked on ComReg&#x27;s ComStat website

There are three mobile telecommunications providers: Three Ireland, Eir Mobile and Vodafone Ireland.

There are also some MNVOs (Mobile Network Virtual Operators), such as: 48, GoMo, Lycamobile, An Post Mobile, Tesco Mobile, Virgin Mobile and Clear Mobile.

===History===
The original network was taken over by the Irish Department of Posts and Telegraphs (P&amp;T) from the British General Post Office in 1921 and used a mixture of manual and step-by-step automatic exchanges. Development of the network was relatively stagnant with slow rollout of automatic switching using step-by-step exchanges until after WWII.
From 1957 onwards, P&amp;T began to roll out more modern crossbar switches primarily using equipment supplied by Ericsson built at their Athlone facility. ITT Pentaconta crossbar switches, built by CGCT (Compagnie générale de constructions téléphoniques) were also used in some areas. This saw significant improvements to many services, but the network was still quite underdeveloped in rural areas with long waits for new subscribers and the last operator-only exchanges only closing in 1987.

Digital switching was introduced in 1980 using Ericsson AXE and Alcatel E10 switches both of which were manufactured at facilities in Ireland. This saw a total transformation of the telephone network with modern automatic and digital services reaching even the most rural parts of Ireland by the mid-1980s.

The fixed-line network is now made up of multiple operators using a diverse range of digital technologies including VoIP.

Ireland&#x27;s first mobile telephone network, Eircell, went live in 1986 using the analogue TACS system.
2G GSM services from Eircell launched on 1 July 1993. Digifone followed in 1997, then Meteor in 2001 (having been licensed in 1998) and 3 Ireland launched its UMTS 3G-only service in 2005.

3G services launched in 2004 (Vodafone Ireland) and other networks quickly followed suit, and 4G launched in 2013 (Meteor) and is now available on most networks. Meteor was bought out by Eir in 2005 and eventually rebranded as Eir in 2017.

==Internet==
* Internet users: 3.6 million, 77% of the population, 70th in the world (2011); 3.0 million, 67th in the world (2009)
* Dial-up subscriptions: 11,437 (Q4 2012 ComStat)
* Fixed broadband subscriptions: 1,506,832 (Q3 2020, ComReg)
* Mobile broadband subscriptions: 323,530 (Q3 2020, ComReg)
* Internet hosts: 1.4 million, 40th in the world (2012)
* Internet censorship: None (2011) 
* Top-level domain name: .ie

Broadband Internet access is available in Ireland via DSL, cable, wireless, and satellite. By the end of 2011 Eircom announced that 75% of its working lines would be connected to Next Generation Broadband (NGB) enabled exchanges.

Currently available services (Q3 2014)
* ADSL - up to 24 Mbit/s - (several providers and unbundled services are available.)
* FTTC - VDSL up to 100 Mbit/s down 20 Mbit/s up (several providers - vectoring technology is used)
* Cable - Speeds of up to 360 Mbit/s - Main provider Virgin Media Ireland
* Fixed Wireless Access (FWA) - various technologies in use - mostly used in rural areas.
* Mobile broadband - UMTS (3G) and LTE (4G) services are available from several providers.

A typical monthly broadband Internet subscription cost $26.02 in 2011, 14% less than the average of $30.16 for the 34 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries surveyed.

In August 2012 Pat Rabbitte, the Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources, outlined a national broadband plan with goals of:
* 70 to 100 Mbit/s broadband service available to at least 50 per cent of the population,
* at least 40 Mbit/s available to at least a further 20 per cent, and
* a minimum of 30 Mbit/s available to everyone, no matter how rural or remote.

Founded in 1996, the Internet Neutral Exchange (INEX) is an industry-owned association that provides IP peering and traffic exchange for its members in Ireland. The INEX switching centres are located in five secure data centres in Dublin and one in Cork: TeleCity Group in Kilcarbery Park, Dublin 22 &amp; TeleCity Group in Citywest Business Campus, Dublin 24 and Interxion DUB1, and Interxion DUB2 in Park West, and Vodafone Clonshaugh as well as at CIX, Hollyhill, Cork T23 R68N. The switches are connected by dedicated resilient fibre links. In June 2015 it listed 74 full and 21 associate members.

Established in 1998, the Internet Service Providers Association of Ireland (ISPAI) listed 24 Internet access and hosting providers as members in 2012.

==Radio and television==

===Infrastructure===
Television in Ireland is broadcast using DVB-T using the common platform specifications defined by NorDig which apply in the Nordic countries and Ireland. Video is encoded using the MPEG4 system.
The analogue PAL-I broadcasting system is no longer on air.

Cable systems operate using the DVB-C standard and Satellite is broadcast using DVB-S/S2.
Some areas still carry a range of cable channels in analogue PAL-I format. Although, this is normally just a legacy service provided by default. It is not possible to subscribe to analogue cable as a new customer.

Radio is broadcast primarily using FM 87-108 MHz.
Digital DAB Radio from the UK is also available in some areas but domestic services have ceased as have 
RTÉ Radio 1&#x27;s Longwave and Mediumwave services.

2RN operates a national FM network. However, most independent FM stations own their own broadcasting infrastructure.

Raidió Teilifís Éireann (&quot;Radio [and] Television of Ireland&quot;; abbreviated as RTÉ) is a statutory semi-state company and the public service broadcaster that dominates the radio and TV sectors in Ireland. The first commercial radio stations began broadcasting in 1989. Prior to 1989 hundreds of pirate radio stations were a mainstay of radio listener-ship, particularly in Dublin, and a handful of pirate stations continue to operate illegally today. In 1998 TV3 (Now Virgin Media 1-4) became the first privately owned commercial TV station and it remains the main free-to-air service after RTÉ. Competition also comes from British public and private terrestrial TV. Satellite and cable TV are widely available. There are also non-commercial community and special interest radio stations.

RTÉ both produces programmes and broadcasts them on television, radio and the Internet in English and Irish. The radio service began on 1 January 1926, while regular television broadcasts began on 31 December 1961, making RTÉ one of the oldest continuously operating public service broadcasters in the world. Some RTÉ services are only funded by advertising, while other RTÉ services are only funded by the television licence fee.

Saorview ( ) is Ireland&#x27;s national free-to-air digital terrestrial television (DTT) service operated by 2RN. Trial service began on 29 October 2010 with full service to the public from May 2011. Analogue television transmissions officially ended on 24 October 2012. with some deflectors continuing into 2013.

SAORSAT is Ireland&#x27;s national free-to-air digital satellite television service, also operated by 2RN. SAORSAT delivers Irish television services to the 1% to 2% of homes that are not covered by the SAORVIEW Digital Terrestrial Television service.

A television licence is required for any address at which there is a television set or device that is not exempt. The annual licence fee is €160. The licence is free to senior citizens (to anyone over the age of 70, some over 66), some social welfare recipients, and individuals who are blind.

== See also ==
* Community Radio Forum of Ireland (CRAOL)
* Internet censorship in Ireland
* List of Irish language radio stations
* List of television channels available in the Republic of Ireland
* Media of the Republic of Ireland

== References ==
== External links ==
* Broadcasting Authority of Ireland
* Commission for Communications Regulation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16152262" start="0" end="29" title="Telecommunications in the Republic of Ireland" label="Telecommunications in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152643" start="525" end="565" title="Commission for Communications Regulation" label="Commission for Communications Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972136" start="623" end="656" title="Broadcasting Authority of Ireland" label="Broadcasting Authority of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865770" start="847" end="906" title="Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment" label="Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049473" start="1587" end="1590" title="Eir (telecommunications)" label="Eir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695837" start="1701" end="1721" title="Telecom Éireann" label="Bord Telecom Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q144458" start="1790" end="1795" title="Irish Stock Exchange" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="1800" end="1823" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152643" start="2209" end="2215" title="Commission for Communications Regulation" label="ComReg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049473" start="2293" end="2296" title="Eir (telecommunications)" label="Eir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049473" start="2365" end="2368" title="Eir (telecommunications)" label="Eir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836758" start="2370" end="2380" title="BT Ireland" label="BT Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050566" start="2382" end="2391" title="ESB Group" label="ESB Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002039" start="2396" end="2416" title="Virgin Media Ireland" label="Virgin Media Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="2612" end="2650" title="dense wavelength-division multiplexing" label="dense wavelength-division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002039" start="3379" end="3399" title="Virgin Media Ireland" label="Virgin Media Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202591" start="3407" end="3410" title="hybrid fibre-coaxial" label="HFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q944595" start="3465" end="3479" title="DOCSIS" label="EuroDOCSIS 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="3552" end="3556" title="Fiber to the x" label="FTTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050566" start="3930" end="3939" title="ESB Group" label="ESB Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939286" start="3944" end="3960" title="Vodafone Ireland" label="Vodafone Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="4483" end="4487" title="Mobile virtual network operator" label="MVNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049473" start="4644" end="4654" title="Eir (telecommunications)" label="Eir Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840921" start="4656" end="4661" title="Three Ireland" label="Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939286" start="4667" end="4675" title="Vodafone Ireland" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840921" start="5825" end="5838" title="Three Ireland" label="Three Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049473" start="5840" end="5850" title="Eir (telecommunications)" label="Eir Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939286" start="5855" end="5871" title="Vodafone Ireland" label="Vodafone Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355181" start="5894" end="5899" title="List of Ireland mobile virtual network operators" label="MNVOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q85763768" start="5949" end="5953" title="GoMo" label="GoMo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357706" start="5955" end="5965" title="Lycamobile" label="Lycamobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q482490" start="5967" end="5981" title="An Post" label="An Post Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12777405" start="5983" end="5995" title="Tesco Mobile" label="Tesco Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002039" start="5997" end="6010" title="Virgin Media Ireland" label="Virgin Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q105102189" start="6015" end="6027" title="Clear Mobile" label="Clear Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781521" start="6093" end="6127" title="Department of Posts and Telegraphs" label="Department of Posts and Telegraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="6155" end="6174" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929149" start="6446" end="6461" title="crossbar switch" label="crossbar switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="6502" end="6510" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q369911" start="6526" end="6533" title="Athlone" label="Athlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655182" start="6940" end="6943" title="AXE telephone exchange" label="AXE"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="6948" end="6955" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071532" start="7362" end="7369" title="Eircell" label="Eircell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783276" start="7408" end="7412" title="Total Access Communication System" label="TACS"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="7424" end="7427" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072246" start="7475" end="7483" title="O2 (Ireland)" label="Digifone"/>
<link wikidata="Q386823" start="7507" end="7513" title="Meteor (mobile network)" label="Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q407009" start="7557" end="7566" title="Hutchison 3G" label="3 Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055785" start="8212" end="8231" title="Internet_censorship_in_the_Republic_of_Ireland" label="Internet censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q39382" start="8271" end="8274" title=".ie" label=".ie"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="8330" end="8333" title="Digital subscriber line" label="DSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294471" start="8335" end="8340" title="Cable Internet access" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585571" start="8342" end="8350" title="Wireless Internet service provider" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q877159" start="8356" end="8365" title="Satellite Internet access" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002039" start="8784" end="8804" title="Virgin Media Ireland" label="Virgin Media Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="9105" end="9159" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q560453" start="9203" end="9215" title="Pat Rabbitte" label="Pat Rabbitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125873" start="9591" end="9616" title="Internet Neutral Exchange" label="Internet Neutral Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433061" start="9671" end="9702" title="Internet exchange point" label="IP peering and traffic exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885029" start="10198" end="10247" title="Internet Service Providers Association of Ireland" label="Internet Service Providers Association of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10969" end="10971" title="FM_broadcasting#Broadcast_bands" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q815830" start="10992" end="11001" title="Digital Audio Broadcasting" label="DAB Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204201" start="11050" end="11079" title="Digital_Radio_in_the_Republic_of_Ireland" label="domestic services have ceased"/>
<link wikidata="Q632658" start="11089" end="11100" title="RTÉ Radio 1" label="RTÉ Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082861" start="11108" end="11116" title="Longwave" label="Longwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q466814" start="11121" end="11131" title="Mediumwave" label="Mediumwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277936" start="11143" end="11146" title="2RN (RTÉ Networks)" label="2RN"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="11261" end="11284" title="Raidió Teilifís Éireann" label="Raidió Teilifís Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602990" start="11368" end="11386" title="semi-state body" label="semi-state company"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="11395" end="11421" title="Public broadcasting" label="public service broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277950" start="11441" end="11446" title="RTÉ Radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277952" start="11451" end="11453" title="RTÉ Television" label="TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071714" start="11564" end="11585" title="Pirate radio in Ireland" label="pirate radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q774637" start="11728" end="11731" title="TV3 (Ireland)" label="TV3"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258374" start="12466" end="12484" title="Television_licensing_in_the_Republic_of_Ireland" label="television licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995451" start="12491" end="12499" title="Saorview" label="Saorview"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="12543" end="12573" title="digital terrestrial television" label="digital terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277936" start="12600" end="12603" title="2RN (RTÉ Networks)" label="2RN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566864" start="12772" end="12782" title="South_Coast_Television" label="deflectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277936" start="12908" end="12911" title="2RN (RTÉ Networks)" label="2RN"/>
<link wikidata="Q25821" start="13061" end="13079" title="television licence" label="television licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="13295" end="13309" title="social welfare" label="social welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="13346" end="13351" title="blindness" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013828" start="13371" end="13403" title="CRAOL" label="Community Radio Forum of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055785" start="13414" end="13444" title="Internet censorship in Ireland" label="Internet censorship in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574514" start="13447" end="13484" title="List of Irish language radio stations" label="List of Irish language radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642565" start="13487" end="13551" title="List of television channels available in the Republic of Ireland" label="List of television channels available in the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805889" start="13554" end="13586" title="Media of the Republic of Ireland" label="Media of the Republic of Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14680" wikidata="Q1287964" url="?curid=14680" title="Transport in Ireland">
<text>Most of the transport system in Ireland is in public hands, either side of the Irish border. The Irish road network has evolved separately in the two jurisdictions into which Ireland is divided, while the Irish rail network was mostly created prior to the partition of Ireland.

In the Republic of Ireland, the Minister for Transport, acting through the Department of Transport, is responsible for the state&#x27;s road network, rail network, public transport, airports and several other areas. Although some sections of road have been built using private or public-private funds, and are operated as toll roads, they are owned by the Government of Ireland. The rail network is also state-owned and operated, while the government currently still owns the main airports. Public transport is mainly in the hands of a statutory corporation, Córas Iompair Éireann (CIÉ), and its subsidiaries, Dublin Bus, Bus Éireann (Irish Bus), and Iarnród Éireann (Irish Rail).

On 1 November 2005, the Irish government published the Transport 21 plan which includes €18bn for improved roads and €16bn for improved rail, including the Western Railway Corridor and the Dublin Metro.

The Republic of Ireland&#x27;s transport sector is responsible for 21% of the state&#x27;s greenhouse gas emissions.

In Northern Ireland, the road network and railways are in state ownership. The Department for Infrastructure is responsible for these and other areas (such as water services). Two of the three main airports in Northern Ireland are privately operated and owned. The exception is City of Derry Airport, which is owned and funded by Derry City Council. A statutory corporation, the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company (which trades as Translink) operates public transport services through its three subsidiaries – NI Railways Company Limited, Ulsterbus Limited, and Citybus Limited (now branded as Metro).

==Railways==

;Total
: broad gauge
: (1998); electrified; double track; some additions and removals since 1997

: standard gauge
: (2004) (Luas tramway); electrified; double track; additional track under construction

: narrow gauge
: (2006) (industrial railway operated by Bord na Móna)

Ireland&#x27;s railways are in State ownership, with Iarnród Éireann (Irish Rail) operating services in the Republic and NI Railways operating services in Northern Ireland. The two companies co-operate in providing the joint Enterprise service between Dublin and Belfast. InterCity services are provided between Dublin and the major towns and cities of the Republic, and in Ulster along the Belfast–Derry railway line. Suburban railway networks operate in Dublin, Dublin Suburban Rail, and Belfast, Belfast Suburban Rail, with limited local services being offered in, or planned for, Cork, Limerick, and Galway.

The rail network in Ireland was developed by various private companies during the 19th century, with some receiving government funding. The network reached its greatest extent by 1920. A broad gauge of 1600mm (5 ft 3in) was agreed as the standard for the island, although there were also hundreds of kilometres of 914mm (3 ft) narrow-gauge railways.

Many lines in the west were decommissioned in the 1930s under Éamon de Valera, with a further large cull in services by both CIÉ and the Ulster Transport Authority (UTA) during the 1960s, leaving few working lines in the northern third of the island. There is a campaign to bring some closed lines back into service, in particular the Limerick-Sligo line (the Western Railway Corridor), to facilitate economic regeneration in the west, which has lagged behind the rest of the country. There is also a move to restore service on the Dublin to Navan line, and smaller campaigns to re-establish the rail links between Sligo and Enniskillen/Omagh/Derry and Mullingar and Athlone/Galway. Under the Irish government&#x27;s Transport 21 plan, the Cork to Midleton rail link was reopened in 2009. The re-opening of the Navan-Clonsilla rail link and the Western Rail Corridor are amongst future projects as part of the same plan.

Public transport services in Northern Ireland are sparse in comparison with those of the rest of Ireland or Great Britain. A large railway network was severely curtailed in the 1950s and 1960s. Current services includes suburban routes to Larne, Newry and Bangor, as well as services to Derry. There is also a branch from Coleraine to Portrush.

Since 1984 an electrified train service run by Iarnród Éireann has linked Dublin with its coastal suburbs. Running initially between Bray and Howth, the Dublin Area Rapid Transit (DART) system was extended from Bray to Greystones in 2000 and further extended from Howth Junction to Malahide. In 2004 a light rail system, Luas, was opened in Dublin serving the central and western suburbs, run by Veolia under franchise from the Railway Procurement Agency. The construction of the Luas system caused much disruption in Dublin. Plans to construct a Dublin Metro service including underground lines were mooted in 2001, but stalled in the financial crisis at the end of that decade.

Ireland has one of the largest dedicated freight railways in Europe, operated by Bord na Móna and totalling nearly .

==Road transport==

===Roads and cars in Ireland===
;Total – 
:South: including of motorway (2010)
:North: including of motorway (2008)
::&quot;paved&quot; – , &quot;unpaved&quot; – 

Ireland&#x27;s roads link Dublin with all the major cities (Belfast, Cork, Limerick, Derry, Galway, and Waterford). Driving is on the left. Signposts in the Republic of Ireland are shown in kilometres and speed limits in kilometres per hour. Distance and speed limit signs in Northern Ireland use imperial units in common with the rest of the United Kingdom.

Historically, land owners developed most roads and later turnpike trusts collected tolls so that as early as 1800 Ireland had a road network. In 2005 the Irish Government launched Transport 21, a plan envisaging the investment of €34 billion in transport infrastructure from 2006 until 2015. Several road projects were progressed but the economic crisis that began in 2008–09 has prevented its full implementation.

Between 2011 and 2015, diesel cars constituted 70% of new cars. In 2015, 27 new cars per 1,000 inhabitants were registered in Ireland, the same as the EU average.

===Bus services===
Ireland&#x27;s first mail coach services were contracted with the government by John Anderson with William Bourne in 1791 who also paid to improve the condition of the roads. The system of mail coaches, carriages and &quot;bians&quot; was further developed by Charles Bianconi, based in Clonmel, from 1815 as a fore-runner of the modern Irish public transportation system.

State-owned Bus Éireann (Irish Bus) currently provides most bus services in the Republic of Ireland, outside Dublin, including an express coach network connecting most cities in Ireland, along with local bus services in the provincial cities. Dublin Bus, a sister company of Bus Éireann, provides most of the bus services in Dublin, with some other operators providing a number of routes. These include Aircoach, a subsidiary of FirstGroup which provides services to Dublin Airport from Dublin city centre, South Dublin City, Greystones and Bray. They also operate two intercity express non-stop services service between Dublin Airport, Dublin City Centre, and Cork and also a non-stop route between Belfast City Centre, Dublin Airport and Dublin City. Other operators such as Irish Citylink and GoBus.ie compete on the Dublin-Galway route. Matthews Coaches run a direct service from Bettystown, Laytown and Julianstown to Dublin whilst Dublin Coach operate services to Portlaoise and Limerick. JJ Kavanagh and Sons also operates regular services on the Portlaoise/Limerick route as well as offering services to Waterford, Carlow, Kilkenny, Clonmel and a selection of regional towns and villages in the south.

TFI Local Link is a set of not-for-profit operators, funded via the National Transport Authority, that provide bus services in rural Ireland. Other private rural operators exist, such as Halpenny&#x27;s in Blackrock, County Louth, which was the first private bus operator to run a public service in Ireland, Bus Feda (Feda O&#x27;Donnell Coaches), which operates twice daily routes from Ranafast, County Donegal to Galway and back.

In Northern Ireland Ulsterbus provides the bus network, with its sister company Metro providing services in Belfast. Both are part of state-owned Translink. Tiger Coaches operates a very late night bus service on Friday and Saturday nights between Belfast and Lisburn.

Private hire companies offer groups travelling throughout Ireland with options ranging from cars to 56 passenger coaches. Private Coach Hire Companies can be found at CTTC.ie.

Cross-border services (e.g. Dublin city centre to Belfast) are run primarily by a partnership of Ulsterbus and Bus Éireann with some services run across the border exclusively by one of the two companies (e.g. Derry–Sligo run by Bus Éireann). Aircoach, a private operator, does however operate a competing Dublin to Belfast Express service via Dublin Airport.

According to an &quot;Irish Times&quot; article in September 2022, 14.3% of national journeys in the Republic of Ireland were undertaken by bus, compared to the European average of 8.8%. However, this may be partly due to the lack of widespread train coverage in the country, as Ireland&#x27;s figure of 3.1% usage of trains for journeys is well behind the European average of 7.9%.

==Modal share==
==Waterways==

;Total (2004) – 
: (pleasure craft only on inland waterways, several lengthy estuarine waterways)
* Grand Canal
* Royal Canal
* Shannon–Erne Waterway
* River Barrow
* River Shannon
* Lower Bann
* Newry Ship Canal

==Pipelines==
Natural gas transmission network (2003). There is a much more extensive distribution network.

==Ports and harbours==

Ireland has major ports in Dublin, Belfast, Cork, Rosslare, Derry and Waterford. Smaller ports exist in Arklow, Ballina, Drogheda, Dundalk, Dún Laoghaire, Foynes, Galway, Larne, Limerick, New Ross, Sligo, Warrenpoint and Wicklow.

Ports in the Republic of Ireland handled 2.8 million travellers crossing the sea between Ireland and Great Britain in 2014, a decrease of 1 million passengers movements since 2003. This has been steadily dropping for a number of years (20% since 1999), probably as a result of low cost airlines.

=== Ferries ===
Ferry connections between Britain and Ireland via the Irish Sea include the routes from Fishguard and Pembroke to Rosslare, and Cairnryan to Larne. The Stranraer to Belfast and Larne routes and the Swansea to Cork route have closed. There is also a connection between Liverpool and Belfast via the Isle of Man. The world&#x27;s largest car ferry, &quot;Ulysses&quot;, is operated by Irish Ferries on the Dublin–Holyhead route.

In addition, there are ferries from Rosslare and Dublin to Cherbourg and Roscoff in France.

The vast majority of heavy goods trade is done by sea. Northern Irish ports handle 10 megatonnes (Mt) of goods trade with Britain annually, while ports in the Republic handle 7.6 Mt, representing 50% and 40% respectively of total trade by weight.
===Mercantile Marine===
;Total – 35 ships (with a volume of or over) totalling /
:&quot;Ships by type&quot; – bulk carrier 7, cargo ship 22, chemical tanker 1, container ship 3, roll-on/roll-off ship 1, short-sea passenger 1
:&quot;Foreign-owned&quot; – Germany 3, Italy 7, Norway 2
:&quot;Registered in other countries&quot; – 18 (2003 est.)

==Aviation==

Ireland has four main international airports: Dublin Airport, Cork Airport, Shannon Airport and Ireland West Airport (Knock). Dublin Airport is the busiest of these carrying almost 35 million passengers per year; a second terminal (T2) was opened in November 2010. All provide services to Great Britain and continental Europe, while Cork, Dublin and Shannon also offer transatlantic services.
The London to Dublin air route is the ninth busiest international air route in the world, and also the busiest international air route in Europe, with 14,500 flights between the two in 2017. In 2015, 4.5 million people took the route, at that time, the world&#x27;s second-busiest. Aer Lingus is the flag carrier of Ireland, although Ryanair is the country&#x27;s largest airline. Ryanair is Europe&#x27;s largest low-cost carrier, the second largest in terms of passenger numbers, and the world&#x27;s largest in terms of international passenger numbers. For several decades until 2007 Shannon was a mandatory stopover for transatlantic routes to the United States. In recent years it has opened a pre-screening service allowing passengers to pass through US immigration services before departing from Ireland.

There are also several smaller regional airports: George Best Belfast City Airport, City of Derry Airport, Galway Airport, Kerry Airport (Farranfore), Sligo Airport (Strandhill), Waterford Airport and Donegal Airport (Carrickfinn). Scheduled services from these regional points are in the main limited to flights travelling to other parts of Ireland and to Great Britain. Airlines based in Ireland include Aer Lingus (the former national airline of the Republic of Ireland), Ryanair, Aer Arann and CityJet. Services to the Aran Islands are operated from Aerfort na Minna (Connemara Regional Airport).

Ireland&#x27;s national airline, Aer Lingus, provides services from Belfast City, Cork, Dublin and Shannon to Europe, North Africa and North America. Dublin and Cork airports are run by a State body, DAA (Dublin Airport Authority). Other Irish airlines are Ryanair, one of the largest in the world, CityJet, ASL Airlines Ireland and the Aer Lingus subsidiary Aer Lingus Regional. A number of other operators specialise in general aviation.

=== Airport passenger numbers ===
For 2018 the passenger numbers were as follows:
==Gateway Irish urban reference destination distances==
; Midlands Gateway urban destination distances
* The distances given below are in &quot;kilometres&quot; as travelling through the Midlands Gateway ATM (Athlone-Tullamore-Mullingar).
* Where it is logical to travel along the east or west coast directly, these distances are provided according to the popular route.
* Urban by-passes, rockades, diversions, detours and all other dispositives prolonging the travelled distances between destinations are equated to ZERO.
: &quot;This is an estimation distance guide only.&quot;
==See also==

* Plug-in electric vehicles in the Republic of Ireland
* Public transport in Ireland
* State-sponsored bodies of Ireland
* List of Ireland-related topics

==Footnotes==
==References==
==External links==
* Rail Users Ireland – Ireland&#x27;s National Rail User organisation
* Meath on Track – Navan railway campaign (defunct)
* A discussion on RTÉ Radio 1&#x27;s science show &quot;Quantum Leap&quot; about the quality of GPS mapping in Ireland is available here. The discussion starts 8mins 17sec into the show. It was aired on 18 Jan 2007 Requires RealPlayer.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7258014" start="12" end="39" title="Public transport in Ireland" label="transport system in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q670200" start="79" end="91" title="Republic of Ireland–United Kingdom border" label="Irish border"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167059" start="97" end="115" title="Roads in Ireland" label="Irish road network"/>
<link wikidata="Q837023" start="205" end="223" title="Rail transport in Ireland" label="Irish rail network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="256" end="276" title="partition of Ireland" label="partition of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="286" end="305" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865981" start="311" end="333" title="Minister for Transport (Ireland)" label="Minister for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776946" start="354" end="377" title="Department of Transport (Ireland)" label="Department of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="429" end="441" title="Rail transport" label="rail network"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="559" end="579" title="Public-private partnership" label="public-private funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="601" end="610" title="toll road" label="toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="635" end="656" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="683" end="694" title="Government-owned corporation" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q699386" start="815" end="836" title="statutory corporation" label="statutory corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q633519" start="838" end="859" title="Córas Iompair Éireann" label="Córas Iompair Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263090" start="889" end="899" title="Dublin Bus" label="Dublin Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017233" start="901" end="912" title="Bus Éireann" label="Bus Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="930" end="945" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759635" start="1016" end="1028" title="Transport 21" label="Transport 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019185" start="1117" end="1141" title="Western Railway Corridor" label="Western Railway Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390607" start="1150" end="1162" title="Dublin Metro" label="Dublin Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1286" end="1302" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044778" start="1362" end="1391" title="Department for Infrastructure (Northern Ireland)" label="Department for Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431211" start="1561" end="1582" title="City of Derry Airport" label="City of Derry Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q125464078" start="1613" end="1631" title="Derry City Council" label="Derry City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017240" start="1662" end="1704" title="Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company" label="Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q180707" start="1722" end="1731" title="Translink (Northern Ireland)" label="Translink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="1801" end="1812" title="NI Railways" label="NI Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880069" start="1830" end="1839" title="Ulsterbus" label="Ulsterbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824449" start="1853" end="1868" title="Metro (Belfast)" label="Citybus Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071527" start="1917" end="1928" title="Irish gauge" label="broad gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="2008" end="2022" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q612560" start="2033" end="2037" title="Luas" label="Luas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="2114" end="2126" title="Narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q893380" start="2168" end="2180" title="Bord na Móna" label="Bord na Móna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="2198" end="2206" title="rail transportation" label="railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="2236" end="2251" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="2304" end="2315" title="NI Railways" label="NI Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q488724" start="2408" end="2418" title="Enterprise (train)" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="2435" end="2441" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="2446" end="2453" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044834" start="2455" end="2464" title="InterCity (Iarnród Éireann)" label="InterCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743315" start="2574" end="2600" title="Belfast–Derry railway line" label="Belfast–Derry railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q952569" start="2647" end="2667" title="Dublin Suburban Rail" label="Dublin Suburban Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882342" start="2682" end="2703" title="Belfast Suburban Rail" label="Belfast Suburban Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="2767" end="2771" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="2773" end="2781" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="2787" end="2793" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q906942" start="2983" end="2994" title="broad gauge" label="broad gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071527" start="3030" end="3042" title="Irish gauge" label="the standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="3123" end="3144" title="narrow-gauge railways" label="narrow-gauge railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="3209" end="3224" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880037" start="3284" end="3310" title="Ulster Transport Authority" label="Ulster Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="3491" end="3496" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019185" start="3507" end="3531" title="Western Railway Corridor" label="Western Railway Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q217845" start="3689" end="3694" title="Navan" label="Navan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="3762" end="3767" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q990109" start="3772" end="3783" title="Enniskillen" label="Enniskillen"/>
<link wikidata="Q510513" start="3784" end="3789" title="Omagh" label="Omagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q369911" start="3814" end="3821" title="Athlone" label="Athlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759635" start="3864" end="3876" title="Transport 21" label="Transport 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q595619" start="3895" end="3903" title="Midleton" label="Midleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217845" start="3958" end="3963" title="Navan" label="Navan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081718" start="3964" end="3973" title="Clonsilla" label="Clonsilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019185" start="3992" end="4013" title="Western Rail Corridor" label="Western Rail Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q935686" start="4308" end="4313" title="Larne" label="Larne"/>
<link wikidata="Q806551" start="4325" end="4331" title="Bangor, Northern Ireland" label="Bangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108185" start="4391" end="4400" title="Coleraine" label="Coleraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027679" start="4404" end="4412" title="Portrush" label="Portrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q652000" start="4548" end="4552" title="Bray, County Wicklow" label="Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q434165" start="4557" end="4562" title="Howth" label="Howth"/>
<link wikidata="Q839815" start="4568" end="4593" title="Dublin Area Rapid Transit" label="Dublin Area Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q652000" start="4626" end="4630" title="Bray, County Wicklow" label="Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q938017" start="4634" end="4644" title="Greystones" label="Greystones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969804" start="4679" end="4693" title="Howth Junction" label="Howth Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459346" start="4697" end="4705" title="Malahide railway station" label="Malahide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="4717" end="4727" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632461" start="4811" end="4817" title="Veolia" label="Veolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461501" start="4843" end="4869" title="Railway Procurement Agency" label="Railway Procurement Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390607" start="4962" end="4974" title="Dublin Metro" label="Dublin Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="5137" end="5144" title="freight" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q893380" start="5177" end="5189" title="Bord na Móna" label="Bord na Móna"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="5502" end="5511" title="Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q406633" start="5815" end="5829" title="turnpike trust" label="turnpike trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759635" start="5938" end="5950" title="Transport 21" label="Transport 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="6197" end="6208" title="Diesel engine" label="diesel cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q912357" start="6378" end="6388" title="mail coach" label="mail coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218941" start="6437" end="6450" title="John Anderson (Scottish businessman)" label="John Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658938" start="6617" end="6633" title="Charles Bianconi" label="Charles Bianconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="6700" end="6721" title="public transportation" label="public transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017233" start="6743" end="6754" title="Bus Éireann" label="Bus Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263090" start="6974" end="6984" title="Dublin Bus" label="Dublin Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017233" start="7006" end="7017" title="Bus Éireann" label="Bus Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7069" end="7089" title="Public transport operators in Dublin#Bus" label="some other operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698488" start="7134" end="7142" title="Aircoach" label="Aircoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198156" start="7160" end="7170" title="FirstGroup" label="FirstGroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q178021" start="7198" end="7212" title="Dublin Airport" label="Dublin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="7392" end="7396" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7572" end="7588" title="Matthews Coaches" label="Matthews Coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668318" start="7615" end="7625" title="Bettystown" label="Bettystown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902456" start="7627" end="7634" title="Laytown" label="Laytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q392074" start="7639" end="7650" title="Julianstown" label="Julianstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108322" start="7726" end="7746" title="JJ Kavanagh and Sons" label="JJ Kavanagh and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="7843" end="7852" title="Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q211703" start="7854" end="7860" title="Carlow" label="Carlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q109092" start="7862" end="7870" title="Kilkenny" label="Kilkenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q217057" start="7872" end="7879" title="Clonmel" label="Clonmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q119805248" start="7942" end="7956" title="TFI Local Link" label="TFI Local Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100681" start="8010" end="8038" title="National Transport Authority (Ireland)" label="National Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088432" start="8148" end="8157" title="Blackrock, County Louth" label="Blackrock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8250" end="8258" title="Bus Feda" label="Bus Feda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077247" start="8329" end="8337" title="Ranafast" label="Ranafast"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="8339" end="8353" title="County Donegal" label="County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880069" start="8395" end="8404" title="Ulsterbus" label="Ulsterbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824449" start="8455" end="8460" title="Metro (Belfast)" label="Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q180707" start="8521" end="8530" title="Translink (Northern Ireland)" label="Translink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698488" start="9065" end="9073" title="Aircoach" label="Aircoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141830" start="9618" end="9632" title="pleasure craft" label="pleasure craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666353" start="9641" end="9657" title="Navigability" label="inland waterways"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="9675" end="9684" title="Estuary" label="estuarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542537" start="9698" end="9709" title="Grand Canal (Ireland)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542268" start="9712" end="9723" title="Royal Canal" label="Royal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q844577" start="9726" end="9747" title="Shannon–Erne Waterway" label="Shannon–Erne Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q936301" start="9750" end="9762" title="River Barrow" label="River Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="9765" end="9778" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19691" start="9781" end="9791" title="Lower Bann" label="Lower Bann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019131" start="9794" end="9810" title="Newry Canal" label="Newry Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182478" start="9972" end="9978" title="Dublin Port" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231086" start="9980" end="9987" title="Port of Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q932369" start="9989" end="9993" title="Cork Harbour" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281650" start="9995" end="10003" title="Rosslare Europort" label="Rosslare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294662" start="10005" end="10010" title="Foyle Port" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="10015" end="10024" title="Port of Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="10249" end="10290" title="Irish Sea" label="the sea between Ireland and Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q190915" start="10453" end="10470" title="Low-cost carrier" label="low cost airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="10515" end="10522" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018730" start="10577" end="10586" title="Fishguard" label="Fishguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762242" start="10591" end="10599" title="Pembroke, Pembrokeshire" label="Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250447" start="10617" end="10626" title="Cairnryan" label="Cairnryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001935" start="10641" end="10650" title="Stranraer" label="Stranraer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="10687" end="10694" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="10757" end="10766" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="10787" end="10798" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720155" start="10842" end="10849" title="MV Ulysses" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070650" start="10872" end="10885" title="Irish Continental" label="Irish Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276" start="11367" end="11379" title="bulk carrier" label="bulk carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="11383" end="11393" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15254" start="11398" end="11413" title="chemical tanker" label="chemical tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210" start="11417" end="11431" title="container ship" label="container ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="11435" end="11451" title="roll-on/roll-off" label="roll-on/roll-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="11531" end="11537" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q178021" start="11661" end="11675" title="Dublin Airport" label="Dublin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345361" start="11677" end="11689" title="Cork Airport" label="Cork Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q584102" start="11691" end="11706" title="Shannon Airport" label="Shannon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q848921" start="11711" end="11731" title="Ireland West Airport" label="Ireland West Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466323" start="11763" end="11779" title="World&amp;#x27;s busiest airports by international passenger traffic" label="busiest of these"/>
<link wikidata="Q83716" start="12290" end="12300" title="Aer Lingus" label="Aer Lingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="12342" end="12349" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12619" end="12627" title="Shannon Airport#The &amp;quot;Shannon stopover&amp;quot;" label="stopover"/>
<link wikidata="Q8987" start="12871" end="12903" title="George Best Belfast City Airport" label="George Best Belfast City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431211" start="12905" end="12926" title="City of Derry Airport" label="City of Derry Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431344" start="12928" end="12942" title="Galway Airport" label="Galway Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431699" start="12944" end="12957" title="Kerry Airport" label="Kerry Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607996" start="12972" end="12985" title="Sligo Airport" label="Sligo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440316" start="13000" end="13017" title="Waterford Airport" label="Waterford Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161027" start="13022" end="13037" title="Donegal Airport" label="Donegal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q83716" start="13227" end="13237" title="Aer Lingus" label="Aer Lingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="13250" end="13266" title="national airline" label="national airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="13296" end="13303" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096618" start="13305" end="13314" title="Aer Arann" label="Aer Arann"/>
<link wikidata="Q163625" start="13319" end="13326" title="CityJet" label="CityJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212893" start="13344" end="13356" title="Aran Islands" label="Aran Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656081" start="13375" end="13391" title="Aerfort na Minna" label="Aerfort na Minna"/>
<link wikidata="Q83716" start="13456" end="13466" title="Aer Lingus" label="Aer Lingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="13541" end="13553" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263077" start="13623" end="13626" title="DAA (Irish company)" label="DAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="13680" end="13687" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q163625" start="13722" end="13729" title="CityJet" label="CityJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q407043" start="13731" end="13751" title="ASL Airlines Ireland" label="ASL Airlines Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q648074" start="13782" end="13801" title="Aer Lingus Regional" label="Aer Lingus Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842535" start="14133" end="14149" title="Midlands Gateway" label="Midlands Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q114434114" start="14543" end="14595" title="Plug-in electric vehicles in the Republic of Ireland" label="Plug-in electric vehicles in the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258014" start="14598" end="14625" title="Public transport in Ireland" label="Public transport in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602990" start="14628" end="14661" title="State-sponsored bodies of Ireland" label="State-sponsored bodies of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574498" start="14664" end="14694" title="List of Ireland-related topics" label="List of Ireland-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q632658" start="14884" end="14895" title="RTÉ Radio 1" label="RTÉ Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="14962" end="14965" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q644320" start="15090" end="15100" title="RealPlayer" label="RealPlayer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14682" wikidata="Q2565686" url="?curid=14682" title="Foreign relations of Ireland">
<text>The foreign relations of [[Republic of Ireland|Ireland]] are substantially influenced by its membership of the European Union, although bilateral relations with the United States and United Kingdom are also important. It is one of the group of smaller nations in the EU and has traditionally followed a non-aligned foreign policy. Ireland has historically tended towards independence in foreign military policy, thus it is not a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation and has a longstanding policy of military neutrality.

==Main relationships==
Ireland was not invited to join the United Nations when it was formed in 1945. Both Washington and London were opposed because of Ireland&#x27;s neutrality during the war. Ireland applied in 1946 and the US and UK voted approval, but the Soviet Union vetoed it. Ireland was finally admitted to the UN in 1955. It joined the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1973; it is now known as the European Union (EU). In 1974 it began the Irish Aid programme to provide assistance to developing countries. In 1991 it established the Irish Institute of International and European Affairs to conduct research and analysis on international and European affairs. In 1992 the Irish Refugee Council began as a humanitarian advocate for the rights of refugees and asylum seekers in Ireland.

===United Kingdom===

Since at least the 12th century Ireland, as a result of military conquest, has had political connections with the United Kingdom and its predecessor states, with the whole island becoming a part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland from 1801 to 1922. From the time Ireland became independent from the United Kingdom in 1922, the two countries have been involved in a dispute over the status of Northern Ireland. Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland formerly claimed Northern Ireland as a part of the &quot;national territory&quot;, though in practice the Irish government did recognise the UK&#x27;s jurisdiction over the region.
From the onset of the Troubles in 1969, the two governments sought to bring the violence to an end. The Sunningdale Agreement of 1973 and the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985 were important steps in this process. In 1998, both states signed the Good Friday Agreement and now co-operate closely to find a solution to the region&#x27;s problems. Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland were amended as part of this agreement, the territorial claim being replaced with a statement of aspiration to unite the people of the island of Ireland. As part of the Good Friday Agreement, the states also ended their dispute over their respective names: &quot;Ireland&quot; and the &quot;United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland&quot;. Each agreed to accept and use the others&#x27; correct name.

When the Troubles were raging in Northern Ireland, the Irish Government sought, with mixed success, to prevent the import of weapons and ammunition through its territory by illegal paramilitary organisations for use in their conflict with the security forces in Northern Ireland. In 1973 three ships of the Irish Naval Service intercepted a ship carrying weapons from Libya which were probably destined for Irish Republican paramilitaries. Law enforcement acts such as these additionally improved relations with the government of the United Kingdom. However, the independent judiciary blocked a number of attempts to extradite suspects between 1970 and 1998 on the basis that their crime might have been &#x27;political&#x27; and thus contrary to international law at the time.

Ireland is one of the parties to the Rockall continental shelf dispute that also involves Denmark, Iceland, and the United Kingdom. Ireland and the United Kingdom have signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall area. However, neither has concluded similar agreements with Iceland or Denmark (on behalf of the Faroe Islands) and the matter remains under negotiation. Iceland now claims a substantial area of the continental shelf to the west of Ireland, to a point 49°48&#x27;N 19°00&#x27;W, which is further south than Ireland.

The controversial Sellafield nuclear fuel reprocessing plant in north-western England has also been a contentious issue between the two governments. The Irish government has sought the closure of the plant, taking a case against the UK government under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. However, the European Court of Justice found that the case should have been dealt with under EU law. In 2006, however, both countries came to a friendly agreement which enabled both the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland and the Garda Síochána (Irish Police Force) access to the site to conduct investigations.

===United States===



The United States recognised the Irish Free State on 28 June 1924 with diplomatic relations being established on 7 October 1924. In 1927, the United States opened an American Legation in Dublin. Due to the ancestral ties between the two countries, Ireland and the US have a strong relationship, both politically and economically, with the US being Ireland&#x27;s biggest trading partner since 2000. Ireland also receives more foreign direct investment from the US than many larger nations, with investments in Ireland equal to France and Germany combined and, in 2012, more than all of developing Asia put together.

The use of Shannon Airport as a stop-over point for US forces en route to Iraq has caused domestic controversy in Ireland. Opponents of this policy brought an unsuccessful High Court case against the government in 2003, arguing that this use of Irish airspace violated Irish neutrality. Restrictions such as carrying no arms, ammunition, or explosives, and that the flights in question did not form part of military exercises or operations were put in place to defend Irish neutrality, however, allegations have been made against the Central Intelligence Agency that the airport has been used between 30 and 50 times for illegal extraordinary rendition flights to the U.S. without the knowledge of the Irish Government, despite diplomatic assurances by the US that Irish airspace would not be used for transport of detainees.

In July 2006, the former Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dermot Ahern voiced concern over the 2006 Lebanon War. A shipment of bombs being sent to Israel by the United States was banned using Irish airspace or airfields.

In 1995 a decision was made by the U.S. government to appoint a Special Envoy to Northern Ireland to help with the Northern Ireland peace process. During the 2008 presidential campaign in the United States, however, Democratic Party candidate Barack Obama was reported as having questioned the necessity to keep a US Special Envoy for Northern Ireland. His remarks caused an uproar within the Republican Party, with Senator John McCain questioning his leadership abilities and his commitment to the ongoing peace process in Northern Ireland.

, Geraldine Byrne Nason is the Irish ambassador to the United States while the position of U.S. ambassador to Ireland is held by Claire D. Cronin.

===China===

Ireland&#x27;s official relationship with the People&#x27;s Republic of China began on 22 June 1979. Following his visit to China in 1999, former Taoiseach Bertie Ahern authorised the establishment of an Asia Strategy. This Strategy aimed to ensure that the Irish Government and Irish enterprise work coherently to enhance the important relationships between Ireland and Asia. In recent years due to the rapid expansion of the Chinese economy, China is becoming a key trade partner of Ireland, with over $6bn worth of bilateral trade between the two countries in 2010. In July 2013, the Tánaiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade were invited to China by the Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi on a trade mission to boost both investment and political ties between the two countries.

Ireland has raised its concerns in the area of human rights with China on several occasions. On 12 May 2007, during a visit to Beijing, former Taoiseach Brian Cowen (then Minister for Finance) discussed human rights issues with Chinese Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing. Former Tánaiste Mary Coughlan also raised human rights issues and concerns with visiting Chinese Vice-Premier Zeng Peiyan. Ireland also participates in the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue.

Concerning the Taiwan issue, Ireland follows a One-China policy and emphasizes the Taiwan issue being best settled through dialogue &quot;between the parties concerned&quot;. Ireland does not maintain official diplomatic ties with Taiwan although there is a Taipei Representative Office that has a representative function about economic and cultural promotion.

In July 2019, the UN ambassadors from 22 nations, including Ireland, signed a joint letter to the UNHRC condemning China&#x27;s mistreatment of the Uyghurs as well as its mistreatment of other minority groups, urging the Chinese government to close the Xinjiang internment camps.

==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which Ireland maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
===Africa===
===Americas===

===Asia===


===Europe===
Ireland is consistently the most pro-European of EU member states, with 88% of the population approving of EU membership according to a poll in 2022. Ireland was a founding member of the euro single currency. In May 2004, Ireland was one of only three countries to open its borders to workers from the 10 new member states. EU issues important to Ireland include the Common Agricultural Policy, corporation tax harmonisation and the EU Constitution. The Irish electorate declined to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon in 2008. A second referendum in October 2009 passed the bill, allowing the treaty to be ratified. Before it was ratified Ireland required legal guarantees on issues such as the right of Ireland to remain militarily neutral (and not engage in any kind of &quot;European army&quot;), the right of the state to maintain its low levels of corporation tax and that the treaty would not change the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland making abortion illegal (since deleted). Ireland has held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union on seven occasions (in 1975, 1979, 1984, 1990, 1996, 2004 and 2013), and is due to hold it for the eight time from July to December 2026.

===Oceania===


==United Nations==
The United Nations was founded in 1945, but Ireland&#x27;s membership was blocked by the Soviet Union until 1955, &quot;partly because of Dublin&#x27;s neutrality&quot; during the Second World War. Since 2017, the Irish ambassador to the UN Office at Geneva has been Michael Gaffey. Ireland has been elected to the UN Security Council as a non-permanent member on four occasions — in 1962, in 1981–1982, in 2001–2002 and most recently in 2021–2022.

Ireland is a member state of the International Criminal Court, having signed the Rome Statute in 1998 and ratified it in 2002.

Irish Aid, the Government of Ireland&#x27;s programme of assistance to developing countries financed the redesign of the UNV Online Volunteering service website in 2008 and supported its operations from 2007 to 2010, which led to a significant growth in the number of online volunteers and the tasks they completed.

In 2017, Ireland signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

===Peacekeeping missions===
Ireland has a long history of participation in UN peacekeeping efforts starting in 1958, just three years after joining the UN. , 90 members of the Irish Defence Forces had been killed on peacekeeping missions.

&quot;List of major peacekeeping operations:&quot;
*June 1958 – December 1958: UNOGIL observer mission to Lebanon
*1958–present: UNTSO mission to the Middle East
*1960–1964: ONUC mission to Congo
*1964–present: UNFICYP mission to Cyprus
*1973–1974: UNEF II mission to Sinai after the Yom Kippur War
*1978–present: UNIFIL mission to Lebanon
*1988–1991: UNIIMOG mission to the Iran-Iraq border following the Iran–Iraq War
*1993–1995: UNOSOM II &quot;peace enforcement&quot; mission to Somalia
*1997–2004: SFOR mission to former Yugoslavia
*1999–present: KFOR mission to Kosovo
*1999–2000: INTERFET mission to East Timor
*2003–2018: UNMIL mission to Liberia
*2008–present: EUFOR Chad/CAR mission to Chad and the Central African Republic

As well as these missions, Irish personnel have served as observers in Central America, Russia, Cambodia, Afghanistan, Namibia, Western Sahara, Kuwait and South Africa.

==Ireland and the Commonwealth of Nations==

Ireland was a member state of the British Commonwealth from 1922 until 1949, initially as a Dominion called the Irish Free State from 1922 until 1937, when Ireland adopted a new constitution and changed the name of the state to &quot;Ireland&quot;. Although the King&#x27;s position was removed from the Constitution in 1936, but included in the External Relations Act 1936 itself, a republic was only formally declared from 18 April 1949 when the Republic of Ireland Act 1948 came into effect. 

Under the rules for membership at the time, a republic could not be a member state of the Commonwealth. Only a Dominion could be a British Commonwealth member state, along with King George VI as their head of state.

This was changed a week later with the adoption of the London Declaration, then India became the first Commonwealth republic on 26 January 1950. King George VI became the first Head of the Commonwealth as a result.

Since 1998, some people in Ireland have advocated joining the Commonwealth of Nations, most notably Éamon Ó Cuív, Frank Feighan, and Mary Kenny.

==International organisations==
Ireland is a member of or otherwise participates in the following international organisations:
==Foreign aid==
Ireland&#x27;s aid programme was founded in 1974, and in 2017 its budget amounted to €651 million. The government had previously set a target of reaching the Millennium Development Goal of 0.7% of Gross National Product in aid by 2012, which was not met as aid was reduced as a result of the Irish financial crisis. Irish development aid is concentrated on eight priority countries: Lesotho, Mozambique, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Zambia, Uganda, Vietnam and East Timor. In 2006, Malawi was announced as the ninth priority country, with a tenth country to follow.

==Human rights==

There have been no serious civil, human or social rights abuses/problems in the State, according to Amnesty International and the U.S. State Department. The country consistently comes among the top nations in terms of freedom and rights ratings.

==See also==

*Ireland–NATO relations
*Common Travel Area
*List of diplomatic missions in Ireland
*List of diplomatic missions of Ireland
*Message to the Free Nations of the World

==References==

==Further reading==
* Burgess, Niall. &quot;One hundred years of Irish foreign policy: looking back, looking forwards.&quot; &quot;Irish Studies in International Affairs&quot; 30.1 (2019): 5–11. excerpt
* Clérigh, Gearóid Ó. &quot;A Changed Approach to Diplomacy: The Department of Foreign Affairs Then and Now.&quot; &quot;Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review&quot; 109.434 (2020): 202–208. online 
* Doyle, John. &quot;100 years of Irish Foreign Policy.&quot; &quot;Irish Studies in International Affairs&quot; 30.1 (2019): 1–5. excerpt 
* Doyle, John. &quot;Irish diplomacy on the UN Security Council 2001–2: foreign policy-making in the light of day.&quot; &quot;Irish Studies in International Affairs&quot; 30.1 (2019) online.
* Fanning, Ronan. &quot;The Anglo-American Alliance and the Irish Application for Membership of the United Nations.&quot; &quot;Irish Studies in International Affairs&quot; 2#2 (1986), pp. 35–61. online 
* Kennedy, Liam. &quot;From the Good Friday Agreement to Brexit: Irish Diaspora Diplomacy in the United States.&quot; &quot;Routledge International Handbook of Diaspora Diplomacy&quot; (Routledge, 2022). 243–254.
* O&#x27;Brien, Ann Marie. &quot;A century of change: The (in) visibility of women in the Irish Foreign Service, 1919–2019.&quot; &quot;Irish Studies in International Affairs&quot; 30.1 (2019): 73–92. excerpt
* O&#x27;Brien, Ann Marie. &quot;Locating women within the Irish Department of External Affairs: a case study of Irish women at the League of Nations and United Nations, 1923–76.&quot; &quot;Irish Historical Studies&quot; 43.163 (2019): 94–110.
* O&#x27;Brien, Ann Marie. &quot;The revolutionary aims of Ireland&#x27;s forgotten diplomats, 1919–1922.&quot; &quot;Historical Journal&quot; 64.5 (2021): 1332–1354.
* Ó&#x27;Fathartaigh, Mícheál Ó., and Liam Weeks. &quot;Birth of a state: the Anglo-Irish Treaty&quot; (Irish Academic Press. 2021). online review 
* Rees, Nicholas, and John O&#x27;Brennan. &quot;The dual crisis in Irish foreign policy: the economic crash and Brexit in a volatile European landscape.&quot; &quot;Irish Political Studies&quot; 34.4 (2019): 595–614, on 21st century.
* Tonra, Ben. &quot;The Europeanisation of national foreign policy: Dutch, Danish and Irish foreign policy in the European Union&quot; (Routledge, 2018) online .
* Whelan, Barry. &quot;Ireland&#x27;s revolutionary diplomat: a biography of Leopold Kerney&quot; (University of Notre Dame Press, 2019)
* Whelan, Bernadette. &quot;De Valera and Roosevelt: Irish and American diplomacy in times of crisis, 1932–1939&quot; (Cambridge University Press. 2021). online 

==External links==
* Department of Foreign Affairs official site
** Irish Treaty Series &quot;All treaties published in the Irish Treaty Series since 2002 are available in pdf format on this site. A limited number of selected treaties published in earlier years is also available&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2565686" start="4" end="56" title="Foreign relations of Ireland" label="foreign relations of [[Republic of Ireland|Ireland]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="111" end="125" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071693" start="303" end="329" title="Irish neutrality" label="non-aligned foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="443" end="477" title="NATO" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="488" end="500" title="The Emergency (Ireland)#Neutrality" label="longstanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="880" end="907" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="946" end="960" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q96382864" start="1220" end="1241" title="Irish Refugee Council" label="Irish Refugee Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="1558" end="1601" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1764" end="1780" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800913" start="1782" end="1829" title="Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="2029" end="2041" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q321925" start="2115" end="2136" title="Sunningdale Agreement" label="Sunningdale Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708643" start="2153" end="2174" title="Anglo-Irish Agreement" label="Anglo-Irish Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="2235" end="2241" title="sovereign state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="2253" end="2274" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800913" start="2352" end="2399" title="Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343246" start="2620" end="2655" title="names of the Irish state" label="dispute over their respective names"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="2818" end="2830" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="2868" end="2884" title="Government of Ireland" label="Irish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594652" start="3120" end="3139" title="Naval Service (Ireland)" label="Irish Naval Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="3181" end="3186" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="3220" end="3236" title="Irish Republican" label="Irish Republican"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3560" end="3589" title="extradition#Common conditions of extradition" label="international law at the time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3629" end="3662" title="Rockall#Law of the Sea" label="Rockall continental shelf dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="3691" end="3698" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="3901" end="3914" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="4003" end="4020" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063567" start="4139" end="4149" title="Sellafield" label="Sellafield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208852" start="4150" end="4181" title="nuclear fuel reprocessing plant" label="nuclear fuel reprocessing plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="4378" end="4425" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="4440" end="4465" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281287" start="4613" end="4657" title="Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland" label="Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366959" start="4666" end="4680" title="Garda Síochána" label="Garda Síochána"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="4805" end="4821" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="5198" end="5223" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5299" end="5305" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="5310" end="5317" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q584102" start="5400" end="5415" title="Shannon Airport" label="Shannon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="5441" end="5450" title="Military of the United States" label="US forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="5463" end="5467" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q671721" start="5561" end="5571" title="High Court (Ireland)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071693" start="5658" end="5674" title="Irish neutrality" label="Irish neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="5923" end="5950" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385398" start="6018" end="6041" title="extraordinary rendition" label="extraordinary rendition"/>
<link wikidata="Q974143" start="6277" end="6289" title="Dermot Ahern" label="Dermot Ahern"/>
<link wikidata="Q49104" start="6314" end="6330" title="2006 Lebanon War" label="2006 Lebanon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="6366" end="6372" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258496" start="6505" end="6518" title="United States Special Envoy for Northern Ireland" label="Special Envoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058587" start="6556" end="6586" title="Northern Ireland peace process" label="Northern Ireland peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="6599" end="6646" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 presidential campaign in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="6684" end="6696" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="6865" end="6876" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42342182" start="6986" end="7007" title="Geraldine Byrne Nason" label="Geraldine Byrne Nason"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562364" start="7113" end="7129" title="Claire D. Cronin" label="Claire D. Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="7291" end="7300" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q154550" start="7301" end="7313" title="Bertie Ahern" label="Bertie Ahern"/>
<link wikidata="Q256330" start="7663" end="7678" title="bilateral trade" label="bilateral trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146214" start="7732" end="7740" title="Tánaiste" label="Tánaiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q701801" start="7838" end="7845" title="Wang Yi (politician)" label="Wang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="8080" end="8089" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q185272" start="8090" end="8101" title="Brian Cowen" label="Brian Cowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q463697" start="8190" end="8201" title="Li Zhaoxing" label="Li Zhaoxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q444705" start="8219" end="8232" title="Mary Coughlan (politician)" label="Mary Coughlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189517" start="8313" end="8324" title="Zeng Peiyan" label="Zeng Peiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q706243" start="8407" end="8419" title="Political status of Taiwan" label="Taiwan issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="8439" end="8455" title="One-China policy" label="One-China policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205650" start="8852" end="8857" title="United Nations Human Rights Council" label="UNHRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754778" start="8882" end="8909" title="Persecution of Uyghurs in China" label="mistreatment of the Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506436" start="9007" end="9032" title="Xinjiang internment camps" label="Xinjiang internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="9241" end="9253" title="pro-European" label="pro-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="9395" end="9399" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q220687" start="9575" end="9601" title="Common Agricultural Policy" label="Common Agricultural Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346525" start="9615" end="9632" title="tax harmonisation" label="tax harmonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="9641" end="9656" title="EU Constitution" label="EU Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q807824" start="9679" end="9697" title="Twenty-eighth Amendment of the Constitution Bill, 2008 (Ireland)" label="declined to ratify"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="9702" end="9718" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126745" start="10111" end="10158" title="Eighth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Eighth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="10166" end="10174" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q54327853" start="10184" end="10197" title="Thirty-sixth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="since deleted"/>
<link wikidata="Q308905" start="10221" end="10268" title="Presidency of the Council of the European Union" label="Presidency of the Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q20380197" start="10517" end="10524" title="List of vetoed United Nations Security Council resolutions" label="blocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10532" end="10544" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820046" start="10581" end="10639" title="Irish neutrality during World War II" label="Dublin&amp;#x27;s neutrality&amp;quot; during the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="10758" end="10777" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="10926" end="10954" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q838958" start="10974" end="10986" title="Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court" label="Rome Statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084032" start="11021" end="11030" title="Irish Aid" label="Irish Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="11369" end="11413" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="11494" end="11506" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q327063" start="11592" end="11612" title="Irish Defence Forces" label="Irish Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933912" start="11735" end="11741" title="UNOGIL" label="UNOGIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="11762" end="11769" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q699036" start="11785" end="11790" title="UNTSO" label="UNTSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q699009" start="11830" end="11834" title="ONUC" label="ONUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="11846" end="11851" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q694772" start="11867" end="11874" title="United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus" label="UNFICYP"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="11886" end="11892" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369193" start="11905" end="11912" title="United Nations Emergency Force" label="UNEF II"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="11924" end="11929" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="11940" end="11954" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="11970" end="11976" title="UNIFIL" label="UNIFIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549011" start="12008" end="12015" title="UNIIMOG" label="UNIIMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="12031" end="12035" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="12036" end="12040" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="12062" end="12075" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778229" start="12088" end="12097" title="UNOSOM II" label="UNOSOM II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="12139" end="12146" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="12159" end="12163" title="SFOR" label="SFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="12175" end="12192" title="former Yugoslavia" label="former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="12208" end="12212" title="Kosovo Force" label="KFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="12224" end="12230" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q402096" start="12243" end="12251" title="INTERFET" label="INTERFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="12263" end="12273" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278645" start="12286" end="12291" title="UNMIL" label="UNMIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="12303" end="12310" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276250" start="12326" end="12340" title="EUFOR Chad/CAR" label="EUFOR Chad/CAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="12352" end="12356" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="12365" end="12389" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="12487" end="12495" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="12497" end="12508" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="12510" end="12517" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="12519" end="12533" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="12535" end="12541" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="12698" end="12706" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="12718" end="12734" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12952" end="12979" title="External Relations Act 1936" label="External Relations Act 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428187" start="13054" end="13082" title="Republic of Ireland Act 1948" label="Republic of Ireland Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="13280" end="13294" title="King George VI" label="King George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670316" start="13375" end="13393" title="London Declaration" label="London Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216856" start="13423" end="13444" title="Commonwealth republic" label="Commonwealth republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q460057" start="13497" end="13521" title="Head of the Commonwealth" label="Head of the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="13598" end="13621" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q273274" start="13636" end="13648" title="Éamon Ó Cuív" label="Éamon Ó Cuív"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443237" start="13650" end="13663" title="Frank Feighan" label="Frank Feighan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462295" start="13669" end="13679" title="Mary Kenny" label="Mary Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="13983" end="14010" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="14022" end="14044" title="Gross National Product" label="Gross National Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q972891" start="14117" end="14139" title="Post-2008 Irish economic downturn" label="Irish financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="14208" end="14215" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="14217" end="14227" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="14229" end="14237" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="14239" end="14247" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="14249" end="14255" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="14257" end="14263" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="14265" end="14272" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="14277" end="14287" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="14298" end="14304" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="14501" end="14522" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="14531" end="14552" title="United States Department of State" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615479" start="14619" end="14626" title="List of indices of freedom" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084031" start="14663" end="14685" title="Ireland–NATO relations" label="Ireland–NATO relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324796" start="14687" end="14705" title="Common Travel Area" label="Common Travel Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616403" start="14707" end="14745" title="List of diplomatic missions in Ireland" label="List of diplomatic missions in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632031" start="14747" end="14785" title="List of diplomatic missions of Ireland" label="List of diplomatic missions of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821812" start="14787" end="14827" title="Message to the Free Nations of the World" label="Message to the Free Nations of the World"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14687" wikidata="Q1616635" url="?curid=14687" title="Geography of Israel">
<text>The geography of Israel is very diverse, with desert conditions in the south, and snow-capped mountains in the north. Israel is located at the eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea in West Asia. It is bounded to the north by Lebanon, the northeast by Syria, the east by Jordan and the West Bank, and to the southwest by Egypt. To the west of Israel is the Mediterranean Sea, which makes up the majority of Israel&#x27;s coastline, and the Gaza Strip. Israel has a small coastline on the Red Sea in the south.

Israel&#x27;s area is approximately , which includes of inland water. Israel stretches from north to south, and its width ranges from at its widest point to at its narrowest point. It has an Exclusive Economic Zone of .

The Israeli-occupied territories include the West Bank, , East Jerusalem, and the Golan Heights, . Geographical features in these territories will be noted as such. Of these areas, Israel has annexed East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, an act not recognized by the international community.

Southern Israel is dominated by the Negev desert, covering some , more than half of the country&#x27;s total land area. The north of the Negev contains the Judean Desert, which, at its border with Jordan, contains the Dead Sea which, at is the lowest point on Earth. The inland area of central Israel is dominated by the Judean Hills of the West Bank, whilst the central and northern coastline consists of the flat and fertile Israeli coastal plain. Inland, the northern region contains the Mount Carmel mountain range, which is followed inland by the fertile Jezreel Valley, and then the hilly Galilee region. The Sea of Galilee is located beyond this region and is bordered to the east by the Golan Heights, a plateau bordered to the north by the Israeli-occupied part of the Mount Hermon massif, which includes the highest point under Israel&#x27;s control, a peak of . The highest point in territory internationally recognized as Israeli is Mount Meron at .

==Location and boundaries==

Israel lies to the north of the equator around 31°30&#x27; north latitude and 34°45&#x27; east longitude. It measures from north to south and, at its widest point , from east to west. At its narrowest point, however, this is reduced to just . It has a land frontier of and a coastline of . It is ranked 153 on the List of countries and outlying territories by total area.

Prior to the establishment of the British Mandate for Palestine, there was no clear-cut definition of the geographical and territorial limits of the area known as &quot;Palestine.&quot; On the eve of World War I it was described by Encyclopædia Britannica as a &quot;nebulous geographical concept.&quot; The Sykes-Picot Treaty in 1916 divided the region that later became Palestine into four political units. Under the British Mandate for Palestine, the first geo-political framework was created that distinguished the area from the larger countries that surrounded it. The boundary demarcation at this time did not introduce geographical changes near the frontiers and both sides of the border were controlled by the British administration.

Modern Israel is bounded to the north by Lebanon, the northeast by Syria, the east by Jordan and the West Bank, and to the southwest by Egypt. To the west of Israel is the Mediterranean Sea, which makes up the majority of Israel&#x27;s coastline and the Gaza Strip. Israel has a small coastline on the Red Sea in the south. The southernmost settlement in Israel is the city of Eilat whilst the northernmost is the town of Metula. The territorial waters of Israel extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate baseline.

The statistics provided by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics include the annexed East Jerusalem and Golan Heights, but exclude the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The population of Israel includes Israeli settlers in the West Bank. The route of the Israeli West Bank barrier incorporates some parts of the West Bank.

==Physiographic regions==

Israel is divided into four physiographic regions: the Mediterranean coastal plain, the Central Hills, the Jordan Rift Valley and the Negev Desert.

===Coastal plain===

The Israeli Coastal Plain stretches from the Lebanese border in the north to Gaza in the south, interrupted only by Cape Carmel at Haifa Bay. It is about wide at Gaza and narrows toward the north to about at the Lebanese border. The region is fertile and humid (historically malarial) and is known for its citrus orchards and viticulture. The plain is traversed by several short streams. From north to south these are: Kishon, Hadera, Alexander, Poleg, and Yarkon. All of these streams were badly polluted, but in the last ten years much work has been done to clean them up. Today the Kishon, Alexander and Yarkon again flow year round, and also have parks along their banks.

Geographically, the region is divided into five sub-regions. The northernmost section lays between the Lebanese border, the Western Galilee to the east, and the sea. It stretches from Rosh HaNikra in the north and down to Haifa, Israel&#x27;s third-largest city. It is a fertile region, and off the coast there are many small islands. Along the Mount Carmel range is Hof HaCarmel, or the Carmel Coastal Plain. It stretches from the point where Mount Carmel almost touches the sea, at Haifa, and down to Nahal Taninim, a stream that marks the southern limit of the Carmel range. The Sharon Plain is the next section, running from Nahal Taninim (south of Zikhron Ya&#x27;akov) to Tel Aviv&#x27;s Yarkon River. This area is Israel&#x27;s most densely populated. South of this, running to Nahal Shikma, is the Central Coastal Plain, also known as the Western Negev. The last segment is the Southern Coastal Plain, which extends south around the Gaza Strip. It is divided into two – in the north, the Besor region, a savanna-type area with a relatively large number of communities, and south of it the Agur-Halutza region, which is very sparsely populated.

===Central hills===

Inland (east) of the coastal plain lies the central highland region. In the north of this region lie the mountains and hills of Upper Galilee and Lower Galilee, which are generally in height, although they reach a maximum height of at Mount Meron. South of the Galilee, in the West Bank, are the Samarian Hills with numerous small, fertile valleys rarely reaching the height of . South of Jerusalem, also mainly within the West Bank, are the Judean Hills, including Mount Hebron. The central highlands average in height and reach their highest elevation at Har Meron, at , in Galilee near Safed. Several valleys cut across the highlands roughly from east to west; the largest is the Jezreel Valley (also known as the Plain of Esdraelon), which stretches from Haifa southeast to the valley of the Jordan River, and is across at its widest point.

===Jordan Rift Valley===
East of the central highlands lies the Jordan Rift Valley, which is a small part of the -long Syrian-East African Rift. In Israel the Rift Valley is dominated by the Jordan River, the Sea of Galilee (an important freshwater source also known as Lake Tiberias and Lake Kinneret), and the Dead Sea. The Jordan, Israel&#x27;s largest river (), originates in the Dan, Baniyas, and Hasbani rivers near Mount Hermon in the Anti-Lebanon Mountains and flows south through the drained Hula Basin into the freshwater Lake Tiberias. Lake Tiberias is in size and, depending on the season and rainfall, is at about below sea level. With a water capacity estimated at , it serves as the principal reservoir of the National Water Carrier (also known as the Kinneret-Negev Conduit). The Jordan River continues its course from the southern end of Lake Tiberias (forming the boundary between the West Bank and Jordan) to its terminus in the highly saline Dead Sea. The Dead Sea is in size and, at below sea level, is the lowest surface point on the earth. South of the Dead Sea, the Rift Valley continues in the Arabah (Hebrew &quot;Arava&quot;, Arabic &quot;Wadi &#x27;Arabah&quot;), which has no permanent water flow, for to the Gulf of Eilat.

===Negev Desert===
The Negev Desert comprises approximately , more than half of Israel&#x27;s total land area. Geographically it is an extension of the Sinai Desert, forming a rough triangle with its base in the north near Beersheba, the Dead Sea, and the southern Judean Mountains, and it has its apex in the southern tip of the country at Eilat. Topographically, it parallels the other regions of the country, with lowlands in the west, hills in the central portion, and the Arava valley as its eastern border.

Unique to the Negev region are the craterlike makhteshim cirques; Makhtesh Ramon, Makhtesh Gadol and Makhtesh Katan. The Negev is also sub-divided into five different ecological regions: northern, western and central Negev, the high plateau and the Arabah Valley. The northern Negev receives of rain annually and has fairly fertile soils. The western Negev receives of rain per year, with light and partially sandy soils. The central Negev has an annual precipitation of and is characterized by impervious soil, allowing minimum penetration of water with greater soil erosion and water runoff. This can result in rare flash floods during heavy rains as water runs across the surface of the impervious desert soil. The high plateau area of Ramat HaNegev stands between above sea level with extreme temperatures in summer and winter. The area gets of rain each year, with inferior and partially salty soils. The Arabah Valley along the Jordanian border stretches from Eilat in the south to the tip of the Dead Sea in the north and is very arid with barely of rain annually.

==Geology==
Israel is divided east–west by a mountain range running north to south along the coast. Jerusalem sits on the top of this ridge, east of which lies the Dead Sea graben which is a pull-apart basin on the Dead Sea Transform fault.

The numerous limestone and sandstone layers of the Israeli mountains serve as aquifers through which water flows from the west flank to the east. Several springs have formed along the Dead Sea, each an oasis, most notably the oases at Ein Gedi and Ein Bokek (Neve Zohar) where settlements have developed. Israel also has a number of areas of karst topography. Caves in the region have been used for thousands of years as shelter, storage rooms, barns and as places of public gatherings.

The far northern coastline of the country has some chalk landscapes best seen at Rosh HaNikra, a chalk cliff into which a series of grottoes have been eroded.

===Seismic activity===
The Jordan Rift Valley is the result of tectonic movements within the Dead Sea Transform (DSF) fault system. The DSF forms the transform boundary between the African Plate to the west and the Arabian Plate to the east. The Golan Heights and all of Jordan are part of the Arabian Plate, while the Galilee, West Bank, Coastal Plain, and Negev along with the Sinai Peninsula are on the African Plate. This tectonic disposition leads to a relatively high seismic activity in the region.

The entire Jordan Valley segment is thought to have ruptured repeatedly, for instance during the last two major earthquakes along this structure in 749 and 1033. The deficit in slip that has built up since the 1033 event is sufficient to cause an earthquake of ~7.4.

The most catastrophic earthquakes occurred in 31 BCE, 363, 749, and 1033 CE, that is every ca. 400 years on average. Destructive earthquakes leading to serious loss of life strike about every 80 years. While stringent construction regulations are currently in place and recently built structures are earthquake-safe, as of 2007 the majority of the buildings in Israel were older than these regulations and many public buildings as well as 50,000 residential buildings did not meet the new standards and were &quot;expected to collapse&quot; if exposed to a strong quake. Given the fragile political situation of the Middle East region and the presence there of major holy sites, a quake reaching magnitude 7 on the Richter scale could have dire consequences for world peace.

==Rivers and lakes==
Israel&#x27;s longest and most famous river is the long River Jordan, which rises on the southern slopes of Mount Hermon in the Anti-Lebanon Mountains. The river flows south through the freshwater Sea of Galilee, and from there forms the boundary with the Kingdom of Jordan for much of its route, eventually emptying into the Dead Sea. The northern tributaries to the Jordan are the Dan, Banias, and Hasbani. Only the Dan is within undisputed Israel; the Hasbani flows from Lebanon and the Banias from territory captured from Syria in the Six-Day War.
The Sea of Galilee (also called the Kinneret) is Israel&#x27;s largest and most important freshwater lake, located in the northeast of the country. The pear-shaped lake is long from north to south, with a maximum width of in the north, covering . The Kinneret lies below sea level and reaches depths of . In a previous geological epoch the lake was part of a large inland sea which extended from the Hula marshes in northern Israel to south of the Dead Sea. The bed of the lake forms part of the Jordan Rift Valley.

South of the Kinneret lies the saltwater Dead Sea which forms the border between Israel and Jordan and is below sea level, making it the lowest water surface on Earth. The Dead Sea is long with a maximum width of and also makes up part of the Rift Valley. A peninsula juts out into the lake from the eastern shore, south of which the lake is shallow, less than deep. To the north is the lake&#x27;s greatest depth.

There are no navigable, artificial waterways in Israel, although the National Water Carrier, a conduit for drinking water, might be classified as such. The idea of a channel connecting the Mediterranean and Dead Seas or the Red and Dead Seas has been discussed.

==Selected elevations==

The following are selected elevations of notable locations, from highest to lowest:

==Climate==

The northern half of Israel has a Mediterranean climate with long, hot, rainless summers and relatively short, mild to cool, rainy winters (Köppen climate classification &quot;Csa&quot;). The southern half has hot semi-arid (&quot;BSh&quot;) and hot desert (&quot;BWh&quot;) climates. The climate is as such due to Israel&#x27;s location between the subtropical aridity of the Sahara and the Arabian deserts, and the subtropical humidity of the Levant and Eastern Mediterranean. The climate conditions are highly variable within the state and modified locally by altitude, latitude, and the proximity to the Mediterranean.

On average, January is the coldest month with average temperatures ranging from , and July and August are the hottest months at , on average across the country. Summers are very humid along the Mediterranean coast but dry in the central highlands, the Rift Valley, and the Negev Desert. In Eilat, a desert city, summer daytime-temperatures are often the highest in the state, at times reaching . More than 70% of the average rainfall in Israel falls between November and March; June through September are usually rainless. Rainfall is unevenly distributed, significantly lower in the south of the country. In the extreme south, rainfall averages near annually; in the north, average annual rainfall exceeds . Rainfall varies from season to season and from year to year, particularly in the Negev Desert. Precipitation is often concentrated in violent storms, causing erosion and flash floods. In winter, precipitation often takes the form of snow at the higher elevations of the central highlands, including Jerusalem. Mount Hermon has seasonal snow which covers all three of its peaks in winter and spring. In rare occasions, snow gets to the northern mountain peaks and only in extremely rare occasions even to the coast. The areas of the country most cultivated are those receiving more than of rainfall annually, making approximately one-third of the country cultivable.

Thunderstorms and hail are common throughout the rainy season and waterspouts occasionally hit the Mediterranean coast, capable of causing only minor damage. However, supercell thunderstorms and a true F2 tornado hit the Western Galilee in April 2006, causing significant damage and 75 injuries.

Heat waves are frequent. 2010 was the hottest year in the history of Israel with absolute record high in several places in August. The heat became stronger from August when temperatures were considerably above the average. October and November were also dry, and November was almost rainless when it was supposed to be rainy.

===Climate charts of different locations in Israel===




==Natural resources==

Unlike much of the Middle East which is rich in lucrative crude oil, Israel has limited natural resources. These include copper, phosphates, bromide, potash, clay, sand, sulfur, asphalt, and manganese. Small amounts of natural gas and crude oil are present, often too little to merit commercial extraction. In 2009, significant reserves of natural gas were discovered at the Tamar 1 offshore drilling site, 90 kilometers west of Haifa. It is the largest natural gas reserve ever discovered in Israel.

==Environmental concerns==

Israel has a large number of environmental concerns ranging from natural hazards to man-made issues both resulting from ancient times to modern development. Natural hazards facing the country include sandstorms which sometimes occur during spring in the desert south, droughts which are usually concentrated in summer months, flash floods which create great danger in the deserts due to their lack of notice, and regular earthquakes, most of which are small, although there is a constant risk due to Israel&#x27;s location along the Jordan Rift Valley. Current environmental concerns include the lack of arable land and natural fresh water resources. Whilst measures have been taken to irrigate and grow in the desert, the amount of water needed here poses issues. Desertification is also a risk possible on the desert fringe, whilst air pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions and groundwater pollution from industrial and domestic waste are also issues facing the country. Furthermore, the effects of the use of chemical fertilizers, and pesticides are issues facing the country.
Israel has signed many international environmental agreements and is party to:
* Convention on Biological Diversity
* UNFCCC – Climate Change
* United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
* Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna
* Hazardous Wastes
* Nuclear Test Ban
* Montreal Protocol – Ozone Layer Protection
* MARPOL 73/78 – Ship Pollution
* Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially As Waterfowl Habitat

Signed but not ratified:
* Kyoto Protocol
* Marine Life Conservation

==Rural settlements==

Israel&#x27;s rural space includes several unique kinds of settlements, notably the moshav and the kibbutz. Originally these were collective and cooperative settlements respectively. Over time, the degree of cooperation in these settlements has decreased and in several of them the cooperative structure has been dismantled altogether. All rural settlements and many small towns (some of which are dubbed &quot;rurban settlements&quot;) are incorporated in regional councils. Land use in Israel is 17% arable land, 4% permanent crops, and 79% other uses. As of 2003 were irrigated.

There are 242 Israeli settlements and civilian land use sites in the West Bank, 42 in the Golan Heights, and 29 in East Jerusalem.

==Islands==
Israel has the Rosh Hanikra Islands and the Achziv Islands within its territorial waters. The Israeli government plans to build artificial islands off the coast to house an airport, a seaport, a desalination plant, a power plant, and a military testing base, as an answer to Israel&#x27;s lack of space.

==Human geography==

As of 2013, the population of Israel is 8 million, 6,015,000 of them Jewish.

For statistical purposes, the country has three metropolitan areas; Gush Dan-Tel Aviv (population 3,150,000), Haifa (population 996,000), and Beersheba (population 531,600). Some argue that Jerusalem, Israel&#x27;s largest city with a population of 763,600, and Nazareth, should also be classified as metropolitan areas. In total, Israel has 74 cities, 14 of which have populations of over 100,000. Other forms of local government in Israel are local councils of which there are 144 governing small municipalities generally over 2,000 in population, and regional councils of which there are 53, governing a group of small communities over a relatively large geographical area.

Israel&#x27;s population is diverse demographically; 76% Jewish, 20% Arab, and 4% unaffiliated. In terms of religion, 76% are Jewish, 16% Muslim, 2% Christian, 2% Druze, and 4% are unclassified by choice. 8% of Israeli Jews are haredi; 9% are &quot;religious&quot;, 12% &quot;religious-traditionalists&quot;, 27% are &quot;non-religious traditionalists&quot;, and 43% are &quot;secular&quot;. Other small, but notable groups in Israel, include Circassians of whom there are approximately 3,000 living mostly in two northern villages, 2,500 Lebanese, and 5,000 Armenians predominantly in Jerusalem.

==Overshoot index==
Israel is ranked 34th in the world in terms of population density with, as noted, a climate of long, hot, rainless summers and relatively short, cool, rainy winters. The Population Matters 2011 overshoot index ranked Israel as the third most dependent region in the World after Singapore and Kuwait.

==See also==

* Archaeology of Israel
* Kurkar
* Land of Israel
* List of endemic flora of Israel
* Historical maps of Israel
* National parks and nature reserves of Israel
* Outline of Israel
* Tourism in Israel
* Wildlife of Israel

==References==
==External links==
*
*Geography and Climate at the Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs website
*Geography and Nature at the Israel Ministry of Tourism website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1616635" start="4" end="23" title="Geography of Israel" label="geography of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="46" end="52" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q27031103" start="82" end="86" title="Snow in Israel" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="118" end="124" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="162" end="179" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="183" end="192" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="224" end="231" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="250" end="255" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="269" end="275" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="284" end="293" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="319" end="324" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="355" end="372" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="438" end="448" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="486" end="493" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="700" end="723" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q575187" start="734" end="762" title="Israeli-occupied territories" label="Israeli-occupied territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q212938" start="788" end="802" title="East Jerusalem" label="East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="812" end="825" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="1059" end="1064" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046004" start="1179" end="1192" title="Judean Desert" label="Judean Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="1241" end="1249" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328820" start="1344" end="1356" title="Judean Hills" label="Judean Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915532" start="1450" end="1471" title="Israeli coastal plain" label="Israeli coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="1514" end="1526" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q763829" start="1583" end="1597" title="Jezreel Valley" label="Jezreel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="1618" end="1625" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q126982" start="1638" end="1652" title="Sea of Galilee" label="Sea of Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="1718" end="1731" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="1735" end="1742" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q215471" start="1801" end="1813" title="Mount Hermon" label="Mount Hermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061151" start="1814" end="1820" title="massif" label="massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q540520" start="1968" end="1979" title="Mount Meron" label="Mount Meron"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="2329" end="2385" title="List of countries and outlying territories by total area" label="List of countries and outlying territories by total area"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="2422" end="2451" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2588" end="2599" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="2620" end="2643" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q211674" start="2696" end="2714" title="Sykes-Picot Treaty" label="Sykes-Picot Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="2807" end="2836" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505887" start="3500" end="3504" title="City council (Israel)" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q134762" start="3508" end="3513" title="Eilat" label="Eilat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288520" start="3545" end="3549" title="Local council (Israel)" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011497" start="3553" end="3559" title="Metula" label="Metula"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="3565" end="3583" title="territorial waters" label="territorial waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043319" start="3725" end="3760" title="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194465" start="3773" end="3780" title="annexed" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q582706" start="3891" end="3907" title="Israeli settlers" label="Israeli settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q524253" start="3943" end="3968" title="Israeli West Bank barrier" label="Israeli West Bank barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915532" start="4094" end="4121" title="Israeli Coastal Plain" label="Mediterranean coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703682" start="4146" end="4164" title="Jordan Rift Valley" label="Jordan Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="4173" end="4185" title="Negev" label="Negev Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="4286" end="4290" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q63767" start="4340" end="4349" title="Haifa Bay" label="Haifa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q202080" start="4452" end="4459" title="fertility (soil)" label="fertile"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="4464" end="4469" title="humidity" label="humid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="4484" end="4491" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="4515" end="4521" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="4522" end="4529" title="orchard" label="orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="4535" end="4546" title="wine" label="viticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="5010" end="5025" title="Western Galilee" label="Western Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915530" start="5070" end="5082" title="Rosh HaNikra (kibbutz)" label="Rosh HaNikra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="5108" end="5113" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="5231" end="5243" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q972150" start="5389" end="5402" title="Nahal Taninim" label="Nahal Taninim"/>
<link wikidata="Q218907" start="5468" end="5480" title="Sharon Plain" label="Sharon Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q198399" start="5539" end="5559" title="Zikhron Ya&amp;#x27;akov" label="Zikhron Ya&amp;#x27;akov"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="5564" end="5572" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q927016" start="5580" end="5592" title="Yarkon River" label="Yarkon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="5741" end="5746" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="5827" end="5837" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668577" start="5882" end="5887" title="HaBesor Stream" label="Besor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="5898" end="5905" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q923921" start="5988" end="5995" title="Halutza" label="Halutza"/>
<link wikidata="Q878223" start="6112" end="6120" title="Highland (geography)" label="highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="6188" end="6219" title="Galilee" label="Upper Galilee and Lower Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q540520" start="6295" end="6306" title="Mount Meron" label="Mount Meron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="6356" end="6363" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917083" start="6526" end="6538" title="Mount Hebron" label="Mount Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q540520" start="6617" end="6626" title="Har Meron" label="Har Meron"/>
<link wikidata="Q188336" start="6649" end="6654" title="Safed" label="Safed"/>
<link wikidata="Q763829" start="6743" end="6757" title="Jezreel Valley" label="Jezreel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q763829" start="6777" end="6795" title="Plain of Esdraelon" label="Plain of Esdraelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="6819" end="6824" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="6856" end="6868" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703682" start="6970" end="6988" title="Jordan Rift Valley" label="Jordan Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q81591" start="7025" end="7049" title="Syrian-East African Rift" label="Syrian-East African Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="7218" end="7226" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="7232" end="7238" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q393137" start="7290" end="7293" title="Dan River (Israel)" label="Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q263922" start="7295" end="7302" title="Baniyas" label="Baniyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432225" start="7308" end="7315" title="Hasbani" label="Hasbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q215471" start="7328" end="7340" title="Hermon" label="Mount Hermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q243276" start="7348" end="7370" title="Anti-Lebanon" label="Anti-Lebanon Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q955139" start="7407" end="7417" title="Hulah Valley" label="Hula Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="7427" end="7437" title="freshwater" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q890229" start="7631" end="7653" title="National Water Carrier" label="National Water Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="7868" end="7876" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q626682" start="8025" end="8031" title="Arabah" label="Arabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q81611" start="8144" end="8157" title="Gulf of Eilat" label="Gulf of Eilat"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="8183" end="8188" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="8312" end="8324" title="sinai peninsula" label="Sinai Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q41843" start="8383" end="8392" title="Beersheba" label="Beersheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q134762" start="8501" end="8506" title="Eilat" label="Eilat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361343" start="8720" end="8728" title="makhtesh" label="makhtesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274674" start="8740" end="8754" title="Makhtesh Ramon" label="Makhtesh Ramon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911410" start="8756" end="8770" title="Makhtesh Gadol" label="Makhtesh Gadol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636381" start="8775" end="8789" title="Makhtesh Katan" label="Makhtesh Katan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="9847" end="9856" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="9920" end="9926" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259386" start="9938" end="9954" title="pull-apart basin" label="pull-apart basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064504" start="9962" end="9980" title="Dead Sea Transform" label="Dead Sea Transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q664573" start="9981" end="9986" title="Transform fault" label="fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="10002" end="10011" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="10016" end="10025" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="10067" end="10074" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q124714" start="10143" end="10150" title="Spring (hydrology)" label="springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="10191" end="10196" title="oasis" label="oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011544" start="10224" end="10232" title="Ein Gedi" label="Ein Gedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q679158" start="10237" end="10246" title="Ein Bokek" label="Ein Bokek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975481" start="10248" end="10258" title="Neve Zohar" label="Neve Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="10331" end="10347" title="karst topography" label="karst topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="10528" end="10533" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650601" start="10558" end="10570" title="Rosh HaNikra grottoes" label="Rosh HaNikra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131329" start="10609" end="10615" title="grotto" label="grotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703682" start="10664" end="10682" title="Jordan Rift Valley" label="Jordan Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064504" start="10730" end="10748" title="Dead Sea Transform" label="Dead Sea Transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q664573" start="10787" end="10805" title="transform fault" label="transform boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q203548" start="10818" end="10831" title="African Plate" label="African Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q331093" start="10852" end="10865" title="Arabian Plate" label="Arabian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q112958123" start="11300" end="11304" title="1033 Jordan Rift Valley earthquake" label="1033"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11321" end="11325" title="Fault (geology)#Slip.2C heave.2C throw" label="slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="12265" end="12277" title="Jordan River" label="River Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q243276" start="12337" end="12359" title="Anti-Lebanon Mountains" label="Anti-Lebanon Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q126982" start="12406" end="12420" title="Sea of Galilee" label="Sea of Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="12465" end="12482" title="Kingdom of Jordan" label="Kingdom of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="12535" end="12543" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q393137" start="12592" end="12595" title="Dan River (Israel)" label="Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410413" start="12597" end="12603" title="Banias River" label="Banias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432225" start="12609" end="12616" title="Hasbani river" label="Hasbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="12683" end="12690" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="12748" end="12759" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="12851" end="12861" title="freshwater" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q312468" start="13091" end="13096" title="Series (stratigraphy)" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q866636" start="13161" end="13165" title="Hula" label="Hula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703682" start="13257" end="13275" title="Jordan Rift Valley" label="Jordan Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="13309" end="13318" title="Seawater" label="saltwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q890229" start="13763" end="13785" title="National Water Carrier" label="National Water Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245394" start="13860" end="13867" title="Dead Sea canal (disambiguation)" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="14114" end="14135" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="14220" end="14249" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="14294" end="14303" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="14326" end="14336" title="Desert climate" label="hot desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="14430" end="14441" title="Subtropics" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="14457" end="14463" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="14472" end="14479" title="Arabian" label="Arabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="14525" end="14531" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="15571" end="15578" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q860333" start="15583" end="15594" title="flash flood" label="flash flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q27031103" start="15646" end="15650" title="Snow in Israel" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q747894" start="16247" end="16270" title="supercell thunderstorms" label="supercell thunderstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="16285" end="16292" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="16301" end="16316" title="Western Galilee" label="Western Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="16843" end="16852" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="16914" end="16924" title="phosphates" label="phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q422423" start="16926" end="16933" title="bromide" label="bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564271" start="16935" end="16941" title="potash" label="potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="16943" end="16947" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="16949" end="16953" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="16955" end="16961" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="16963" end="16970" title="Bitumen" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="16976" end="16985" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="17020" end="17029" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499333" start="17160" end="17185" title="Tamar gas field" label="Tamar 1 offshore drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="17515" end="17525" title="Dust storm" label="sandstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q860333" start="17641" end="17652" title="flash flood" label="flash flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703682" start="17848" end="17866" title="Jordan Rift Valley" label="Jordan Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="17919" end="17930" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="18080" end="18095" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113712" start="18205" end="18226" title="groundwater pollution" label="groundwater pollution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18337" end="18357" title="Chemical fertilizers#Environmental effects of fertilizer use" label="chemical fertilizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="18363" end="18372" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="18486" end="18520" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Convention on Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="18523" end="18529" title="UNFCCC" label="UNFCCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q331520" start="18549" end="18600" title="United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification" label="United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="18603" end="18686" title="Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna" label="Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="18708" end="18724" title="Nuclear Test Ban" label="Nuclear Test Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="18727" end="18744" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q651219" start="18772" end="18784" title="MARPOL 73/78" label="MARPOL 73/78"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="18804" end="18886" title="Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially As Waterfowl Habitat" label="Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially As Waterfowl Habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="18915" end="18929" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166287" start="18932" end="18956" title="Marine Life Conservation" label="Marine Life Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q917146" start="19065" end="19071" title="moshav" label="moshav"/>
<link wikidata="Q161387" start="19080" end="19087" title="kibbutz" label="kibbutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="19654" end="19667" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q212938" start="19679" end="19693" title="East Jerusalem" label="East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737271" start="19723" end="19743" title="Rosh Hanikra Islands" label="Rosh Hanikra Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6799092" start="19752" end="19766" title="Achziv Islands" label="Achziv Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q13691" start="19836" end="19853" title="artificial island" label="artificial island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="20160" end="20177" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q319233" start="20180" end="20188" title="Tel Aviv Metropolitan Area" label="Gush Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639058" start="20222" end="20227" title="Haifa metropolitan area" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880089" start="20254" end="20263" title="Beersheba metropolitan area" label="Beersheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="20302" end="20311" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q430776" start="20374" end="20382" title="Nazareth" label="Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505887" start="20457" end="20463" title="City council (Israel)" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762194" start="20526" end="20552" title="local government in Israel" label="local government in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288520" start="20557" end="20571" title="local council (Israel)" label="local councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022469" start="20666" end="20683" title="Regional council (Israel)" label="regional councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="20859" end="20863" title="Israeli Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="20953" end="20958" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="21018" end="21024" title="haredi" label="haredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="21234" end="21245" title="Circassians" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606511" start="21330" end="21338" title="Lebanese people" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="21350" end="21359" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="21377" end="21386" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21426" end="21430" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by population density#Main table" label="34th"/>
<link wikidata="Q968767" start="21456" end="21466" title="Demographics of Israel" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155736" start="21579" end="21597" title="Population Matters" label="Population Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146594" start="21603" end="21612" title="Overshoot (population)" label="overshoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="21687" end="21696" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="21701" end="21707" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916356" start="21726" end="21747" title="Archaeology of Israel" label="Archaeology of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446111" start="21750" end="21756" title="Kurkar" label="Kurkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="21759" end="21773" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618869" start="21776" end="21807" title="List of endemic flora of Israel" label="List of endemic flora of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85750830" start="21810" end="21835" title="Cartography of Palestine" label="Historical maps of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969178" start="21838" end="21882" title="National parks and nature reserves of Israel" label="National parks and nature reserves of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264771" start="21885" end="21902" title="Outline of Israel" label="Outline of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914365" start="21905" end="21922" title="Tourism in Israel" label="Tourism in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506836" start="21925" end="21943" title="Wildlife of Israel" label="Wildlife of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431423" start="22011" end="22045" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Israel)" label="Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565132" start="22083" end="22109" title="Ministry of Tourism (Israel)" label="Israel Ministry of Tourism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14688" wikidata="Q968767" url="?curid=14688" title="Demographics of Israel">
<text>The demographics of Israel, monitored by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, encompass various attributes that define the nation&#x27;s populace. Since its establishment in 1948, Israel has witnessed significant changes in its demographics. Formed as a homeland for the Jewish people, Israel has attracted Jewish immigrants from Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Americas.

The Israel Central Bureau of Statistics defines the population of Israel as including Jews living in all of the West Bank and Palestinians in East Jerusalem but excluding Palestinians anywhere in the rest of the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, and foreign workers anywhere in Israel. As of December 2023, this calculation stands at approximately 9,842,000 of whom: 
*73.2% (about 7,208,000 people) are Jews, including about 503,000 living outside the self-defined borders of the State of Israel in the West Bank
*21.1% (around 2,080,000 people) are Israeli citizens classified as Arab, some identifying as Palestinian, and including Druze, Circassians, all other Muslims, Christian Arabs, Armenians (which Israel considers &quot;Arab&quot;)
*An additional 5.7% (roughly 554,000 people) are classified as &quot;others&quot;. This diverse group comprises those with Jewish ancestry but not recognized as Jewish by religious law, non-Jewish family members of Jewish immigrants, Christians other than Arabs and Armenians, and residents without a distinct ethnic or religious categorization.

Israel&#x27;s annual population growth rate stood at 2.0% in 2015, more than three times faster than the OECD average of around 0.6%. With an average of three children per woman, Israel also has the highest fertility rate in the OECD by a considerable margin and much higher than the OECD average of 1.7.

== Definitions ==
The definition of what constitutes the population of Israel varies depending on which territories are counted and which population groups are counted in each territory.

The Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) definition of the Area of the State of Israel:
*includes East Jerusalem since 1967, which Israel unilaterally annexed
*includes the Golan Heights since 1982, which Israel unilaterally annexed
*excludes the West Bank other than East Jerusalem

The CBS&#x27; definition of the Population of Israel, however:
*includes non-Israeli Palestinians (as well as Israeli Arabs/Palestinians) in East Jerusalem who have permission to live there
*includes Israeli settlers and others with Israeli residency permits living in the Area C of West Bank
*excludes Palestinian/Arab/other residents of Area C and East Jerusalem who do not have Israeli citizenship or residence
*excludes persons who are not registered (from 2008 on) and/or entered illegally, and foreign workers.

== Population ==

=== Total population ===
 (most current update from the Israeli Central Bureau for Statistics, via live feed)

&quot;Note:&quot; includes over 200,000 Israelis and 250,000 Arabs in East Jerusalem, about 421,400 Jewish settlers on the West Bank, and about 42,000 in the Golan Heights (July 2007 estimate). Does not include Arab populations in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Does not include 222,000 foreigners living in the country.

=== Density ===

Geographic deployment, as of 2018:
* Central District: 24.5% (2,196,100)
* Tel Aviv District: 15.9% (1,427,200)
* Northern District: 16.2% (1,448,100)
* Southern District: 14.5% (1,302,000)
* Haifa District: 11.5% (1,032,800)
* Jerusalem District: 12.6% (1,133,700)
* Judea and Samaria Area (West Bank) (Israelis only): 4.8% (427,800)

=== Population growth rate ===
* 2.0% (2016)

During the 1990s, the Jewish population growth rate was about 3% per year, as a result of massive immigration to Israel, primarily from the republics of the former Soviet Union. There is also a very high population growth rate among certain Jewish groups, especially adherents of Orthodox Judaism. The growth rate of the Arab population in Israel is 2.2%, while the growth rate of the Jewish population in Israel is 1.8%. The growth rate of the Arab population has slowed from 3.8% in 1999 to 2.2% in 2013, and for the Jewish population, the growth rate declined from 2.7% to its lowest rate of 1.4% in 2005. Due to a rise in fertility of the Jewish population since 1995 and immigration, the growth rate has since risen to 1.8%.

=== Fertility ===
The total fertility rate (TFR) of a population is the average number of children that an average woman would have, in her lifetime.

* 3.01 children born/woman (2019)
Jewish total fertility rate increased by 10.2% during 1998–2009, and was recorded at 2.90 during 2009. During the same time period, Arab TFR decreased by 20.5%. Muslim TFR was measured at 3.73 for 2009, and 2.9 for 2022.

In 2000, the Jewish and Arab TFRs in Jerusalem were 3.79 and 4.43 respectively. By 2009, the Jewish TFR in Jerusalem was measured higher than the Arab TFR (2010: 4.26 vs 3.85, 2009: 4.16 vs 3.87). As of 2021, the Jewish and Arab TFRs in Jerusalem were 4.4 and 3.1 respectively. TFR for Arab residents in the West Bank was measured at 2.91 in 2013, while that for the Jewish residents was reported at 5.10 children per woman.

The ethnic group with highest recorded TFR is the Bedouin of Negev. Their TFR was reported at 10.06 in 1998, and 5.73 in 2009. TFR is also very high among Haredi Jews. For Ashkenazi Haredim, the TFR rose from 6.91 in 1980 to 8.51 in 1996. The figure for 2008 is estimated to be even higher. TFR for Sephardi/Mizrahi Haredim rose from 4.57 in 1980 to 6.57 in 1996. In 2020 the overall Jewish TFR in Israel (3.00) was for the first time measured higher than Arab Muslim TFR (2.99).

As of 2022, the fertility rates in Israeli cities dominated by specific demographic groups were: Haredi 6.1, Bedouin 4.4, Jewish non-Haredi 2.4, Arab 2.2, Druze 1.8.
==== Birth rate ====

2021 :

* Total: 19.7 births/1,000 population
* Jews and others: 19.1 births/1,000 population
* Muslims: 23.4 births/1,000 population
* Christians: 13.3 births/1,000 population
* Druze: 15.8 births/1,000 population

Births, in absolute numbers, by mother&#x27;s religion


Between the mid-1980s and 2000, the fertility rate in the Muslim sector was stable at 4.6–4.7 children per woman; after 2001, a gradual decline became evident, reaching 3.51 children per woman in 2011. By point of comparison, in 2011, there was a rising fertility rate of 2.98 children among the Jewish population.

=== Life expectancy ===
As of 2019:
* Total population: 82.8 years
* Male: 81 years
* Female: 84.7 years

==== Infant mortality rate ====
* Total: 4.03 deaths/1,000 live births
* Male: 4.20 deaths/1,000 live births
* Female: 3.84 deaths/1,000 live births (2013 est.)

=== Age structure ===

The table shows population estimates by sex and age group, as of July 1, 2019. It includes data for East Jerusalem and Israeli residents in certain other territories under occupation by Israeli military forces since June 1967. Data refer to Israeli citizens and permanent residents who are listed in the Population Register.

==== Median age ====
The Jewish median age in Jerusalem district and the West Bank are 24.9 and 19.7, respectively, and both account for 16% of the Jewish population, but 24% of 0- to 4-year-olds. The lowest median age in Israel, and one of the lowest in the world, is found in two of the West Bank&#x27;s biggest Jewish cities: Modi&#x27;in Illit (11), Beitar Illit (11) followed by Bedouin towns in the Negev (15.2).

=== Cities ===

Within Israel&#x27;s system of local government, an urban municipality can be granted a city council by the Israeli Interior Ministry when its population exceeds 20,000. The term &quot;city&quot; does not generally refer to local councils or urban agglomerations, even though a defined city often contains only a small portion of an urban area or metropolitan area&#x27;s population.
== Ethnic and religious groups ==

=== Statistics ===



The most prominent ethnic and religious groups that live in Israel at present and that are Israeli citizens or nationals are as follows:

=== Jews ===
According to Israel&#x27;s Central Bureau of Statistics, in 2008, of Israel&#x27;s 7.3 million people, 75.6 percent were Jews of any background. Among them, 70.3 percent were Sabras (born in Israel), mostly second- or third-generation Israelis, and the rest are olim (Jewish immigrants to Israel)—20.5 percent from Europe and the Americas, and 9.2 percent from Asia and Africa, including the Arab countries.

According to Israel&#x27;s Central Bureau of Statistics, in April 2023, of Israel&#x27;s 9.7 million people, 73.5 percent, or 7.145 million, were Jews of any background.

There are no government statistics categorizing Israeli Jews as &quot;Ashkenazi&quot;, &quot;Mizrahi&quot;, etc, but studies and estimates have been conducted. In a 2019 study, in a sample meant to be representative of the Israeli Jewish population, about 44.9% percent of Israel&#x27;s Jewish population were categorized as Mizrahi (defined as having grandparents born in North Africa or Asia), 31.8% were categorized as Ashkenazi (defined as having grandparents born in Europe, the Americas, Oceania and South Africa), 12.4% as &quot;Soviet&quot; (defined as having progenitors who came from the ex-USSR in 1989 or later), about 3% as Beta Israel (Ethiopia) and 7.9% as a mix of these, or other Jewish groups. Note that this methodology isn&#x27;t exact: See, for example, Bulgarian or Greek Jews, who would be categorized as Ashkenazi according to this definition, although they are overwhelmingly Sephardic.

The paternal lineage of the Jewish population of Israel as of 2015 is as follows:

=== Arabs ===
Arab citizens of Israel are those Arab residents of Mandatory Palestine that remained within Israel&#x27;s borders following the 1948 Arab–Israeli War and the establishment of the State of Israel. It is including those born within the state borders subsequent to this time, as well as those who had left during the establishment of the state (or their descendants), who have since re-entered by means accepted as lawful residence by the Israeli state (primarily family reunifications).

In 2019, the official number of Arab residents in Israel was 1,890,000 people, representing 21% of Israel&#x27;s population. This figure includes 209,000 Arabs (14% of the Israeli Arab population) in East Jerusalem, also counted in the Palestinian statistics, although 98 percent of East Jerusalem Palestinians have either Israeli residency or Israeli citizenship.

Arab Muslims

Most Arab citizens of Israel are Muslim, particularly of the Sunni branch of Islam. A small minority are Ahmadiyya sect and there are also some Alawites (affiliated with Shia Islam) in the northernmost village of Ghajar with Israeli citizenship. As of 2019, Arab citizens of Israel composed 21 percent of the country&#x27;s total population. About 82 percent of the Arab population in Israel are Sunni Muslims, a very small minority are Shia Muslims, another 9 percent are Druze, and around 9 percent are Christian (mostly Eastern Orthodox and Catholic denominations).

Bedouin
The Arab Muslim citizens of Israel include also the Bedouins, who are divided into two main groups: the Bedouin in the north of Israel, who live in villages and towns for the most part, and the Bedouin in the Negev, who include half-nomadic and inhabitants of towns and Unrecognized villages. According to the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as of 1999, 110,000 Bedouins live in the Negev, 50,000 in the Galilee and 10,000 in the central region of Israel. The vast majority of Arab Bedouins of Israel practice Sunni Islam.

Ahmadiyya

The Ahmadiyya community was first established in the region in the 1920s, in what was then Mandatory Palestine. There is a large community in Kababir, a neighborhood on Mount Carmel in Haifa. It is unknown how many Israeli Ahmadis there are, although it is estimated there are about 2,200 Ahmadis in Kababir alone.

Arab Christians

As of December 2013, about 161,000 Israeli citizens practiced Christianity, together comprising about 2% of the total population. The largest group consists of Melkites (about 60% of Israel&#x27;s Christians), followed by the Greek Orthodox (about 30%), with the remaining ca. 10% spread between the Roman Catholic (Latin), Maronite, Anglican, Lutheran, Armenian, Syriac, Ethiopian, Coptic and other denominations.

Druze
The Arab citizens of Israel include also the Druze, who numbered at an estimated 143,000 in April 2019. All of the Druze living in what was then British Mandate Palestine became Israeli citizens after the declaration of the State of Israel. Druze serve prominently in the Israel Defense Forces, and are represented in mainstream Israeli politics and business as well, unlike Muslim or Christian Arabs who are not required to and generally choose not to serve in the Israeli army. Though a few individuals identify themselves as &quot;Palestinian Druze&quot;, the vast majority of Druze do not consider themselves to be &#x27;Palestinian&#x27;, and consider their Israeli identity stronger than their Arab identity. A 2017 Pew Research Center poll reported that the majority of the Israeli Druze identified as ethnically Arab.

=== Syriac Christians ===
Arameans
In 2014, Israel decided to recognize the Aramaic community within its borders as a national minority, allowing some of the Christians in Israel to be registered as &quot;Aramean&quot; instead of &quot;Arab&quot;. As of October 2014, some 600 Israelis requested to be registered as Arameans, with several thousand eligible for the status – mostly members of the Maronite community with some Assyrians as well.

The Maronite Christian community in Israel of around 7,000 resides mostly in the Galilee, with a presence in Haifa, Nazareth and Jerusalem. It is largely composed of families that lived in Upper Galilee in villages such as Jish long before the establishment of Israel in 1948. In the year 2000, the community was joined by a group of Lebanese SLA militia members and their families, who fled Lebanon after 2000 withdrawal of IDF from South Lebanon.

Assyrians
There are around 1,000 Assyrians living in Israel, mostly in Jerusalem and Nazareth. Assyrians are an Aramaic speaking, Eastern Rite Christian minority who are descended from the ancient Mesopotamians. The old Syriac Orthodox monastery of Saint Mark lies in Jerusalem. Other than followers of the Syriac Orthodox Church, there are also followers of the Assyrian Church of the East and the Chaldean Catholic Church living in Israel.

=== Other citizens ===
Copts

Some 1,000 Israeli citizens belong to the Coptic community, originating in Egypt.

Samaritans
The Samaritans are an ethnoreligious group of the Levant. Ancestrally, they claim descent from a group of Israelite inhabitants who have connections to ancient Samaria from the beginning of the Babylonian Exile up to the beginning of the Common Era. 2007 population estimates show that 712 Samaritans live half in Holon, Israel and half at Mount Gerizim in the West Bank. The Holon community holds Israeli citizenship, while the Gerizim community resides at an Israeli-controlled enclave, holding dual Israeli-Palestinian citizenship.

Armenians
About 4,000 Armenians reside in Israel mostly in Jerusalem (including in the Armenian Quarter), but also in Tel Aviv, Haifa and Jaffa. Armenians have a Patriarchate in Jerusalem and churches in Jerusalem, Haifa and Jaffa. Although Armenians of Old Jerusalem have Israeli identity cards, they are officially holders of Jordanian passports.

Circassians

In Israel, there are also a few thousand Circassians, living mostly in Kfar Kama (2,000) and Reyhaniye (1,000). These two villages were a part of a greater group of Circassian villages around the Golan Heights. The Circassians in Israel enjoy, like Druzes, a &quot;status aparte&quot;. Male Circassians (at their leader&#x27;s request) are mandated for military service, while females are not.

People from post-Soviet states
Ethnic Russians, Ukrainians, and Belarusians, immigrants from the former Soviet Union, who were eligible to emigrate due to having, or being married to somebody who has, at least one Jewish grandparent and thus qualified for Israeli citizenship under the revised Law of Return. A number of these immigrants also belong to various ethnic groups from the Former Soviet Union such as Armenians, Georgians, Azeris, Uzbeks, Moldovans, Tatars, among others. Some of them, having a Jewish father or grandfather, identify as Jews, but being non-Jewish by Orthodox Halakha (religious law), they are not recognized formally as Jews by the state. Most of them are in the mainstream of Israel culture and are called &quot;expanded Jewish population&quot;. In addition, a certain number of former Soviet citizens, primarily women of Russian and Ukrainian ethnicity, emigrated to Israel, after marrying Muslim or Christian Arab citizens of Israel, who went to study in the former Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s. 1,557,698 people from the current Russia and Ukraine live in Israel.

Finns

Although most people of Finnish origin in Israel are Finnish Jews who immigrated to Israel, and their descendants, a small number of Finnish Christians moved to Israel in the 1940s before independence and gained citizenship following independence. For the most part, many of the original Finnish settlers intermarried with the other communities in the country, and therefore remain very small in number. A Moshav shitufi near Jerusalem named Yad HaShmona, meaning the &quot;Memorial for the Eight&quot;, was established in 1971 by a group of Finnish Christian-Israelis, although today, most members are Israeli, and are predominantly Hebrew speakers, and the moshav has become a center of Messianic Jews.

Baháʼís

The population of followers of the Baháʼí Faith in Israel is almost entirely made up of volunteers serving at the Baháʼí World Centre. Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh (1817–1892), the Faith&#x27;s founder, was banished to Akka and died nearby where his shrine is located. During his lifetime he instructed his followers not to teach or convert those living in the area, and the Baháʼís descending from those original immigrants were later asked to leave and teach elsewhere. For nearly a century there has been a policy by Baháʼí leaders to not accept converts living in Israel. The 650 or so foreign national Baháʼís living in Israel are almost all on temporary duty serving at the shrines and administrative offices.

Vietnamese

The number of Vietnamese people in Israel and their descendants is estimated at 150 to 200. Most of them came to Israel in between 1976 and 1979, after prime minister Menachem Begin authorized their admission to Israel and granted them political asylum. The Vietnamese people living in Israel are Israeli citizens who also serve in the Israel Defense Forces. Today, the majority of the community lives in the Gush Dan area in the center of Tel Aviv, but also a few dozen Vietnamese-Israelis or Israelis of Vietnamese origin live in Haifa, Jerusalem, and Ofakim.

African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem
The African Hebrew Israelite Nation of Jerusalem is a religious sect of Black Americans, founded in 1960 by Ben Carter a metal worker in Chicago. The members of this sect believe they are descended from the tribes of Judah driven from the Holy Land by the Romans during the First Jewish War (70 AD), and who reportedly emigrated to West Africa before being taken as slaves to the United States. With a population of over 5,000, most members live in their own community in Dimona, Israel, with additional families in Arad, Mitzpe Ramon, and the Tiberias area. The group believes that the ancient Israelites are the ancestors of Black Americans and that the actual Jews are &quot;impostors&quot;. Some scholarship does consider them to be of subsaharan African origin, rather than Levantine. Their ancestors were Black Americans who, after being expelled from Liberia, illegally immigrated to Israel in the late 1960s using tourist visas, requesting that Israel provide them legal citizenship status. Israel granted their requests. The African Hebrew Israelites, like the Haredim and most Israeli Arabs, are not required to serve in the military; however, some do.

Naturalized foreign workers

Some naturalized foreign workers and their children born in Israel, predominantly from the Philippines, Nepal, Nigeria, Senegal, Romania, China, Cyprus, Thailand, and South America (mainly Colombia).

=== Non-citizens ===
African migrants

The number and status of African migrants in Israel is disputed and controversial, but it is estimated that at least 70,000 refugees mainly from Eritrea, Sudan, South Sudan, Ethiopia, and the Ivory Coast reside and work in Israel. A count in late 2011 published in Ynet pointed out the number only in Tel Aviv is 40,000, which represents 10 percent of the city&#x27;s population. The vast majority live in the southern parts of the city. There is a significant population in the southern Israeli cities of Eilat, Arad, and Beersheba.

Foreign workers
There are around 300,000 foreign workers, residing in Israel under temporary work visas, including Palestinians. Most of those foreign workers engage in agriculture and construction. The main groups of those foreign workers include the Chinese, Thai, Filipinos, Nigerians, Romanians, and Latin Americans.

Other refugees

Approximately 100–200 refugees from Bosnia, Kosovo, Iraqi Kurdistan, and North Korea were absorbed in Israel as refugees. Most of them were also given Israeli resident status, and currently reside in Israel. As of 2006, some 200 ethnic Kurdish refugees from Turkey resided in Israel as illegal immigrants, fleeing the Kurdish–Turkish conflict.

== Languages ==
Due to its immigrant nature, Israel is one of the most multicultural and multilingual societies in the world. Hebrew is the official language of the country, and Arabic is given special status, while English and Russian are the two most widely spoken non-official languages. A certain degree of English is spoken widely, and is the language of choice for many Israeli businesses. Hebrew and English language are mandatory subjects in the Israeli school system, and most schools offer either Arabic, French, Spanish, German, Italian, or Russian.

== Religion ==

According to a 2010 Israel Central Bureau of Statistics study of Israeli Jews aged over 18:

While the ultra-Orthodox, or Haredim, represented only 5% of Israel&#x27;s population in 1990, they are expected to represent more than one-fifth of Israel&#x27;s Jewish population by 2028. By 2022, Haredim were 13.3% of the population and enumerated 1,280,000.

== Education ==

Education between ages 5 and 15 is compulsory. It is not free, but it is subsidized by the government, individual organizations (such as the Beit Yaakov System), or a combination. Parents are expected to participate in courses as well. The school system is organized into kindergartens, 6-year primary schools, and either 6-year secondary schools or 3-year junior secondary schools + 3-year senior secondary schools (depending on region), after which a comprehensive examination is offered for university admissions.

=== Literacy ===
Age 15 and over can read and write (2011 estimate):
* Total population: 97.8%
* Male: 98.7%
* Female: 96.8%

== Policy ==

Israel is the thirtieth-most-densely-crowded country in the world. In an academic article, Jewish National Fund Board member Daniel Orenstein, argues that, as elsewhere, overpopulation is a stressor on the environment in Israel; he shows that environmentalists have conspicuously failed to consider the impact of population on the environment, and argues that overpopulation in Israel has not been appropriately addressed for ideological reasons.

=== Citizenship and Entry Law ===
The Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law (Temporary Order) 5763 was first passed on 31 July 2003, and has since been extended until 31 July 2008. The law places age restrictions for the automatic granting of Israeli citizenship and residency permits to spouses of Israeli citizens, such that spouses who are inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza Strip are ineligible. On 8 May 2005, the Israeli ministerial committee for issues of legislation once again amended the Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law, to restrict citizenship and residence in Israel only to Palestinian men over the age of 35, and Palestinian women over the age of 25. Those in favor of the law say the law not only limits the possibility of the entrance of terrorists into Israel, but, as Ze&#x27;ev Boim asserts, allows Israel &quot;to maintain the state&#x27;s democratic nature, but also its Jewish nature&quot; (i. e., its Jewish demographic majority). Critics, including the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, say the law disproportionately affects Arab citizens of Israel, since Arabs in Israel are far more likely to have spouses from the West Bank and Gaza Strip than other Israeli citizens.

In the constitutional challenges to the Citizenship and Entry to Israel Law, the state, represented by the Attorney General, insisted that security was the only objective behind the law. The state also added that even if the law was intended to achieve demographic objectives, it is still in conformity with Israel&#x27;s Jewish and democratic definition, and thus constitutional. In a 2012 ruling by the Supreme Court on the issue, some of the judges on the panel discussed demography, and were inclined to accept that demography is a legitimate consideration in devising family reunification policies that violate the right to family life.

== Vital statistics ==
=== Current vital statistics ===


== Migration ==
===Immigration===
In 2013 Israel had an estimated net migration rate of 1.81 migrant(s) per 1,000 population.

Immigrants by last country of residence in recent years (according to CBS and the Jewish Agency):

====Immigration from the USSR====

During the 1970s about 163,000 people of Jewish descent immigrated to Israel from the USSR.

Later Ariel Sharon, in his capacity as Minister of Housing &amp; Construction and member of the Ministerial Committee for Immigration &amp; Absorption, launched an unprecedented large-scale construction effort to accommodate the new Russian population in Israel so as to facilitate their smooth integration and encourage further Jewish immigration as an ongoing means of increasing the Jewish population of Israel. Between 1989 and 2006, about 979,000 Jews emigrated from the former Soviet Union to Israel.

=== Emigration ===
For many years definitive data on Israeli emigration was unavailable. In &quot;The Israeli Diaspora&quot; sociologist Stephen J. Gold maintains that calculation of Jewish emigration has been a contentious issue, explaining, &quot;Since Zionism, the philosophy that underlies the existence of the Jewish state, calls for return home of the world&#x27;s Jews, the opposite movement—Israelis leaving the Jewish state to reside elsewhere—clearly presents an ideological and demographic problem.&quot;

In the past several decades, emigration (yerida) has seen a considerable increase. From 1990 to 2005, 230,000 Israelis left the country; a large proportion of these departures included people who initially immigrated to Israel and then reversed their course (48% of all post-1990 departures and even 60% of 2003 and 2004 departures were former immigrants to Israel). 8% of Jewish immigrants in the post-1990 period left Israel, while 15% of non-Jewish immigrants did. In 2005 alone, 21,500 Israelis left the country and had not yet returned at the end of 2006; among them 73% were Jews, 5% Arabs, and 22% &quot;Others&quot; (mostly non-Jewish immigrants, with Jewish ancestry, from USSR). At the same time, 10,500 Israelis came back to Israel after over one year abroad; 84% were Jews, 9% Others, and 7% Arabs.

According to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, as of 2005, 650,000 Israelis had left the country for over one year and not returned. Of them, 530,000 are still alive today. This number does not include the children born overseas. It should also be noted that Israeli law grants citizenship only to the first generation of children born to Israeli emigrants.

== Health ==

=== HIV/AIDS – adult prevalence rate ===
* 0.2% (2009 est.)

=== Obesity – adult prevalence rate ===
* 26% of women and 40% of men are overweight. In both genders, obesity rate is 15% (as of 2011).

== Future projections ==
In June 2013, the Central Bureau of Statistics released a demographic report, projecting that Israel&#x27;s population would grow to 11.4 million by 2035, with the Jewish population numbering 8.3 million, or 73% of the population, and the Arab population at 2.6 million, or 23%. This includes some 2.3 million Muslims (20% of the population), 185,000 Druze, and 152,000 Christians. The report predicts that the Israeli population growth rate will decline to 1.4% annually, with growth in the Muslim population remaining higher than the Jewish population until 2035, at which point the Jewish population will begin growing the fastest.

In 2017, the Central Bureau of Statistics projected that Israel&#x27;s population would rise to about 18 million by 2059, including 14.4 million Jews and 3.6 million Arabs. Of the Jewish population, about 5.25 million would be Haredi. Overall, the forecast projected that 49% of the population would be either Haredi Jews (29%) or Arabs (20%). It also projected a population of 20 million in 2065. Jews and other non-Arabs are expected to compose 81% of the population in 2065, and Arabs 19%. About 32% of the population is expected to be Haredi.

Other forecasts project that Israel could have a population as high as 23 million, or even 36 million, by 2050.

== See also ==

* Aliyah
* Crime in Israel
* Culture of Israel
* Demographic history of Palestine (region)
* Demographics of the Middle East
* Demographics of the State of Palestine
* Health care in Israel
* Israel Central Bureau of Statistics
* Jewish population by country
* Standard of living in Israel
* Women in Israel
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* Book review by John Waterbury.
*Videos of academic lectures posted on the official YouTube VOD (video on demand) channel of &quot;Tel Aviv University:&quot;
** (28 min)
** (16 min)
** (31 min)
== External links ==
* Official website of the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics
* Population of Israel by the Tourism Ministry
* Israel. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Issues in Israeli Society at the Jewish Agency for Israel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q968767" start="4" end="26" title="Demographics of Israel" label="demographics of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043319" start="45" end="80" title="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="157" end="182" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="its establishment in 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220693" start="258" end="288" title="homeland for the Jewish people" label="homeland for the Jewish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="311" end="328" title="Aliyah" label="Jewish immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043319" start="379" end="414" title="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="487" end="496" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q212938" start="517" end="531" title="East Jerusalem" label="East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752440" start="772" end="776" title="Israeli Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="872" end="881" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="950" end="954" title="Arab citizens of Israel" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="976" end="987" title="Palestinian citizens of Israel" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115389" start="1003" end="1008" title="Druze in Israel" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071535" start="1010" end="1021" title="Circassians in Israel" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q123689" start="1042" end="1057" title="Christianity in Israel" label="Christian Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069685" start="1059" end="1068" title="Armenians in Israel and Palestine" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="1563" end="1567" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="1665" end="1679" title="fertility rate" label="fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043319" start="1956" end="1991" title="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212938" start="2055" end="2069" title="East Jerusalem" label="East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="2130" end="2143" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q582706" start="2441" end="2457" title="Israeli settlers" label="Israeli settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683572" start="2514" end="2533" title="West Bank Areas in the Oslo II Accord" label="Area C of West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q212938" start="2958" end="2972" title="East Jerusalem" label="East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="3046" end="3059" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="3123" end="3132" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="3137" end="3147" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q188785" start="3263" end="3279" title="Central District (Israel)" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q192811" start="3301" end="3318" title="Tel Aviv District" label="Tel Aviv District"/>
<link wikidata="Q189942" start="3340" end="3357" title="Northern District (Israel)" label="Northern District"/>
<link wikidata="Q188781" start="3379" end="3396" title="Southern District (Israel)" label="Southern District"/>
<link wikidata="Q185845" start="3418" end="3432" title="Haifa District" label="Haifa District"/>
<link wikidata="Q192232" start="3454" end="3472" title="Jerusalem District" label="Jerusalem District"/>
<link wikidata="Q513200" start="3494" end="3516" title="Judea and Samaria Area" label="Judea and Samaria Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="3637" end="3659" title="population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="3765" end="3784" title="former Soviet Union" label="former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="3888" end="3904" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="3929" end="3933" title="Arab citizens of Israel" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="4361" end="4381" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="4531" end="4551" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="5344" end="5353" title="Ashkenazim" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="5471" end="5479" title="Sephardim" label="Sephardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="5480" end="5487" title="Mizrachim" label="Mizrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="6150" end="6164" title="fertility rate" label="fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q168140" start="7376" end="7394" title="Modi&amp;#x27;in Illit" label="Modi&amp;#x27;in Illit"/>
<link wikidata="Q152578" start="7401" end="7413" title="Beitar Illit" label="Beitar Illit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762194" start="7490" end="7530" title="Local government in Israel" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s system of local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505887" start="7571" end="7583" title="City council (Israel)" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909783" start="7591" end="7616" title="Israeli Ministry of Interior" label="Israeli Interior Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288520" start="7707" end="7721" title="Local council (Israel)" label="local councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="7725" end="7744" title="urban agglomeration" label="urban agglomeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="7830" end="7847" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="7943" end="7949" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="7954" end="7970" title="Religious denomination" label="religious groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043319" start="8088" end="8130" title="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310159" start="8250" end="8256" title="Sabra (person)" label="Sabras"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="8337" end="8341" title="Aliyah" label="olim"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="8467" end="8481" title="Arab world" label="Arab countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043319" start="8497" end="8539" title="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="8980" end="8987" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="9077" end="9086" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890021" start="9191" end="9197" title="1990s post-Soviet aliyah" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q202812" start="9292" end="9303" title="Beta Israel" label="Beta Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849207" start="9430" end="9439" title="Bulgarian Jews in Israel" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505056" start="9443" end="9453" title="Greek Jews" label="Greek Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="9794" end="9815" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="9824" end="9860" title="establishment of the State of Israel" label="establishment of the State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="10593" end="10598" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087464" start="10637" end="10646" title="Ahmadiyya in Israel" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q209496" start="10676" end="10684" title="Alawites" label="Alawites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261045" start="10745" end="10751" title="Ghajar" label="Ghajar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115389" start="11005" end="11010" title="Druze in Israel" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="11055" end="11071" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="11319" end="11324" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897352" start="11380" end="11401" title="Unrecognized Bedouin villages in Israel" label="Unrecognized villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431423" start="11420" end="11455" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Israel)" label="Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="11477" end="11484" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087464" start="11654" end="11673" title="Ahmadiyya in Israel" label="Ahmadiyya community"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="11741" end="11760" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897547" start="11792" end="11799" title="Kababir" label="Kababir"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="11819" end="11831" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="11835" end="11840" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778933" start="12143" end="12150" title="Melkite" label="Melkite"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="12450" end="12455" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="12520" end="12525" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="12550" end="12575" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="12677" end="12698" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169577" start="13105" end="13118" title="Arab identity" label="Arab identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="13127" end="13146" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="13225" end="13229" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q123689" start="13390" end="13400" title="Christianity in Israel" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="13681" end="13699" title="Maronites" label="Maronite Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915499" start="13866" end="13879" title="Upper Galilee" label="Upper Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527236" start="13900" end="13904" title="Jish" label="Jish"/>
<link wikidata="Q929554" start="14011" end="14023" title="South Lebanon Army" label="Lebanese SLA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14083" end="14124" title="Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon#Withdrawal from the security belt" label="2000 withdrawal of IDF from South Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="14160" end="14169" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="14198" end="14207" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q430776" start="14212" end="14220" title="Nazareth" label="Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="14239" end="14246" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="14257" end="14269" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="14324" end="14337" title="Mesopotamians" label="Mesopotamians"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="14347" end="14362" title="Syriac Orthodox" label="Syriac Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="14490" end="14517" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="Assyrian Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q64868" start="14526" end="14550" title="Chaldean Catholic Church" label="Chaldean Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q146744" start="14642" end="14648" title="Copts" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="14698" end="14708" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q192213" start="15008" end="15021" title="Holon, Israel" label="Holon, Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288751" start="15034" end="15047" title="Mount Gerizim" label="Mount Gerizim"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="15252" end="15261" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645501" start="15317" end="15333" title="Armenian Quarter" label="Armenian Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q213274" start="15484" end="15497" title="Old Jerusalem" label="Old Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="15634" end="15645" title="Circassians" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576600" start="15664" end="15673" title="Kfar Kama" label="Kfar Kama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916856" start="15686" end="15695" title="Rehaniya" label="Reyhaniye"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="15789" end="15802" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="15842" end="15847" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="16026" end="16034" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="16036" end="16046" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="16052" end="16063" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="16085" end="16104" title="Post-Soviet states" label="former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q950320" start="16282" end="16295" title="Law of Return" label="Law of Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="16400" end="16409" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973" start="16411" end="16420" title="Georgians" label="Georgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q482942" start="16422" end="16428" title="Azeris" label="Azeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="16430" end="16436" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q487796" start="16438" end="16447" title="Moldovans" label="Moldovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="16449" end="16455" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="16575" end="16582" title="Halakha" label="Halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q45232" start="17152" end="17164" title="Finnish Jews" label="Finnish Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886462" start="17505" end="17519" title="Moshav shitufi" label="Moshav shitufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915704" start="17541" end="17553" title="Yad HaShmona" label="Yad HaShmona"/>
<link wikidata="Q216952" start="17788" end="17802" title="Messianic Jews" label="Messianic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="17849" end="17861" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q494706" start="17928" end="17947" title="Baháʼí World Centre" label="Baháʼí World Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="17949" end="17970" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="18026" end="18030" title="Acre, Israel" label="Akka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233666" start="18550" end="18567" title="Overseas Vietnamese" label="Vietnamese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="18703" end="18717" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="18872" end="18893" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q319233" start="18945" end="18953" title="Gush Dan" label="Gush Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="19068" end="19073" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="19075" end="19084" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q167632" start="19090" end="19096" title="Ofakim" label="Ofakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="19216" end="19225" title="African Americans" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q152396" start="19610" end="19624" title="Dimona, Israel" label="Dimona, Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152473" start="19654" end="19658" title="Arad, Israel" label="Arad"/>
<link wikidata="Q741793" start="19660" end="19672" title="Mitzpe Ramon" label="Mitzpe Ramon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151920" start="19682" end="19690" title="Tiberias" label="Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="19955" end="19964" title="African Americans" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="19996" end="20003" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="20208" end="20215" title="Haredim" label="Haredim"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="20225" end="20238" title="Israeli Arabs" label="Israeli Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10512400" start="20348" end="20362" title="foreign worker" label="foreign worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="20422" end="20433" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="20435" end="20440" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="20442" end="20449" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="20451" end="20458" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="20460" end="20467" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="20476" end="20482" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="20484" end="20492" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="20716" end="20723" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="20725" end="20730" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="20732" end="20743" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="20745" end="20753" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="20763" end="20774" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q472834" start="21367" end="21371" title="Thai people" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="21373" end="21382" title="Filipinos" label="Filipinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155102" start="21384" end="21393" title="Nigerians" label="Nigerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="21395" end="21404" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="21410" end="21425" title="Latin Americans" label="Latin Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="21480" end="21486" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="21488" end="21494" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q66711956" start="21496" end="21511" title="Iraqi Kurdistan" label="Iraqi Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="21517" end="21528" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445765" start="21680" end="21696" title="Kurdish refugees" label="Kurdish refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q619749" start="21762" end="21786" title="Kurdish–Turkish conflict (1978–present)" label="Kurdish–Turkish conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="21915" end="21921" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043319" start="22387" end="22422" title="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="23412" end="23450" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by population density" label="thirtieth-most-densely-crowded country"/>
<link wikidata="Q696658" start="23489" end="23509" title="Jewish National Fund" label="Jewish National Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122785" start="23884" end="23921" title="Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law" label="Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q197108" start="24641" end="24656" title="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Boim" label="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Boim"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="24941" end="24964" title="Arab citizens of Israel" label="Arab citizens of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614401" start="25410" end="25431" title="Jewish and democratic state" label="Jewish and democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="25998" end="26011" title="Jewish Agency" label="Jewish Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901225" start="26127" end="26140" title="Aliyah from the Soviet Union in the 1970s" label="from the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="26149" end="26161" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042232" start="27209" end="27215" title="yerida" label="yerida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043319" start="28602" end="28630" title="Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="29447" end="29453" title="Haredi Judaism" label="Haredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="29899" end="29905" title="Aliyah" label="Aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185317" start="29908" end="29923" title="Crime in Israel" label="Crime in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q385334" start="29926" end="29943" title="Culture of Israel" label="Culture of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256060" start="29946" end="29987" title="Demographic history of Palestine (region)" label="Demographic history of Palestine (region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256114" start="29990" end="30021" title="Demographics of the Middle East" label="Demographics of the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256116" start="30024" end="30062" title="Demographics of the State of Palestine" label="Demographics of the State of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079786" start="30065" end="30086" title="Health care in Israel" label="Health care in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043319" start="30089" end="30124" title="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916388" start="30127" end="30155" title="Jewish population by country" label="Jewish population by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q13577788" start="30158" end="30186" title="Standard of living in Israel" label="Standard of living in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470836" start="30189" end="30204" title="Women in Israel" label="Women in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263147" start="30264" end="30278" title="John Waterbury" label="John Waterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q319239" start="30379" end="30398" title="Tel Aviv University" label="Tel Aviv University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043319" start="30489" end="30524" title="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Israel Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565132" start="30555" end="30571" title="Tourism Ministry (Israel)" label="Tourism Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="30588" end="30606" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="30614" end="30641" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="30678" end="30702" title="Jewish Agency for Israel" label="Jewish Agency for Israel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14690" wikidata="Q1379800" url="?curid=14690" title="Economy of Israel">
<text>The economy of Israel is a highly developed free-market economy. The prosperity of Israel&#x27;s advanced economy allows the country to have a sophisticated welfare state, a powerful modern military said to possess a nuclear-weapons capability with a full nuclear triad, modern infrastructure equivalent to developed countries, and a high-technology sector competitively on par with Silicon Valley. It has the second-largest number of startup companies in the world after the United States, and the third-largest number of NASDAQ-listed companies after the U.S. and China. American companies, such as Intel, Microsoft, and Apple, built their first overseas research and development facilities in Israel. More than 400 high-tech multi-national corporations, such as IBM, Google, Hewlett-Packard, Cisco Systems, Facebook and Motorola have opened R&amp;D centers throughout the country. As of 2024, the IMF estimated Israel has the 26th largest economy in the world by nominal GDP, and one of the biggest economies in the Middle East.

The country&#x27;s major economic sectors are high-technology and industrial manufacturing. The Israeli diamond industry is one of the world&#x27;s centers for diamond cutting and polishing, amounting to 21% of all exports in 2017. As the country is relatively poor in natural resources, it consequently depends on imports of petroleum, raw materials, wheat, motor vehicles, uncut diamonds and production inputs. Nonetheless, the country&#x27;s nearly total reliance on energy imports may change in the future as recent discoveries of natural gas reserves off its coast and the Israeli solar energy industry have taken a leading role in Israel&#x27;s energy sector.

Israel&#x27;s quality higher education and the establishment of a highly motivated and educated populace is largely responsible for ushering in the country&#x27;s high technology boom and rapid economic development by regional standards. The country has developed a strong educational infrastructure and a high-quality business startup incubation system for promoting cutting edge new ideas to create value-driven goods and services. These developments have allowed the country to create a high concentration of high-tech companies across the country&#x27;s regions. These companies are financially backed by a strong venture capital industry. Its central high technology hub, the &quot;Silicon Wadi&quot;, is considered second in importance only to its Californian counterpart. Numerous Israeli companies have been acquired by global multinational corporations for their profit-driven technologies in addition to their reliable and quality corporate personnel.

In its early decades, the Israeli economy was largely state-controlled and shaped by social democratic ideas. In the 1970s and 1980s, the economy underwent a series of free-market reforms and was gradually liberalized. In the past three decades, the economy has grown considerably, though GDP per capita has increased faster than wages. Israel is the most developed and advanced country in West Asia, possessing the 17th largest foreign-exchange reserves in the world and the highest average wealth per adult in the Middle East (10th worldwide by financial assets per capita). Israel is the 9th largest arm exporter in the world and has the highest number of billionaires in the Middle East, ranked 18th in the world. In recent years, Israel has had among the highest GDP growth rates within the developed world along with Ireland. &quot;The Economist&quot; ranked Israel as the 4th most successful economy among developed countries for 2022. The IMF estimated Israel&#x27;s GDP at US$564 billion and its GDP per capita at US$58,270 in 2023 (13th highest in the world), a figure comparable to other highly developed countries. Israel was invited to join the OECD in 2010. Israel has also signed free trade agreements with the European Union, the United States, the European Free Trade Association, Turkey, Mexico, Canada, Ukraine, Jordan, and Egypt. In 2007, Israel became the first non-Latin-American country to sign a free trade agreement with the Mercosur trade bloc.

==History==

The British Mandate for Palestine that came into effect in 1920 aimed at restricting land purchases by Jewish immigrants. For this reason, the Jewish population was initially more urban and had a higher share in industrial occupations. This particular development resulted economically in one of the few growth miracles of the region whereby the structure of firms was determined mainly by private businessmen rather than by the government.
The first survey of the Dead Sea in 1911, by the Russian Jewish businessman and engineer Moshe Novomeysky, led to the establishment of Palestine Potash Ltd. in 1930, later renamed the Dead Sea Works. In 1923, the businessman and hydraulic engineer Pinhas Rutenberg was granted an exclusive concession for the production and distribution of electric power. He founded the Palestine Electric Company, later the Israel Electric Corporation. Between 1920 and 1924, some of the country&#x27;s largest factories were established, including the Shemen Oil Company, the Societe des Grand Moulins, the Palestine Silicate Company and the Palestine Salt Company.

In 1937, there were 86 spinning and weaving factories in the country, employing a workforce of 1,500. Capital and technical expertise were supplied by Jewish professionals from Europe. The Ata textile plant in Kiryat Ata, which went on to become an icon of the Israeli textile industry, was established in 1934. In 1939, the cornerstone was laid for one of the kibbutz industry&#x27;s first factories: the Naaman brick factory, which supplied the growing need for construction materials.

The textile underwent rapid development during World War II, when supplies from Europe were cut off while local manufacturers were commissioned for army needs. By 1943, the number of factories had grown to 250, with a workforce of 5,630, and output increased tenfold.

From 1924, trade fairs were held in Tel Aviv. The Levant Fair was inaugurated in 1932.

===After independence===
After statehood, Israel faced a deep economic crisis. As well as having to recover from the devastating effects of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, it also had to absorb hundreds of thousands of Jewish refugees from Europe and almost a million from the Arab world. Israel was financially overwhelmed and faced a deep economic crisis, which led to a policy of austerity from 1949 to 1959. Unemployment was high, and foreign currency reserves were scarce.

In 1952, Israel and West Germany signed an agreement stipulating that West Germany was to pay Israel to compensate for Jewish property stolen by the Nazis, material claims during the Holocaust, and absorption of refugees as a result. Over the next 14 years, West Germany paid Israel 3 billion marks (around US$714 million according to 1953–1955 conversion rates or equivalent to approximately US$7 billion in modern currency). The reparations became a decisive part of Israel&#x27;s income, comprising as high as 87.5% of Israel&#x27;s income in 1956. Israel never had any formal diplomatic relations with East Germany. In 1950, the Israeli government launched Israel Bonds for American and Canadian Jews to buy. In 1951, the final results of the bonds program exceeded $52 million. Additionally, many American Jews made private donations to Israel, which in 1956 were thought to amount to $100 million a year. In 1957, bond sales amounted to 35% of Israel&#x27;s special development budget. Later in the century, Israel became significantly reliant on economic aid from the United States, a country that also became Israel&#x27;s most important source of political support internationally.

The proceeds from these sources were invested in industrial and agricultural development projects, which allowed Israel to become economically self-sufficient. Among the projects made possible by the aid was the Hadera power plant, the Dead Sea Works, the National Water Carrier, port development in Haifa, Ashdod, and Eilat, desalination plants, and national infrastructure projects.

After statehood, priority was given to establishing industries in areas slated for development, among them, Lachish, Ashkelon, the Negev and Galilee. The expansion of Israel&#x27;s textile industry was a consequence of the development of cotton growing as a profitable agricultural branch. By the late 1960s, textiles were one of the largest industrial branches in Israel, second only to the foodstuff industry. Textiles constituted about 12% of industrial exports, becoming the second-largest export branch after polished diamonds. In the 1990s, cheap East Asian labor decreased the profitability of the sector. Much of the work was subcontracted to 400 Israeli Arab sewing shops. As these closed down, Israeli firms, among them Delta, Polgat, Argeman and Kitan, began doing their sewing work in Jordan and Egypt, usually under the QIZ arrangement. In the early 2000s, Israeli companies had 30 plants in Jordan. Israeli exports reached $370 million a year, supplying such retailers and designers as Marks &amp; Spencer, The Gap, Victoria&#x27;s Secret, Walmart, Sears, Ralph Lauren, Calvin Klein, and Donna Karan.

In its first two decades of existence, Israel&#x27;s strong commitment to development led to economic growth rates that exceeded 10% annually. Between 1950 and 1963, the expenditure among wage-earner&#x27;s families rose 97% in real terms. Between 1955 and 1966, per capita consumption rose by 221%. In the 1970s, investment began to shift from agriculture and basic infrastructure to industry and defense programs. These latter investments would later become the foundation of Israel&#x27;s technology sector. The years after the 1973 Yom Kippur War were a lost decade economically, as growth stalled, inflation soared and government expenditures rose significantly. Also worthy of mention is the 1983 Bank stock crisis. By 1984, the economic situation became almost catastrophic with inflation reaching an annual rate close to 450% and projected to reach over 1000% by the end of the following year. However, the successful economic stabilization plan implemented in 1985 and the subsequent introduction of market-oriented structural reforms reinvigorated the economy and paved the way for its rapid growth in the 1990s and became a model for other countries facing similar economic crises.
Two developments have helped to transform Israel&#x27;s economy since the beginning of the 1990s. The first is waves of Jewish immigration, predominantly from the countries of the former USSR, that has brought over one million new citizens to Israel. These new Soviet Jewish immigrants, many of them highly educated, had a wellspring of scientific and technical expertise to help spur Israel&#x27;s burgeoning technology sector, now constitute some 15% of Israel&#x27;s population. The second development benefiting the Israeli economy is the peace process that begun at the Madrid conference of October 1991, which led to the signing of accords and later to a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan (1994).
During the early 2000s, the Israeli economy went into a downturn due to the crashing of the global dot-com bubble which bankrupted many startups established during the height of the bubble. The Second Intifada, which cost Israel billions of dollars in security costs, and a decline in investment and tourism, sent unemployment in Israel to the double digits; growth in one quarter of 2000 was 10%. In 2002, the Israeli economy declined about 4% in one quarter. Afterward, Israel managed to create a remarkable recovery by opening up new markets to Israeli exporters farther afield, such as in the rapidly growing countries of East Asia. This was possible thanks to a rebound in the Israeli tech sector, spurred on by the gradual bottoming out of the dotcom crash and a growing increase in demand for computer software, which in turn was due to burgeoning rates of global internet usage at this time. The explosion in demand for security and defense products following 9/11 also allowed Israel to sell even more of its technologies abroad – a situation only made possible due to Israel&#x27;s prior investments in the technology sector in an effort to curb high levels of domestic unemployment.

In the 2000s, there was an influx of foreign investment in Israel from companies that formerly shunned the Israeli market. In 2006, foreign investment in Israel totalled $13 billion, according to the Manufacturers Association of Israel. The &quot;Financial Times&quot; said that &quot;bombs drop, yet Israel&#x27;s economy grows&quot;. Moreover, while Israel&#x27;s total gross external debt is US$95 billion, or approximately 41.6% of GDP, since 2001 it has become a net lender nation in terms of net external debt (the total value of assets vs. liabilities in debt instruments owed abroad), which stood at a significant surplus of US$60 billion. The country also maintains a current account surplus in an amount equivalent to about 3% of its gross domestic product in 2010. In 2023, Israel&#x27;s account surplus was 25.3 billion U.S. dollars.

The Israeli economy weathered and withstood the late-2000s recession, registering positive GDP growth in 2009 and ending the decade with an unemployment rate lower than that of many of its Western counterparts. There are several reasons behind this economic resilience, for example, the fact that the country is a net lender rather than a borrower nation and the government and the Bank of Israel&#x27;s generally conservative macro-economic policies. Two policies, in particular, can be cited, one is the refusal of the government to succumb to pressure by the banks to appropriate large sums of public money to aid them early in the crisis, thus limiting their risky behavior. The second is the implementation of the recommendations of the Bach&#x27;ar commission in the early to mid-2000s which recommended decoupling the banks&#x27; depository- and Investment banking activities, contrary to the then-opposite trend, particularly in the United States, of easing such restrictions which had the effect of encouraging more risk-taking in the financial systems of those countries. American investors today make up the most significant portion of investors in Israel.

===OECD membership===
In May 2007, Israel was invited to open accession discussions with the OECD. In May 2010, the OECD voted unanimously to invite Israel to join, despite Palestinian objections. It became a full member on 7 September 2010. The OECD praised Israel&#x27;s scientific and technological progress and described it as having &quot;produced outstanding outcomes on a world scale.&quot;

==Challenges==
Despite economic prosperity, the Israeli economy faces many challenges, some short-term and some long-term. In the short term, its inability to duplicate its success in the telecommunication industry in other growing industries hampers its economic outlook. Its inability to foster large multinational companies in the last decade also calls into question its ability to employ many people in advanced industries. On the long term, Israel is facing challenges of high dependency on the growing number of Ultra-Orthodox Jews, who have a low level of official labor force participation among men. This situation could lead to a materially lower employment-to-population ratio and a higher dependency ratio in the future. The governor of the Bank of Israel, Stanley Fischer, stated that the growing poverty amongst the Ultra-Orthodox is hurting the Israeli economy. According to the data published by Ian Fursman, 60% of the poor households in Israel are of the Haredi Jews and the Israeli Arabs. Together, these two groups represent 25–28% of the Israeli population. Organizations such as The Kemach Foundation, Gvahim, Jerusalem Village, and The Jerusalem Business Networking Forum are addressing these challenges with job placement services and networking events.

===2023 Israel–Hamas war===
After the 2023 Israel–Hamas war, the Israeli stock markets and currency nosedived. It is estimated that Israel will lose around $400 billion in the next decade and experience a significant economic shock. Ninety percent of this will result from indirect consequences such as reduced investment, labor market disruptions, and hindered productivity growth. On August 2024, Fitch Ratings downgraded Israel&#x27;s credit rating. The Bank of Israel has counted war-related costs from 2023 to 2025 at up to $55.6 billion. Another consequence of the war was that consumer spending dropped by 27%, imports fell by 42%, and exports declined by 18%.

===Red Sea crisis===
The Red Sea crisis caused by the Houthi attacks has severely affected the Israeli economy, disrupting shipping routes, increasing costs, and causing job losses. The port of Eilat, Israel&#x27;s southern gateway, has suffered almost shut down and bankruptcy, leading to requests for government support. Half of the port&#x27;s workers were at risk of losing their jobs. Many ships are avoiding the Red Sea and rerouting around Africa, which makes the journey three weeks longer and more expensive. Insurance costs for ships in the Red Sea surged, with some Israeli ships seeing a 250% increase or being denied coverage altogether.

== Data ==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022–2027). Inflation under 5% is in green.

==Sectors==
===Agriculture===
In 2017, 2.4% of the country&#x27;s GDP is derived from agriculture. Of a total labor force of 2.7 million, 2.6% are employed in agricultural production while 6.3% in services for agriculture. While Israel imports substantial quantities of grain (approximately 80% of local consumption), it is largely self-sufficient in other agricultural products and foodstuffs. For centuries, farmers of the region have grown varieties of citrus fruits, such as grapefruit, oranges and lemons. Citrus fruits are still Israel&#x27;s major agricultural export. In addition, Israel is one of the world&#x27;s leading greenhouse-food-exporting countries. Israel also produces and exports flowers and cotton. The country exports more than $1.3 billion worth of agricultural products every year, including farm produce as well as $1.2 billion worth of agricultural inputs and technology. Israeli technological innovations in agriculture and water technology have given the Israeli AgTech sector a competitve edge and allows Israeli agtech companies to operate in numerous countries around the world.

===Financial services===


Israel has over 100 active venture capital funds operating throughout the country with US$10 billion under management. In 2004, international foreign funds from various nations around the world committed over 50 percent of the total dollars invested exemplifying the country&#x27;s strong and sound reputation as an internationally sought after foreign investment by many countries. Israel&#x27;s venture capital sector has rapidly developed from the early 1990s, and has about 70 active venture capital funds (VC), of which 14 international VCs have Israeli offices. Israel&#x27;s thriving venture capital and business-incubator industry played an important role in financing the country&#x27;s flourishing high-tech sector. In 2008, venture capital investment in Israel, rose 19 percent to $1.9 billion.

&quot;Between 1991 and 2000, Israel&#x27;s annual venture-capital outlays, nearly all private, rose nearly 60-fold, from $58 million to $3.3 billion; companies launched by Israeli venture funds rose from 100 to 800; and Israel&#x27;s information-technology revenues rose from $1.6 billion to $12.5 billion. By 1999, Israel ranked second only to the United States in invested private-equity capital as a share of GDP. Israel led the world in the share of its growth attributable to high-tech ventures: 70 percent.&quot;

Israel&#x27;s thriving venture capital industry has played an important role in funding the country&#x27;s booming high-technology sector, with hundreds of prosperous Israeli private equity and venture capital firms. The 2007–2008 financial crisis negatively affected the availability of venture capital locally. In 2009, there were 63 mergers and acquisitions in the Israeli market worth a total of $2.54 billion; 7% below 2008 levels ($2.74 billion), when 82 Israeli companies were merged or acquired, and 33% lower than 2007 proceeds ($3.79 billion) when 87 Israeli companies were merged or acquired. Numerous Israeli high tech companies have been acquired by various global multinational corporations for their ability to produce profit-driven technologies in addition to their arsenal of reliable corporate management and quality administrative personnel. In addition to venture capital funds, many of the world&#x27;s leading investment banks, pension funds, and insurance companies have a strong presence in Israel committing their funds to financially back Israeli high-tech firms and benefit from its prosperous high tech sector. These institutional investors include Goldman Sachs, Bear Stearns, Deutsche Bank, JP Morgan, Credit Suisse First Boston, Merrill Lynch, CalPERS, Ontario Teachers Pension Plan, and AIG.

Israel also has a small but fast growing hedge fund industry. Within five years between 2007 and 2012, the number of active hedge funds doubled to 60. Israel-based hedge funds have registered an increase of 162% from 2006 to 2012, when they managed a total of $2 billion (₪8 billion) and employed about 300 people. The ever-growing hedge fund industry in Israel is also attracting a myriad of investors from around the world, particularly from the United States.

In 2023, despite the occurrence of war and significant events like a legal reform and interest rate rise that shook the capital market and created uncertainty, about 40% of the companies traded on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange continued to distribute dividends to their shareholders. This was particularly evident in the energy, oil and gas industries, and in the banking and financial services sector. The year marked a record in the total dividend distributed to public shareholders, with about 62% of the distributed amount (16.8 billion shekels), compared to about 55% of the dividends (15.8 billion shekels) in 2022, with the remainder being paid to stakeholders. The average dividend yield of the exchange-listed companies in 2023 was approximately 2.9%, compared to about 2.8% in the previous year. This was the highest return since 2017 and higher than that of 2022, the record year, as the average market value in 2023 was about 9% lower than in 2022, while the total dividend was only about 5% lower than the previous year.

===High technology===

Science and technology in Israel is one of the country&#x27;s most highly developed and industrialized sectors. The modern Israeli ecosystem of high technology is highly optimized making up a significant bulk of the Israeli economy. The percentage of Israelis engaged in scientific and technological inquiry, and the amount spent on research and development (R&amp;D) concerning gross domestic product (GDP), is among the highest in the world, with 140 scientists and technicians per 10,000 employees. In comparison, the same is 85 per 10,000 in the United States and 83 per 10,000 in Japan. Israel ranks fourth in the world in scientific activity, as measured by the number of scientific publications per million citizens. Israel&#x27;s percentage of the total number of scientific articles published worldwide is almost 10 times higher than its percentage of the world&#x27;s population. The country is home to over 1,400 life science companies, including about 300 pharmaceutical companies, 600 medical device companies, 450 digital health companies, and 468 biotechnology companies. Israeli scientists, engineers, and technicians have contributed to the modern advancement of the natural sciences, agricultural sciences, computer sciences, electronics, genetics, medicine, optics, solar energy and various fields of engineering. The country has one of the world&#x27;s technologically most literate populations. Israel has the second largest number of startup companies globally, behind only the United States, and remains one of the largest centers in the world for technology start-up enterprises. As of 2013, around 200 start-ups were being created annually in Israel. In 2019, there were nearly 7,000 active start-ups operating throughout the country. In 2021, there were 79 Israeli-established tech unicorns, with 32 of them headquartered in Israel. More than one-third of cybersecurity unicorns in the world were Israeli in 2021. Israel is also home to nearly 400 research and development centers owned by various multinational companies, including prominent high-technology giants such as Google, Microsoft, and Intel.

Israel is also a major semiconductor design hub. The country is home to numerous chip design centers owned by major multinational corporations, and is considered as having one of the most advanced chip design industries in the world. In 2021, a total of 37 multinational corporations were operating in Israel in the semiconductor field.

In 1998, Tel Aviv was named by &quot;Newsweek&quot; as one of the ten technologically most influential cities in the world. In 2012, the city was also named one of the best places for high-tech startup companies, placed second behind its California counterpart.
In 2013, &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; ranked Tel Aviv as the second-best city for business start-ups, after Silicon Valley. In 2020, StartupBlink ranked Israel as having the third best startup ecosystem in the world, behind only the United States and United Kingdom.

As a result of the country&#x27;s highly prolific and dynamic start-up culture, Israel is often referred to as the &quot;Start-Up Nation.&quot; and the &quot;Silicon Valley of the Middle East&quot;. Programs that send people to Israel to explore the &quot;Start-Up Nation&quot; economy include TAVtech Ventures and TAMID Group. This success has been attributed by some to widespread service in the Israel Defense Forces and its development of talent which then fuels the high-tech industry upon discharge.

In recent years, the industry has faced a shortage of technology specialists; 15% of positions in the high technology sector of Israel were unfilled as of 2019. However, the largest number of unfilled job positions (31%) are in software engineering specialities: DevOps, back-end, data science, machine learning and artificial intelligence. Therefore, salaries of specialists in the Israeli market also increased significantly. To solve this problem, IT companies look for filling the gaps abroad. Consequently, they employ about 25% of their entire workforce overseas. Most companies choose to hire employees from Ukraine (45%) and the United States (with 16%) are the second most popular offshoring destination country. In 2017, the Council for Higher Education in Israel launched a five-year program to increase the number of graduates from computer science and engineering programs by 40%.

===Energy===


Historically, Israel relied on external imports for meeting most of its energy needs, spending an amount equivalent to over 5% of its GDP per year in 2009 on imports of energy products. The transportation sector relies mainly on gasoline and diesel fuel, while the majority of electricity production is generated using imported coal. As of 2013, Israel was importing about 100 mln barrels of oil per year. The country possesses negligible reserves of crude oil but does have domestic natural gas resources which were discovered in more significant quantities starting in 2009, after many decades of previously unsuccessful exploration.

====Natural gas====

Until the early 2000s, natural gas use in Israel was minimal. In the late 1990s, the government of Israel decided to encourage the usage of natural gas because of environmental, cost, and resource diversification reasons. At the time however, there were no domestic sources of natural gas and the expectation was that gas would be supplied from overseas in the form of LNG and by a future pipeline from Egypt (which eventually became the Arish–Ashkelon pipeline). Plans were made for the Israel Electric Corporation to construct several natural gas-driven power plants, for erecting a national gas distribution grid, and for an LNG import terminal.

====Recent discoveries ====
In 2000, a 33-billion-cubic-metre (BCM), or 1,200-billion-cubic-foot, natural-gas field was located offshore Ashkelon, with commercial production starting in 2004. however, this field is nearly depleted—earlier than expected due to increased pumping to partially compensate for the loss of imported Egyptian gas in the wake of unrest associated with the fall of the Mubarak regime in 2011. In 2009, a significant gas find named Tamar, with proven reserves of 223 BCM or (307 BCM total proven + probable) was located in deep water approximately west of Haifa, as well as a smaller 15 BCM () field situated nearer the coastline. Furthermore, results of 3D seismic surveys and test drilling conducted since 2010 have confirmed that an estimated 621 BCM () natural-gas deposit named Leviathan exists in a large underwater geological formation nearby the large gas field already discovered in 2009.

The Tamar field began commercial production on 30 March 2013 after four years of development. The supply of gas from Tamar was expected to aid the Israeli economy, which had suffered losses of more than ₪20 billion between 2011 and 2013 resulting from the disruption of gas supplies from neighboring Egypt (and which are not expected to resume due to Egypt&#x27;s decision to indefinitely suspend its gas supply agreement to Israel). As a result, Israel, as well as its other neighbor Jordan, which also suffered from disruption of gas deliveries from Egypt, had to resort to importing significantly more expensive and polluting liquid heavy fuels as substitute sources of energy. The ensuing energy crisis in Israel was lifted once the Tamar field came online in 2013, while Jordan committed to a US$10 billion, 15-year gas supply deal totaling 45 BCM from the Israeli Leviathan field which is scheduled to come online in late 2019. The agreement is estimated to save Jordan US$600 million per year in energy costs. In 2018, the owners of the Tamar and Leviathan fields announced that they are negotiating an agreement with a consortium of Egyptian firms for the supply of up to 64 BCM of gas over 10 years valued at up to US$15 billion. In early 2012 the Israeli cabinet announced plans to set up a sovereign wealth fund (called &quot;the Israeli Citizens&#x27; Fund&quot;).

====Electricity====


Since the founding of the state through the mid-2010s decade, the state-owned utility, Israel Electric Corporation (IEC) had an effective monopoly on power generation in the country. In 2010 the company sold 52,037 GWh of electricity. Until the mid-2010s the country also faced a persistently low operating reserve, which is mostly the result of Israel being an &quot;electricity island&quot;. Most countries have the capability of relying on power drawn from producers in adjacent countries in the event of a power shortage. Israel&#x27;s grid however, is unconnected to those of neighboring countries. This is mostly due to political reasons but also to the considerably less-developed nature of the power systems of Jordan and Egypt, whose systems constantly struggle to meet domestic demand and whose per-capita electric generation is less than one fifth that of Israel&#x27;s. Nevertheless, while operating reserves in Israel were low, the country possessed sufficient generation and transmission capacity to meet domestic electricity needs and unlike in the countries surrounding it, rolling blackouts have historically been quite rare, even at periods of extreme demand.

Facing the increasing demand for electricity and concerned about the low reserve situation, the government of Israel began taking steps to increase the supply of electricity and operating reserve, as well to reduce the monopoly position of the IEC and increase competition in the electricity market starting in the second half of the 2000s decade. It instructed the IEC to construct several new power stations and encouraged private investment in the generation sector. By 2015, the IEC&#x27;s share of total nationwide installed electric generation capacity had fallen to about 75%, with the company then possessing an installed generation capacity of about 13.6 gigawatts (GW). Since 2010, Independent Power Producers have constructed three new gas-fired combined cycle power stations with a total generation capacity of about 2.2 GW, while various industrial concerns constructed on-premises cogeneration facilities with a total electricity output of about 1 GW, and which are licensed by the electric authority to sell surplus electricity to the national grid at competitive rates. Also under construction is a 300 MW pumped storage facility, with two more in planning, plus several solar-powered plants.

In addition to the above steps, Israel and Cyprus are considering implementing the proposed EuroAsia Interconnector project. This consists of laying a 2000MW HVDC undersea power cable between them and between Cyprus and Greece, thus connecting Israel to the greater European power grid. If carried out, this will allow a further increase in the country&#x27;s operating reserve as well as sell surplus electricity abroad.

In 2016, total nationwide electricity production was 67.2 GWh, of which 55.2% was generated using natural gas and 43.8% using coal – the first time the share of electricity production using natural gas exceeded that generated using coal.

====Solar power====
Solar power in Israel and the Israeli solar energy industry has a history that dates to the founding of the country. In the 1950s, Levi Yissar developed a solar water heater to help assuage an energy shortage in the new country. By 1967 around one in twenty households heated their water with the sun and 50,000 solar heaters had been sold. With the 1973 oil crisis, Harry Zvi Tabor, the father of Israel&#x27;s solar industry, developed the prototype solar water heater that is now used in over 90% of Israeli homes.

===Industrial manufacturing===
Israel has a large industrial capacity. It has a well-developed chemical industry with many of its products aimed at the export market. Most of the chemical plants are located in Ramat Hovav, the Haifa Bay area and near the Dead Sea. Israel Chemicals is one of the largest fertilizer and chemical companies in Israel and its subsidiary, the Dead Sea Works in Sdom is the world&#x27;s fourth-largest producer and supplier of potash products. The company also produces other products such as magnesium chloride, industrial salts, de-icers, bath salts, table salt, and raw materials for the cosmetic industry. Industrial production of metals, machinery and electrical equipment, construction materials, consumer goods, and textiles, as well as food processing also form a significant part of the manufacturing sector. Machinery and equipment manufactured in Israel includes computer equipment, medical equipment, agricultural equipment, and robots. Israel has a successful semiconductor device fabrication industry, with several semiconductor manufacturing facilities in the country.

One of the country&#x27;s largest employers is Israel Aerospace Industries which produces mainly aviation, space, and defense products. In 2017 the company had an order backlog of 11.4 billion US dollars. There are numerous other aerospace companies. Israeli aerospace companies are primarily sub-suppliers, focusing on fields such as machining, electronic systems and components, and composite materials. Israel is a major manufacturer and exporter of unmanned aerial vehicles. Israel also has a significant pharmaceutical industry and is home to Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, one of the world&#x27;s largest pharmaceutical companies, which employed 40,000 people as of 2011. It specializes in generic and proprietary pharmaceuticals and active pharmaceutical ingredients. It is the largest generic drug manufacturer in the world and one of the 15 largest pharmaceutical companies worldwide. In addition, Israel also has a shipbuilding industry through the company Israel Shipyards, which has one of the largest shipbuilding and repair facilities in the Eastern Mediterranean. For the civilian market, it builds merchant ships and other civilian watercraft as well as machinery for ports and heavy industries. It also builds naval craft for the defense market.

====Diamond industry====

Israel is one of the world&#x27;s three major centers for polished diamonds, alongside Belgium and India. Israel&#x27;s net polished diamond exports slid 22.8 percent in 2012 as polished diamond exports fell to $5.56 billion from $7.2 billion in 2011. Net exports of rough diamonds dropped 20.1 percent to $2.8 billion and net exports of polished diamonds slipped 24.9 percent to $4.3 billion, while net rough diamond imports dropped 12.9 percent to $3.8 billion. Net exports and imports dropped during the Great Recession, particularly within the Eurozone, affected by the European sovereign-debt crisis, and the United States. The United States is the largest market accounting for 36% of overall export market for polished diamonds while Hong Kong remains at second with 28 percent and Belgium at 8 percent coming in third. , cut diamonds were Israel&#x27;s largest export product, comprising 23.2% of all exports.

====Defense contracting====

Israel is one of the world&#x27;s major exporters of military equipment, accounting for 10% of the world total in 2007. Three Israeli companies were listed on the 2010 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute index of the world&#x27;s top 100 arms-producing and military service companies: Elbit Systems, Israel Aerospace Industries and RAFAEL. The Defense industry in Israel is a strategically important sector and a large employer within the country. It is also a major player in the global arms market and is the 11th largest arms exporter in the world as of 2012. Total arms transfer agreements topped 12.9 billion between 2004 and 2011. There are over 150 active defense companies based in the country with combined revenues of more than US$3.5 billion annually. Israeli defense equipment exports have reached 7 billion U.S. dollars in 2012, making it a 20 percent increase from the amount of defense-related exports in 2011. Much of the exports are sold to the United States and Europe. Other major regions that purchase Israeli defense equipment include Southeast Asia and Latin America. India is also major country for Israeli arms exports and has remained Israel&#x27;s largest arms market in the world. Israel is considered to be the leading UAV exporter in the world. According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Israeli defense companies were behind 41% of all drones exported in 2001–2011. Israel&#x27;s defense exports in 2021 reached US$11.2 billion in sales. Exports to Arab countries that joined the Abraham Accords made up 7% of all Israeli defense exports.

===Tourism===

Israel is a major tourist destination, especially for those of Jewish ancestry, with 4.55 million foreign tourists visiting the country in 2019 (about one tourist per two Israelis), yielding a 25% growth since 2016 and contributed ₪20 billion to the economy, making it an all-time record at that time. The most popular paid visited site is Masada.

==External trade==
In 2016, Israeli goods exports totaled US$55.8 billion. It imported US$61.9 billion worth of goods in the same year. In 2017 total exports (goods and services) amounted to US$102.3 billion, while imports totaled $96.7 billion.
Israel usually posts a modest trade deficit in goods. Its main goods imports consist of raw materials, crude oil, production inputs and finished consumer goods. Most of its exports are high-value-added items such as electronic components and other high-technology equipment, tools, and machinery, cut diamonds, refined petrochemicals, and pharmaceuticals. It normally posts a substantial trade surplus in services thanks to tourism and service industries such as software development, engineering services, and biomedical and scientific research and development. Therefore, overall external trade is positive, contributing to a significant current account surplus which as of 2017 stood at 4.7% of GDP.

The United States is Israel&#x27;s largest trading partner, and Israel is the United States&#x27; 26th-largest trading partner; two-way trade totaled some $24.5 billion in 2010, up from $12.7 billion in 1997. The principal U.S. exports to Israel include computers, integrated circuits, aircraft parts and other defense equipment, wheat, and automobiles. Israel&#x27;s chief exports to the U.S. include cut diamonds, jewelry, integrated circuits, printing machinery, and telecommunications equipment. The two countries signed a free trade agreement (FTA) in 1985 that progressively eliminated tariffs on most goods traded between the two countries over the following ten years. An agricultural trade accord was signed in November 1996, which addressed the remaining goods not covered in the FTA. Some non-tariff barriers and tariffs on goods remain, however. Israel also has trade and cooperation agreements in place with the European Union and Canada, and is seeking to conclude such agreements with a number of other countries, including Turkey, Jordan and several countries in Eastern Europe.

In regional terms, the European Union is the top destination for Israeli exports. In the four-month period between October 2011 and January 2012, Israel exported goods totalling $5 billion to the EU – amounting to 35% of Israel&#x27;s overall exports. During the same period, Israeli exports to East Asia and the Far East totaled some $3.1 billion.

Until 1995, Israel&#x27;s trade with the Arab world was minimal due to the Arab League boycott, which was begun against the Jewish community of Palestine in 1945. Arab nations not only refused to have direct trade with Israel (the primary boycott), but they also refused to do business with any corporation that operated in Israel (secondary boycott), or any corporation that did business with a corporation that did business with Israel (tertiary boycott).

In 2013, commercial trade between Israel and the Palestinian territories were valued at US$20 billion annually.

In 2012, ten companies were responsible for 47.7% of Israel&#x27;s exports. These companies were Intel Israel, Elbit Systems, Oil Refineries Ltd, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Iscar, Israel Chemicals, Makhteshim Agan, Paz Oil Company, Israel Aerospace Industries and the Indigo division of Hewlett-Packard. The Bank of Israel and Israel&#x27;s Export Institute have warned that the country is too dependent on a small number of exporters.

===Export destinations and import origins===

==Rankings==
The Global Competitiveness Report of 2016 to 2017 ranked Israel as having the world&#x27;s second most innovative economy. It was also ranked 19th among 189 world nations on the UN&#x27;s Human Development Index. As of 2018, Israel ranks 20th out of 133 countries on the economic complexity index. The IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook of 2016 ranked Israel&#x27;s economy as world 21st most competitive out of the 61 economies surveyed. The Israeli economy was ranked as the world&#x27;s most durable economy in the face of crises, and was also ranked first in the rate research and development center investments. The Bank of Israel was ranked first among central banks for its efficient functioning, up from the 8th place in 2009. Israel was ranked first also in its supply of skilled manpower. Israeli companies, particularly in the high-tech area, have enjoyed considerable success raising money on Wall Street and other world financial markets: Israel ranked second among foreign countries in the number of its companies listed on U.S. stock exchanges.

Having moved away from the socialist economic model since the mid-1980s and early 1990s, Israel has made dramatic moves toward the free-market capitalist paradigm. , Israel&#x27;s economic freedom score is 74.0, making its economy the 26th freest in the 2020 Index of Economic Freedom. Israel ranks 35th on the World Bank&#x27;s ease of doing business index. Israel&#x27;s economic competitiveness is helped by strong protection of property rights, relatively low corruption levels, and high openness to global trade and investment. Income and corporate tax rates remain relatively high. , Israel ranks 35th out of 179 countries in Transparency International&#x27;s Corruption Perceptions Index. Bribery and other forms of corruption are illegal in Israel, which is a signatory to the OECD Bribery Convention since 2008.

In April 2024, one of the three leading US credit rating agencies, Fitch, issued a warning that the Israel–Hamas war could result in a significant decline in Israel&#x27;s credit metrics. In August 2024, Fitch downgraded Israel&#x27;s credit rating. The credit rating of Israel was downgraded to Baa1 by another agency, Moody&#x27;s, in the upcoming month. In October 2024, Israel was also downgraded by the third agency, S&amp;P.

==See also==
* Economy of the Middle East
* Energy Triangle
* Fishing industry in Israel
* List of companies of Israel
* List of largest companies in Israel
* Ministry of Finance (Israel)
* Privatization in Israel
* Standard of living in Israel
* Taxation in Israel
* Tel Aviv Stock Exchange
* Trajtenberg Committee
* Transport in Israel

==References==
==Further reading==
* Argov, Eyal. &quot;The Development of Education in Israel and its Contribution to Long-Term Growth&quot; (No. 2016.15. Bank of Israel, 2016) online .
* Shalev, Michael. &quot;Labour and the Political Economy in Israel&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992.
* Ben-Porath, Yoram ed. &quot;The Israeli Economy: Maturing through Crises&quot;. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986.
* Chill, Dan. &quot;The Arab Boycott of Israel: Economic Aggression and World Reaction&quot;. New York: Praeger, 1976.
* Kanovsky, Eliyahu. &quot;The Economy of the Israeli Kibbutz&quot;. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1966.
* Klein, Michael. &quot;A Gemara of the Israel Economy&quot;. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2005.
* Michaely, Michael. &quot;Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Israel&quot;. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.
* .
* Senor, Dan and Singer, Saul, &quot;Start-up Nation: The Story of Israel&#x27;s Economic Miracle&quot;, Hachette, New York (2009) 
* Rubner, Alex. &quot;The Economy of Israel: A Critical Account of the First Ten Years&quot;. New York: Frederick A Praeger, 1960.
* Maman, Daniel and Rosenhek, Zeev. &quot;The Israeli Central Bank: Political Economy: Global Logics &amp; Local Actors&quot;. Routledge, 2011.
* &quot;The Global Political Economy of Israel&quot; 

==External links==
* Israel and the IMF , International Monetary Fund
* World Bank Trade Summary Statistics Israel 2012 
* .
* Tariffs applied by Israel as provided by ITC&#x27;s ITC Market Access Map, an online database of customs tariffs and market requirements
* Investigative Dashboard List of Israel Company Registries
* Hebrew documents about the recession in Israel 1966–1967:
* ישראל – הסיפור המתועד: &quot;האחרון שיוצא שיכבה את האור&quot; – 50 שנה למיתון 1966 – 1967 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1379800" start="4" end="21" title="Economy of Israel" label="economy of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="34" end="43" title="Economic development" label="developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="44" end="63" title="Market economy" label="free-market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="83" end="89" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682093" start="157" end="170" title="Welfare in Israel" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="190" end="198" title="Military of Israel" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q65455964" start="217" end="243" title="Israel and nuclear power" label="nuclear-weapons capability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731619" start="256" end="269" title="nuclear triad" label="nuclear triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426839" start="334" end="356" title="Silicon Wadi" label="high-technology sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574649" start="523" end="546" title="List of Israeli companies quoted on the Nasdaq" label="NASDAQ-listed companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="765" end="768" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="770" end="776" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="778" end="793" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="795" end="808" title="Cisco Systems" label="Cisco Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="810" end="818" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="823" end="831" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011676" start="844" end="882" title="List of multinational companies with research and development centres in Israel" label="R&amp;amp;D centers throughout the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768194" start="900" end="913" title="List of countries by past and projected GDP (nominal)" label="IMF estimated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050268" start="1129" end="1153" title="Israel diamond industry" label="Israeli diamond industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q930442" start="1193" end="1208" title="diamond cutting" label="diamond cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404890" start="1568" end="1602" title="Natural gas in Israel" label="natural gas reserves off its coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556771" start="1611" end="1640" title="Solar power in Israel" label="Israeli solar energy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195588" start="1722" end="1738" title="Higher education in Israel" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920426" start="2318" end="2342" title="Venture capital in Israel" label="venture capital industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426839" start="2387" end="2399" title="Silicon Wadi" label="Silicon Wadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="2454" end="2477" title="Silicon Valley" label="Californian counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="2748" end="2765" title="Social democracy" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="2831" end="2842" title="Free market" label="free-market"/>
<link wikidata="Q645029" start="2869" end="2880" title="Economic liberalization" label="liberalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="2952" end="2966" title="Lists of countries by GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="3019" end="3028" title="Developed country" label="developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="3053" end="3062" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q317617" start="3092" end="3117" title="Foreign exchange reserves" label="foreign-exchange reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107550" start="3155" end="3171" title="List of countries by wealth per adult" label="wealth per adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037142" start="3210" end="3237" title="List of countries by financial assets per capita" label="financial assets per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858279" start="3322" end="3353" title="List of countries by number of billionaires" label="billionaires in the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="3501" end="3514" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="3821" end="3825" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536928" start="3858" end="3878" title="free trade agreement" label="free trade agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="3928" end="3959" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4264" start="4113" end="4121" title="Mercosur" label="Mercosur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970316" start="4160" end="4181" title="Mandate for Palestine" label="Mandate for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="4613" end="4621" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091321" start="4678" end="4694" title="Moshe Novomeysky" label="Moshe Novomeysky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904092" start="4773" end="4787" title="Dead Sea Works" label="Dead Sea Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q475380" start="4837" end="4853" title="Pinhas Rutenberg" label="Pinhas Rutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915481" start="4998" end="5025" title="Israel Electric Corporation" label="Israel Electric Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338646" start="5431" end="5448" title="ATA (Israeli company)" label="Ata textile plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q152602" start="5452" end="5462" title="Kiryat Ata" label="Kiryat Ata"/>
<link wikidata="Q213203" start="6050" end="6061" title="Levant Fair" label="Levant Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="6232" end="6253" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910546" start="6466" end="6475" title="Austerity in Israel" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="6582" end="6594" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q660521" start="6605" end="6614" title="Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany" label="agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="6855" end="6860" title="Deutsche Mark" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328442" start="7135" end="7162" title="East Germany–Israel relations" label="formal diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="7168" end="7180" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603758" start="7223" end="7235" title="State of Israel Bonds" label="Israel Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="7240" end="7248" title="American Jews" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995" start="7253" end="7266" title="History of the Jews in Canada" label="Canadian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q607505" start="7624" end="7650" title="United States aid to Israel" label="aid from the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931760" start="7966" end="7984" title="Orot Rabin" label="Hadera power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904092" start="7990" end="8004" title="Dead Sea Works" label="Dead Sea Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q890229" start="8010" end="8032" title="National Water Carrier" label="National Water Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="8034" end="8038" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="8054" end="8059" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171639" start="8061" end="8067" title="Ashdod" label="Ashdod"/>
<link wikidata="Q134762" start="8073" end="8078" title="Eilat" label="Eilat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190873" start="8080" end="8092" title="desalination" label="desalination"/>
<link wikidata="Q848509" start="8248" end="8255" title="Lachish" label="Lachish"/>
<link wikidata="Q60956" start="8257" end="8265" title="Ashkelon" label="Ashkelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="8271" end="8276" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="8281" end="8288" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q930442" start="8654" end="8662" title="diamond cutting" label="polished"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268679" start="8973" end="8976" title="Qualifying Industrial Zone" label="QIZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="9140" end="9159" title="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer" label="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q420822" start="9161" end="9168" title="Gap (clothing retailer)" label="The Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q332477" start="9170" end="9192" title="Victoria&amp;#x27;s Secret" label="Victoria&amp;#x27;s Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="9194" end="9201" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="9203" end="9208" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q296647" start="9210" end="9222" title="Ralph Lauren" label="Ralph Lauren"/>
<link wikidata="Q214800" start="9224" end="9236" title="Calvin Klein" label="Calvin Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q464497" start="9242" end="9253" title="Donna Karan" label="Donna Karan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="9792" end="9806" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581056" start="9959" end="9976" title="Bank stock crisis (Israel 1983)" label="Bank stock crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582343" start="10182" end="10229" title="Economic Stabilization Plan (Israel 1985)" label="economic stabilization plan implemented in 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="10569" end="10587" title="Aliyah" label="Jewish immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10636" end="10640" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890021" start="10659" end="10698" title="Russian immigration to Israel in the 1990s" label="over one million new citizens to Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141816" start="10992" end="11005" title="Israeli–Palestinian peace process" label="peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343802" start="11024" end="11041" title="Madrid Conference of 1991" label="Madrid conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="11142" end="11148" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="11249" end="11270" title="dot-com bubble" label="global dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="11351" end="11366" title="Second Intifada" label="Second Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333668" start="11762" end="11792" title="Economy of East Asia" label="growing countries of East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="12389" end="12407" title="Foreign direct investment" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3580673" start="12552" end="12587" title="Manufacturers Association of Israel" label="Manufacturers Association of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="12599" end="12614" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q746687" start="13029" end="13044" title="Current account (balance of payments)" label="current account"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="13247" end="13267" title="late-2000s recession" label="late-2000s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q848507" start="14036" end="14047" title="Commercial bank" label="depository-"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="14052" end="14070" title="Investment banking" label="Investment banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982090" start="14095" end="14118" title="Decline of the Glass–Steagall Act" label="the then-opposite trend"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="14461" end="14465" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902770" start="14955" end="14981" title="Telecommunications in Israel" label="telecommunication industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="15286" end="15305" title="Haredi" label="Ultra-Orthodox Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q829714" start="15425" end="15455" title="employment-to-population ratio" label="employment-to-population ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350180" start="15469" end="15485" title="dependency ratio" label="dependency ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q244411" start="15521" end="15535" title="Bank of Israel" label="Bank of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q447236" start="15537" end="15552" title="Stanley Fischer" label="Stanley Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="15741" end="15752" title="Haredi Jews" label="Haredi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="15761" end="15774" title="Israeli Arabs" label="Israeli Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="16085" end="16106" title="2023 Israel–Hamas war" label="2023 Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q871325" start="16446" end="16459" title="Fitch Ratings" label="Fitch Ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q244411" start="16504" end="16518" title="Bank of Israel" label="Bank of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123285238" start="16741" end="16755" title="Red Sea crisis" label="Red Sea crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734621" start="17607" end="17618" title="Agriculture in Israel" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057127" start="18513" end="18519" title="Agricultural technology" label="AgTech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132207" start="19271" end="19289" title="Business incubator" label="business-incubator"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="20208" end="20234" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="20323" end="20347" title="mergers and acquisitions" label="mergers and acquisitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="21164" end="21177" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q813018" start="21179" end="21191" title="Bear Stearns" label="Bear Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q66048" start="21193" end="21206" title="Deutsche Bank" label="Deutsche Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="21208" end="21217" title="JP Morgan" label="JP Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002423" start="21219" end="21245" title="Credit Swiss First Boston" label="Credit Suisse First Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q334122" start="21247" end="21260" title="Merrill Lynch" label="Merrill Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933412" start="21262" end="21269" title="CalPERS" label="CalPERS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455043" start="21271" end="21300" title="Ontario Teachers Pension Plan" label="Ontario Teachers Pension Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212235" start="21306" end="21309" title="American International Group" label="AIG"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="21353" end="21363" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q131309" start="21584" end="21585" title="Israeli new shekel" label="₪"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693972" start="24034" end="24055" title="Agricultural research in Israel" label="agricultural sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556771" start="24117" end="24129" title="Solar power in Israel" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983877" start="24640" end="24648" title="unicorn (finance)" label="unicorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="24932" end="24938" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="24940" end="24949" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="24955" end="24960" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="24986" end="24999" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="25310" end="25318" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="25338" end="25346" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="25539" end="25561" title="Silicon Valley" label="California counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="25578" end="25594" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="25671" end="25685" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149741" start="25748" end="25765" title="startup ecosystem" label="startup ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="25814" end="25828" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155658" start="25952" end="25967" title="Start-up Nation" label="Start-Up Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="26229" end="26250" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="26566" end="26586" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025536" start="26601" end="26607" title="DevOps" label="DevOps"/>
<link wikidata="Q620167" start="26609" end="26617" title="Back-end (computing)" label="back-end"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374463" start="26619" end="26631" title="data science" label="data science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="26633" end="26649" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="26654" end="26677" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="26953" end="26960" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051832" start="27028" end="27038" title="offshoring" label="offshoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382269" start="27073" end="27111" title="Council for Higher Education in Israel" label="Council for Higher Education in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="27477" end="27485" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q38423" start="27490" end="27501" title="diesel fuel" label="diesel fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="27699" end="27708" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="27732" end="27743" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="27871" end="27882" title="hydrocarbon exploration" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="28275" end="28278" title="Liquefied natural gas" label="LNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302730" start="28344" end="28367" title="Arish–Ashkelon pipeline" label="Arish–Ashkelon pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915481" start="28394" end="28421" title="Israel Electric Corporation" label="Israel Electric Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60956" start="28693" end="28701" title="Ashkelon" label="Ashkelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="28938" end="28972" title="Egyptian Revolution of 2011" label="fall of the Mubarak regime in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499333" start="29012" end="29017" title="Tamar gas field" label="Tamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164249" start="29024" end="29039" title="proven reserves" label="proven reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="29136" end="29141" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q794981" start="29363" end="29372" title="Leviathan gas field" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131309" start="29682" end="29683" title="Israeli new shekel" label="₪"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="30780" end="30801" title="sovereign wealth fund" label="sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q24682007" start="30820" end="30847" title="Israeli Citizens&amp;#x27; Fund" label="Israeli Citizens&amp;#x27; Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915481" start="30966" end="30993" title="Israel Electric Corporation" label="Israel Electric Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438438" start="31969" end="31985" title="rolling blackout" label="rolling blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q676081" start="32338" end="32356" title="electricity market" label="electricity market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017033" start="32750" end="32776" title="Independent Power Producer" label="Independent Power Producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q900729" start="32815" end="32829" title="combined cycle" label="combined cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221620" start="32953" end="32965" title="cogeneration" label="cogeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="33180" end="33194" title="Pumped-storage hydroelectricity" label="pumped storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="33311" end="33317" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411505" start="33360" end="33383" title="EuroAsia Interconnector" label="EuroAsia Interconnector"/>
<link wikidata="Q370607" start="33426" end="33430" title="high-voltage direct current" label="HVDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117949" start="33431" end="33451" title="submarine power cable" label="undersea power cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="33512" end="33518" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535557" start="34081" end="34092" title="Levi Yissar" label="Levi Yissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="34300" end="34315" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11180250" start="34317" end="34332" title="Harry Zvi Tabor" label="Harry Zvi Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000978" start="34679" end="34690" title="Ramat Hovav" label="Ramat Hovav"/>
<link wikidata="Q63767" start="34696" end="34705" title="Haifa Bay" label="Haifa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="34724" end="34732" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q903957" start="34734" end="34750" title="Israel Chemicals" label="Israel Chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904092" start="34841" end="34855" title="Dead Sea Works" label="Dead Sea Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q180141" start="34859" end="34863" title="Sdom" label="Sdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564271" start="34924" end="34930" title="potash" label="potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q265414" start="34990" end="35008" title="magnesium chloride" label="magnesium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="35470" end="35502" title="semiconductor device fabrication" label="semiconductor device fabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q876017" start="35629" end="35656" title="Israel Aerospace Industries" label="Israel Aerospace Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="36035" end="36058" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q898750" start="36130" end="36160" title="Teva Pharmaceutical Industries" label="Teva Pharmaceutical Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q506319" start="36279" end="36286" title="generic drug" label="generic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085829" start="36550" end="36566" title="Israel Shipyards" label="Israel Shipyards"/>
<link wikidata="Q930442" start="36931" end="36939" title="Diamond cutting" label="polished"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="36940" end="36948" title="diamonds" label="diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="37380" end="37395" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="37447" end="37477" title="European sovereign-debt crisis" label="European sovereign-debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140407" start="37989" end="38037" title="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute" label="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325369" start="38119" end="38132" title="Elbit Systems" label="Elbit Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q876017" start="38134" end="38161" title="Israel Aerospace Industries" label="Israel Aerospace Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q154610" start="38166" end="38172" title="RAFAEL" label="RAFAEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="38890" end="38904" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="38909" end="38922" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="38924" end="38929" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="39081" end="39084" title="UAV" label="UAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140407" start="39125" end="39173" title="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute" label="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q99495661" start="39368" end="39383" title="Abraham Accords" label="Abraham Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="39506" end="39512" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q131309" start="39674" end="39675" title="Israeli new shekel" label="₪"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="39775" end="39779" title="tourist attraction" label="site"/>
<link wikidata="Q186312" start="39783" end="39789" title="Masada" label="Masada"/>
<link wikidata="Q930442" start="40335" end="40338" title="Diamond cutting" label="cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q746687" start="40678" end="40693" title="Current account (balance of payments)" label="current account"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="41167" end="41185" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="41269" end="41279" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="41334" end="41340" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="41667" end="41681" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="41781" end="41787" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="42133" end="42142" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="42151" end="42159" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="42229" end="42239" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911165" start="42263" end="42282" title="Arab League boycott" label="Arab League boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="42696" end="42719" title="Palestinian territories" label="Palestinian territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="42857" end="42862" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325369" start="42871" end="42884" title="Elbit Systems" label="Elbit Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q636231" start="42886" end="42904" title="Oil Refineries Ltd" label="Oil Refineries Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q898750" start="42906" end="42926" title="Teva Pharmaceuticals" label="Teva Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973793" start="42928" end="42933" title="Iscar" label="Iscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q903957" start="42935" end="42951" title="Israel Chemicals" label="Israel Chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q903943" start="42953" end="42968" title="Makhteshim Agan" label="Makhteshim Agan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211731" start="42970" end="42985" title="Paz Oil Company" label="Paz Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q876017" start="42987" end="43014" title="Israel Aerospace Industries" label="Israel Aerospace Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q694352" start="43023" end="43057" title="Indigo Digital Press" label="Indigo division of Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067257" start="43255" end="43284" title="Global Competitiveness Report" label="Global Competitiveness Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q176793" start="43393" end="43407" title="List of countries by Human Development Index" label="19th among 189"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="43439" end="43462" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333445" start="43522" end="43547" title="economic complexity index" label="economic complexity index"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="44156" end="44167" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="44571" end="44596" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="Index of Economic Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="44623" end="44633" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200749" start="44641" end="44669" title="ease of doing business index" label="ease of doing business index"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="44744" end="44759" title="property rights" label="property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="44944" end="44970" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="44978" end="45006" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q626826" start="45097" end="45120" title="OECD Bribery Convention" label="OECD Bribery Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q871325" start="45201" end="45206" title="Fitch Ratings" label="Fitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="45234" end="45250" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159021" start="45454" end="45466" title="Moody&amp;#x27;s Ratings" label="Moody&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q106158" start="45556" end="45563" title="S&amp;amp;P Global Ratings" label="S&amp;amp;P"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578730" start="45581" end="45607" title="Economy of the Middle East" label="Economy of the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377001" start="45610" end="45625" title="Energy Triangle" label="Energy Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606662" start="45628" end="45654" title="Fishing industry in Israel" label="Fishing industry in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519062" start="45657" end="45684" title="List of companies of Israel" label="List of companies of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q66789390" start="45687" end="45722" title="List of largest companies in Israel" label="List of largest companies in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707870" start="45725" end="45753" title="Ministry of Finance (Israel)" label="Ministry of Finance (Israel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246285" start="45756" end="45779" title="Privatization in Israel" label="Privatization in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13577788" start="45782" end="45810" title="Standard of living in Israel" label="Standard of living in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689539" start="45813" end="45831" title="Taxation in Israel" label="Taxation in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507974" start="45834" end="45857" title="Tel Aviv Stock Exchange" label="Tel Aviv Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256819" start="45860" end="45881" title="Trajtenberg Committee" label="Trajtenberg Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369657" start="45884" end="45903" title="Transport in Israel" label="Transport in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="46299" end="46301" title="Massachusetts" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214365" start="46840" end="46850" title="Dan Senor" label="Senor, Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427341" start="46855" end="46867" title="Saul Singer" label="Singer, Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155658" start="46875" end="46890" title="Start-up Nation" label="Start-up Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="47342" end="47369" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14696" wikidata="Q223732" url="?curid=14696" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence">
<text>The Israeli Declaration of Independence, formally the Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel (), was proclaimed on 14 May 1948 (5 Iyar 5708), at the end of the civil war phase and beginning of the international phase of the 1948 Palestine war, by David Ben-Gurion, the Executive Head of the World Zionist Organization and Chairman of the Jewish Agency for Palestine.

It declared the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine (or the Land of Israel in the Jewish tradition), to be known as the State of Israel, which would come into effect on termination of the British Mandate at midnight that day. The event is celebrated annually in Israel as Independence Day, a national holiday on 5 Iyar of every year according to the Hebrew calendar.

==Background==
The possibility of a Jewish homeland in Palestine had been a goal of Zionist organisations since the late 19th century. In 1917 British Foreign Secretary Arthur Balfour stated in a letter to British Jewish community leader Walter, Lord Rothschild that:

His Majesty&#x27;s government view with favour the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavours to facilitate the achievement of this object, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country.

Through this letter, which became known as the Balfour Declaration, British government policy officially endorsed Zionism. After World War I, the United Kingdom was given a mandate for Palestine, which it had conquered from the Ottomans during the war. In 1937 the Peel Commission suggested partitioning Mandate Palestine into an Arab state and a Jewish state, though the proposal was rejected as unworkable by the government and was at least partially to blame for the renewal of the 1936–39 Arab revolt.
In the face of increasing violence after World War II, the British handed the issue over to the recently established United Nations. The result was Resolution 181(II), a plan to partition Palestine into &quot;Independent Arab and Jewish States and the Special International Regime for the City of Jerusalem&quot;. The Jewish state was to receive around 56% of the land area of Mandate Palestine, encompassing 82% of the Jewish population, though it would be separated from Jerusalem. The plan was accepted by most of the Jewish population, but rejected by much of the Arab populace. On 29 November 1947, the resolution to recommend to the &quot;United Kingdom, as the mandatory Power for Palestine, and to all other Members of the United Nations the adoption and implementation, with regard to the future government of Palestine, of the Plan of Partition with Economic Union&quot; was put to a vote in the United Nations General Assembly.
The result was 33 to 13 in favour of the resolution, with 10 abstentions. Resolution 181(II): &quot;PART I: Future constitution and government of Palestine: A. TERMINATION OF MANDATE, PARTITION AND INDEPENDENCE: Clause 3&quot; provides:Independent Arab and Jewish States and the Special International Regime for the City of Jerusalem, ... shall come into existence in Palestine two months after the evacuation of the armed forces of the mandatory Power has been completed but in any case not later than 1 October 1948.

The Arab countries (all of which had opposed the plan) proposed to query the International Court of Justice on the competence of the General Assembly to partition a country, but the resolution was rejected.

===Drafting the text===
The first draft of the declaration was made by Zvi Berenson, the legal advisor of the Histadrut trade union and later a Justice of the Supreme Court, at the request of Pinchas Rosen. A revised second draft was made by three lawyers, Mordechai Baham, and , and was framed by a committee including David Remez, Pinchas Rosen, Haim-Moshe Shapira, Moshe Sharett and Aharon Zisling. A second committee meeting, which included David Ben-Gurion, Yehuda Leib Maimon, Sharett and Zisling produced the final text.

===Minhelet HaAm Vote===
On 12 May 1948, the Minhelet HaAm (, lit. &quot;People&#x27;s Administration&quot;) was convened to vote on declaring independence. Three of the thirteen members were absent, with Yehuda Leib Maimon and Yitzhak Gruenbaum being blocked in besieged Jerusalem, while Yitzhak-Meir Levin was in the United States.

The meeting started at 13:45 and ended after midnight. The decision was between accepting the American proposal for a truce, or declaring independence. The latter option was put to a vote, with six of the ten members present supporting it:
*For: David Ben-Gurion, Moshe Sharett (Mapai); Peretz Bernstein (General Zionists); Haim-Moshe Shapira (Hapoel HaMizrachi); Mordechai Bentov, Aharon Zisling (Mapam).
*Against: Eliezer Kaplan, David Remez (Mapai); Pinchas Rosen (New Aliyah Party); Bechor-Shalom Sheetrit (Sephardim and Oriental Communities).

Chaim Weizmann, the Chairman of the World Zionist Organization, and soon to be first President of Israel, endorsed the decision, after reportedly asking &quot;What are they waiting for, the idiots?&quot;

===Final wording===
The draft text was submitted for approval to a meeting of Moetzet HaAm at the JNF building in Tel Aviv on 14 May. The meeting started at 13:50 and ended at 15:00, an hour before the declaration was due to be made. Despite ongoing disagreements, members of the Council unanimously voted in favour of the final text. During the process, there were two major debates, centering on the issues of borders and religion.

====Borders====
The borders were not specified in the Declaration, although its 14th paragraph indicated a readiness to cooperate in the implementation of the UN Partition Plan. The original draft had declared that the borders would be decided by the UN partition plan. While this was supported by Rosen and Bechor-Shalom Sheetrit, it was opposed by Ben-Gurion and Zisling, with Ben-Gurion stating, &quot;We accepted the UN Resolution, but the Arabs did not. They are preparing to make war on us. If we defeat them and capture western Galilee or territory on both sides of the road to Jerusalem, these areas will become part of the state. Why should we obligate ourselves to accept boundaries that in any case the Arabs don&#x27;t accept?&quot; The inclusion of the designation of borders in the text was dropped after the provisional government of Israel, the Minhelet HaAm, voted 5–4 against it. The Revisionists, committed to a Jewish state on both sides of the Jordan River (that is, including Transjordan), wanted the phrase &quot;within its historic borders&quot; included, but were unsuccessful.

==== Religion ====

The second major issue was over the inclusion of God in the last section of the document, with the draft using the phrase &quot;and placing our trust in the Almighty&quot;. The two rabbis, Shapira and Yehuda Leib Maimon, argued for its inclusion, saying that it could not be omitted, with Shapira supporting the wording &quot;God of Israel&quot; or &quot;the Almighty and Redeemer of Israel&quot;. It was strongly opposed by Zisling, a member of the secularist Mapam. In the end the phrase &quot;Rock of Israel&quot; was used, which could be interpreted as either referring to God, or the land of Eretz Israel, Ben-Gurion saying &quot;Each of us, in his own way, believes in the &#x27;Rock of Israel&#x27; as he conceives it. I should like to make one request: Don&#x27;t let me put this phrase to a vote.&quot; Although its use was still opposed by Zisling, the phrase was accepted without a vote.

==== Name ====
The writers also had to decide on the name for the new state. Eretz Israel, Ever (from the name Eber), Judea, and Zion were all suggested, as were Ziona, Ivriya and Herzliya. Judea and Zion were rejected because, according to the partition plan, Jerusalem (Zion) and most of the Judaean Mountains would be outside the new state. Ben-Gurion put forward &quot;Israel&quot; and it passed by a vote of 6–3. Official documents released in April 2013 by the State Archive of Israel show that days before the establishment of the State of Israel in May 1948, officials were still debating about what the new country would be called in Arabic: Palestine (, &quot;Filasṭīn&quot;), Zion (, &quot;Ṣahyūn&quot;) or Israel (, &quot;&#x27;Isrā’īl&quot;). Two assumptions were made: &quot;That an Arab state was about to be established alongside the Jewish one in keeping with the UN&#x27;s partition resolution the year before, and that the Jewish state would include a large Arab minority whose feelings needed to be taken into account&quot;. In the end, the officials rejected the name Palestine because they thought that would be the name of the new Arab state and could cause confusion so they opted for the most straightforward option of Israel.

==== Other items ====
At the meeting on 14 May, several other members of Moetzet HaAm suggested additions to the document. Meir Vilner wanted it to denounce the British Mandate and military but Sharett said it was out of place. Meir Argov pushed to mention the Displaced Persons camps in Europe and to guarantee freedom of language. Ben-Gurion agreed with the latter but noted that Hebrew should be the main language of the state.

The debate over wording did not end completely even after the Declaration had been made. Declaration signer Meir David Loewenstein later claimed, &quot;It ignored our sole right to Eretz Israel, which is based on the covenant of the Lord with Abraham, our father, and repeated promises in the Tanach. It ignored the aliya of the Ramban and the students of the Vilna Gaon and the Ba&#x27;al Shem Tov, and the [rights of] Jews who lived in the &#x27;Old Yishuv&#x27;.&quot;

== Declaration ceremony ==

The ceremony was held in the Tel Aviv Museum (today known as Independence Hall) but was not widely publicised as it was feared that the British Authorities might attempt to prevent it or that the Arab armies might invade earlier than expected. An invitation was sent out by messenger on the morning of 14 May telling recipients to arrive at 15:30 and to keep the event a secret. The event started at 16:00 (a time chosen so as not to breach the sabbath) and was broadcast live as the first transmission of the new radio station Kol Yisrael.

The final draft of the declaration was typed at the Jewish National Fund building following its approval earlier in the day. Ze&#x27;ev Sherf, who stayed at the building in order to deliver the text, had forgotten to arrange transport for himself. Ultimately, he had to flag down a passing car and ask the driver (who was driving a borrowed car without a licence) to take him to the ceremony. Sherf&#x27;s request was initially refused but he managed to persuade the driver to take him. The car was stopped by a policeman for speeding while driving across the city though a ticket was not issued after it was explained that he was delaying the declaration of independence. Sherf arrived at the museum at 15:59.

At 16:00, Ben-Gurion opened the ceremony by banging his gavel on the table, prompting a spontaneous rendition of Hatikvah, soon to be Israel&#x27;s national anthem, from the 250 guests. On the wall behind the podium hung a picture of Theodor Herzl, the founder of modern Zionism, and two flags, later to become the official flag of Israel.

After telling the audience &quot;I shall now read to you the scroll of the Establishment of the State, which has passed its first reading by the National Council&quot;, Ben-Gurion proceeded to read out the declaration, taking 16 minutes, ending with the words &quot;Let us accept the Foundation Scroll of the Jewish State by rising&quot; and calling on Rabbi Fishman to recite the Shehecheyanu blessing.

=== Signatories ===

As leader of the Yishuv, David Ben-Gurion was the first person to sign. The declaration was due to be signed by all 37 members of Moetzet HaAm. However, twelve members could not attend, with eleven of them trapped in besieged Jerusalem and one abroad. The remaining 25 signatories present were called up in alphabetical order to sign, leaving spaces for those absent. Although a space was left for him between the signatures of Eliyahu Dobkin and Meir Vilner, Zerach Warhaftig signed at the top of the next column, leading to speculation that Vilner&#x27;s name had been left alone to isolate him, or to stress that even a communist had agreed with the declaration. However, Warhaftig later denied this, stating that a space had been left for him (as he was one of the signatories trapped in Jerusalem) where a Hebraicised form of his name would have fitted alphabetically, but he insisted on signing under his actual name so as to honour his father&#x27;s memory and so moved down two spaces. He and Vilner would be the last surviving signatories, and remained close for the rest of their lives. Of the signatories, two were women (Golda Meir and Rachel Cohen-Kagan).

When Herzl Rosenblum, a journalist, was called up to sign, Ben-Gurion instructed him to sign under the name Herzl Vardi, his pen name, as he wanted more Hebrew names on the document. Although Rosenblum acquiesced to Ben-Gurion&#x27;s request and legally changed his name to Vardi, he later admitted to regretting not signing as Rosenblum. Several other signatories later Hebraised their names, including Meir Argov (Grabovsky), Peretz Bernstein (then Fritz Bernstein), Avraham Granot (Granovsky), Avraham Nissan (Katznelson), Moshe Kol (Kolodny), Yehuda Leib Maimon (Fishman), Golda Meir (Meyerson/Myerson), Pinchas Rosen (Felix Rosenblueth) and Moshe Sharett (Shertok). Other signatories added their own touches, including Saadia Kobashi who added the phrase &quot;HaLevy&quot;, referring to the tribe of Levi.

After Sharett, the last of the signatories, had put his name to paper, the audience again stood and the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra played &quot;Hatikvah&quot;. Ben-Gurion concluded the event with the words &quot;The State of Israel is established! This meeting is adjourned!&quot;

== Aftermath ==
The declaration was signed in the context of civil war between the Arab and Jewish populations of the Mandate that had started the day after the partition vote at the UN six months earlier. Neighbouring Arab states and the Arab League were opposed to the vote and had declared they would intervene to prevent its implementation. In a cablegram on 15 May 1948 to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States claimed that &quot;the Arab states find themselves compelled to intervene in order to restore law and order and to check further bloodshed&quot;.

Over the next few days after the declaration, armies of Egypt, Trans-Jordan, Iraq, and Syria engaged Israeli troops inside the area of what had just ceased to be Mandatory Palestine, thereby starting the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. A truce began on 11 June, but fighting resumed on 8 July and stopped again on 18 July, before restarting in mid-October and finally ending on 24 July 1949 with the signing of the armistice agreement with Syria. By then Israel had retained its independence and increased its land area by almost 50% compared to the 1947 UN Partition Plan.

Following the declaration, Moetzet HaAm became the Provisional State Council, which acted as the legislative body for the new state until the first elections in January 1949.

Many of the signatories would play a prominent role in Israeli politics following independence; Moshe Sharett and Golda Meir both served as Prime Minister, Yitzhak Ben-Zvi became the country&#x27;s second president in 1952, and several others served as ministers. David Remez was the first signatory to pass away, dying in May 1951, while Meir Vilner, the youngest signatory at just 29, was the longest living, serving in the Knesset until 1990 and dying in June 2003. Eliyahu Berligne, the oldest signatory at 82, died in 1959.

Eleven minutes after midnight, the United States &quot;de facto&quot; recognised the State of Israel. This was followed by Iran (which had voted against the UN partition plan), Guatemala, Iceland, Nicaragua, Romania, and Uruguay. The Soviet Union was the first nation to fully recognise Israel de jure on 17 May 1948, followed by Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Ireland, and South Africa. The United States extended official recognition after the first Israeli election, as Truman had promised on 31 January 1949. By virtue of General Assembly Resolution 273 (III), Israel was admitted to membership in the United Nations on 11 May 1949.

In the three years following the 1948 Palestine war, about 700,000 Jews immigrated to Israel, residing mainly along the borders and in former Arab lands. Around 136,000 were some of the 250,000 displaced Jews of World War II. And from the 1948 Arab–Israeli War until the early 1970s, 800,000–1,000,000 Jews left, fled, or were expelled from their homes in Arab countries; 260,000 of them reached Israel between 1948 and 1951; and 600,000 by 1972.

At the same time, a large number of Arabs left, fled or were expelled from, what became Israel. In the &quot;Report of the Technical Committee on Refugees (Submitted to the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine in Lausanne on 7 September 1949) – (A/1367/Rev.1)&quot;, in paragraph 15, the estimate of the statistical expert, which the Committee believed to be as accurate as circumstances permitted, indicated that the number of refugees from Israel-controlled territory amounted to approximately 711,000.

== Status in Israeli law ==

Paragraph 13 of the Declaration provides that the State of Israel would &quot;be based on freedom, justice and peace as envisaged by the prophets of Israel; it will ensure complete equality of social and political rights to all its inhabitants irrespective of religion, race or sex;&quot;. However, the Knesset maintains that the declaration is neither a law nor an ordinary legal document. The Supreme Court has ruled that the guarantees were merely guiding principles, and that the declaration is not a constitutional law making a practical ruling on the upholding or nullification of various ordinances and statutes.

In 1994 the Knesset amended two basic laws, Human Dignity and Liberty and Freedom of Occupation, introducing (among other changes) a statement saying &quot;the fundamental human rights in Israel will be honored (...) in the spirit of the principles included in the declaration of the establishment of the State of Israel.&quot;

== The scroll ==
Although Ben-Gurion had told the audience that he was reading from the scroll of independence, he was actually reading from handwritten notes because only the bottom part of the scroll had been finished by artist and calligrapher Otte Wallish by the time of the declaration (he did not complete the entire document until June). The scroll, which is bound together in three parts, is generally kept in the country&#x27;s National Archives.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Notes ==

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==

* Proclamation of Independence: Official Gazette: Number 1; Tel Aviv, 5 Iyar 5708, 14.5.1948 Page 1
* U.S. Recognition of &quot;de facto&quot; government of Israel. .
* &quot;Signatorius&quot;. , exhibition held at the Engel Gallery dealing with the independence declaration in Israeli art.
* Declaration of Establishment of State of Israel – English translation of text on the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="4" end="39" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="Israeli Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="54" end="109" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212437" start="147" end="151" title="Iyar" label="Iyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379101" start="177" end="192" title="1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine" label="civil war phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="214" end="233" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="international phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q49097" start="241" end="259" title="1948 Palestine war" label="1948 Palestine war"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="264" end="280" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q205386" start="308" end="334" title="World Zionist Organization" label="World Zionist Organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="355" end="382" title="Jewish Agency for Israel#Formation of the Jewish Agency for Palestine" label="Jewish Agency for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915311" start="420" end="432" title="Jewish state" label="Jewish state"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="436" end="445" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="454" end="468" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="514" end="529" title="Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749986" start="563" end="574" title="End of the British Mandate for Palestine" label="termination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970316" start="582" end="597" title="Mandate for Palestine" label="British Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q952721" start="666" end="682" title="Independence Day (Israel)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q57598" start="686" end="702" title="National day" label="national holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="744" end="759" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="798" end="804" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="817" end="826" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="846" end="853" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="905" end="930" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="British Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="931" end="945" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Arthur Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q316669" start="1000" end="1023" title="Walter Rothschild, 2nd Baron Rothschild" label="Walter, Lord Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q187152" start="1508" end="1527" title="Balfour Declaration" label="Balfour Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1590" end="1601" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="1634" end="1641" title="League of Nations mandate" label="mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1689" end="1697" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q655894" start="1726" end="1741" title="Peel Commission" label="Peel Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q719543" start="1752" end="1782" title="Two-state solution" label="partitioning Mandate Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46057" start="1946" end="1965" title="1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine" label="1936–39 Arab revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2008" end="2020" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2084" end="2098" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q846795" start="2115" end="2133" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 181" label="Resolution 181(II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q846795" start="2553" end="2585" title="United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine" label="29 November 1947, the resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="3503" end="3533" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410814" start="3705" end="3717" title="Zvi Berenson" label="Zvi Berenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457407" start="3744" end="3753" title="Histadrut" label="Histadrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q399798" start="3793" end="3806" title="Supreme Court of Israel" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389085" start="3826" end="3839" title="Pinchas Rosen" label="Pinchas Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176303" start="3954" end="3965" title="David Remez" label="David Remez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389085" start="3967" end="3980" title="Pinchas Rosen" label="Pinchas Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079775" start="3982" end="4000" title="Haim-Moshe Shapira" label="Haim-Moshe Shapira"/>
<link wikidata="Q208477" start="4002" end="4015" title="Moshe Sharett" label="Moshe Sharett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588843" start="4020" end="4034" title="Aharon Zisling" label="Aharon Zisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="4079" end="4095" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382713" start="4097" end="4115" title="Yehuda Leib Maimon" label="Yehuda Leib Maimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778032" start="4208" end="4221" title="Provisional government of Israel" label="Minhelet HaAm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382713" start="4368" end="4386" title="Yehuda Leib Maimon" label="Yehuda Leib Maimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661879" start="4391" end="4408" title="Yitzhak Gruenbaum" label="Yitzhak Gruenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916279" start="4426" end="4434" title="Battle for Jerusalem (1948)" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="4435" end="4444" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907909" start="4452" end="4470" title="Yitzhak-Meir Levin" label="Yitzhak-Meir Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="4744" end="4760" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208477" start="4762" end="4775" title="Moshe Sharett" label="Moshe Sharett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453052" start="4777" end="4782" title="Mapai" label="Mapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q935201" start="4785" end="4801" title="Peretz Bernstein" label="Peretz Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887828" start="4803" end="4819" title="General Zionists" label="General Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079775" start="4822" end="4840" title="Haim-Moshe Shapira" label="Haim-Moshe Shapira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917054" start="4842" end="4859" title="Hapoel HaMizrachi" label="Hapoel HaMizrachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091327" start="4862" end="4878" title="Mordechai Bentov" label="Mordechai Bentov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588843" start="4880" end="4894" title="Aharon Zisling" label="Aharon Zisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428864" start="4896" end="4901" title="Mapam" label="Mapam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329314" start="4914" end="4928" title="Eliezer Kaplan" label="Eliezer Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176303" start="4930" end="4941" title="David Remez" label="David Remez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389085" start="4951" end="4964" title="Pinchas Rosen" label="Pinchas Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777648" start="4966" end="4982" title="New Aliyah Party" label="New Aliyah Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909380" start="4985" end="5007" title="Bechor-Shalom Sheetrit" label="Bechor-Shalom Sheetrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915298" start="5009" end="5043" title="Sephardim and Oriental Communities" label="Sephardim and Oriental Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q172183" start="5047" end="5061" title="Chaim Weizmann" label="Chaim Weizmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q205386" start="5083" end="5109" title="World Zionist Organization" label="World Zionist Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q14757733" start="5126" end="5131" title="List of Presidents of Israel" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q327948" start="5132" end="5151" title="President of Israel" label="President of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910097" start="5330" end="5342" title="Provisional State Council" label="Moetzet HaAm"/>
<link wikidata="Q696658" start="5350" end="5353" title="Jewish National Fund" label="JNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="5366" end="5374" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909380" start="5995" end="6017" title="Bechor-Shalom Sheetrit" label="Bechor-Shalom Sheetrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778032" start="6548" end="6561" title="Provisional government of Israel" label="Minhelet HaAm"/>
<link wikidata="Q592710" start="6589" end="6601" title="Revisionist Zionism" label="Revisionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="6652" end="6664" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="6685" end="6696" title="Jordan" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="6992" end="6997" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382713" start="7012" end="7030" title="Yehuda Leib Maimon" label="Yehuda Leib Maimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428864" start="7272" end="7277" title="Mapam" label="Mapam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354846" start="7307" end="7321" title="Rock of Israel" label="Rock of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="7408" end="7420" title="Eretz Israel" label="Eretz Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="7788" end="7800" title="Land of Israel" label="Eretz Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q502282" start="7822" end="7826" title="Eber" label="Eber"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="7829" end="7834" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q205318" start="7840" end="7844" title="Zion" label="Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328820" start="8005" end="8022" title="Judaean Mountains" label="Judaean Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376050" start="9087" end="9098" title="Meir Vilner" label="Meir Vilner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893392" start="9192" end="9202" title="Meir Argov" label="Meir Argov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154868" start="9225" end="9247" title="Displaced Persons camp" label="Displaced Persons camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="9287" end="9295" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908216" start="9504" end="9526" title="Meir David Loewenstein" label="Meir David Loewenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="9577" end="9589" title="Land of Israel" label="Eretz Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="9639" end="9646" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="9689" end="9695" title="Tanakh" label="Tanach"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="9725" end="9731" title="Nahmanides" label="Ramban"/>
<link wikidata="Q279359" start="9756" end="9766" title="Vilna Gaon" label="Vilna Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q319062" start="9775" end="9794" title="Baal Shem Tov" label="Ba&amp;#x27;al Shem Tov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620299" start="9926" end="9941" title="Independence Hall (Israel)" label="Tel Aviv Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="10342" end="10349" title="shabbat" label="sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714952" start="10425" end="10436" title="Kol Yisrael" label="Kol Yisrael"/>
<link wikidata="Q696658" start="10491" end="10511" title="Jewish National Fund" label="Jewish National Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q184431" start="10564" end="10580" title="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Sherf" label="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Sherf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625659" start="11207" end="11212" title="gavel" label="gavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130865" start="11264" end="11272" title="Hatikvah" label="Hatikvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="11299" end="11314" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q44003" start="11385" end="11398" title="Theodor Herzl" label="Theodor Herzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q128480" start="11475" end="11489" title="flag of Israel" label="flag of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47932" start="11637" end="11653" title="Jewish National Council" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382713" start="11851" end="11858" title="Yehuda Leib Maimon" label="Fishman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068387" start="11873" end="11885" title="Shehecheyanu" label="Shehecheyanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356549" start="11935" end="11941" title="Yishuv" label="Yishuv"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="11943" end="11959" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916279" start="12135" end="12143" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1948)" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="12144" end="12153" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908363" start="12346" end="12360" title="Eliyahu Dobkin" label="Eliyahu Dobkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376050" start="12365" end="12376" title="Meir Vilner" label="Meir Vilner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890045" start="12378" end="12394" title="Zerach Warhaftig" label="Zerach Warhaftig"/>
<link wikidata="Q42992" start="13051" end="13061" title="Golda Meir" label="Golda Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501401" start="13066" end="13084" title="Rachel Cohen-Kagan" label="Rachel Cohen-Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615196" start="13093" end="13108" title="Herzl Rosenblum" label="Herzl Rosenblum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893392" start="13492" end="13502" title="Meir Argov" label="Meir Argov"/>
<link wikidata="Q935201" start="13516" end="13532" title="Peretz Bernstein" label="Peretz Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392568" start="13557" end="13571" title="Avraham Granot" label="Avraham Granot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777279" start="13585" end="13599" title="Avraham Katznelson" label="Avraham Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907940" start="13614" end="13623" title="Moshe Kol" label="Moshe Kol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382713" start="13635" end="13653" title="Yehuda Leib Maimon" label="Yehuda Leib Maimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42992" start="13665" end="13675" title="Golda Meir" label="Golda Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389085" start="13696" end="13709" title="Pinchas Rosen" label="Pinchas Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208477" start="13734" end="13747" title="Moshe Sharett" label="Moshe Sharett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777904" start="13812" end="13826" title="Saadia Kobashi" label="Saadia Kobashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215512" start="13894" end="13898" title="Levi" label="Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062617" start="14005" end="14034" title="Israel Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Israel Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379101" start="14247" end="14311" title="1947–1948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine" label="civil war between the Arab and Jewish populations of the Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="14425" end="14436" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14536" end="14545" title=":s:Cablegram from the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States to the Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="cablegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="15011" end="15032" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q999143" start="15213" end="15232" title="1949 Armistice Agreements" label="armistice agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910097" start="15424" end="15449" title="Provisional State Council" label="Provisional State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674684" start="15515" end="15530" title="1949 Israeli legislative election" label="first elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130120" start="15604" end="15620" title="Politics of Israel" label="Israeli politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128894" start="15705" end="15720" title="Yitzhak Ben-Zvi" label="Yitzhak Ben-Zvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975871" start="15721" end="15727" title="1952 Israeli presidential election" label="became"/>
<link wikidata="Q327948" start="15754" end="15763" title="President of Israel" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578249" start="15802" end="15811" title="Cabinet of Israel" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176303" start="15813" end="15824" title="David Remez" label="David Remez"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="15975" end="15982" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778048" start="16018" end="16034" title="Eliyahu Berligne" label="Eliyahu Berligne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055209" start="16149" end="16159" title="International recognition of Israel" label="recognised"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="16287" end="16294" title="Communist Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="16373" end="16380" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="16409" end="16415" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359848" start="16417" end="16431" title="History of Czechoslovakia (1948–1989)" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="16433" end="16443" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674684" start="16536" end="16552" title="1949 Israeli legislative election" label="Israeli election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888404" start="16610" end="16647" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 273" label="General Assembly Resolution 273 (III)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49097" start="16755" end="16773" title="1948 Palestine war" label="1948 Palestine war"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="16961" end="16982" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="17029" end="17057" title="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries" label="left, fled, or were expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220089" start="17212" end="17239" title="1948 Palestinian exodus" label="left, fled or were expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="18024" end="18031" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q399798" start="18116" end="18129" title="Supreme Court of Israel" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368137" start="18374" end="18384" title="Basic Laws of Israel" label="basic laws"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18386" end="18411" title="Basic Law: Human Dignity and Liberty" label="Human Dignity and Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109337" start="18918" end="18930" title="Otte Wallish" label="Otte Wallish"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14699" wikidata="Q216989" url="?curid=14699" title="Geography of Italy">
<text>The geography of Italy includes the description of all the physical geographical elements of Italy. Italy, whose territory largely coincides with the homonymous geographical region, is located in southern Europe and comprises the long, boot-shaped Italian Peninsula crossed by the Apennines, the southern side of Alps, the large plain of the Po Valley and some islands including Sicily and Sardinia. Italy is part of the Northern Hemisphere. Two of the Pelagie Islands (Lampedusa and Lampione) are located on the African continent.

The total area of Italy is , of which is land and is water. It lies between latitudes 35° and 47° N, and longitudes 6° and 19° E. Italy borders Switzerland (), France (), Austria () and Slovenia (). San Marino () and Vatican City () are enclaves. The total border length is . Including islands, Italy has a coastline of on the Adriatic Sea, Ionian Sea, Tyrrhenian Sea, Ligurian Sea, Sea of Sardinia and Strait of Sicily.

The Italian geographical region, in its traditional and most widely accepted extent, has an area of approximately , which is greater than the area of the entire Italian Republic (). The Italian geographical region also includes territories that are sovereign parts of Croatia, France, Slovenia and Switzerland, as well as the four small independent states of the Principality of Monaco, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of San Marino and the Vatican City State (the Holy See).

==General features==

Italy is joined to the central-western section of the European continent by the Alps. Due to its position, it constitutes a bridge between Europe and Africa. In particular, the Italian peninsula is located in the center of the Mediterranean Sea, between the Balkans and Hellenic peninsula to the east, the Iberian peninsula to the west, North Africa to the south and continental Europe to the north separated by the Alps.

Italy also separates the western basin of the Mediterranean Sea from the eastern basin — that is, the Tyrrhenian Sea from the Ionian Sea — extending towards the west with Calabria and Sicily, which together geologically form a peninsular extension. Only separate Sicily and Africa (the Tunisian peninsula), by the channel of Sicily.

To the east, Salento is from the Albanian coast, at the narrowest point of the Strait of Otranto. It is Capo d&#x27;Otranto (also called &quot;Punta Palascìa&quot;), located at 40° 7&#x27; north latitude and 18° 31&#x27; east longitude. To the north of Salento lies the long and narrow inlet of the Adriatic Sea.

The islands of Sardinia and Corsica then divide the Tyrrhenian Sea from the Sardinian Sea.


The coastal development of the Italian peninsula and islands is vast; about , which is much larger than that of the Iberian peninsula, but much less than that of the Balkans.

Italy has a prevalence of hilly areas (41.6% of the territory) compared to mountainous areas (35.2% of the territory), or flat areas (23.2%).

The Italian soil today is the result of anthropization and is partly mountainous, partly hilly, partly volcanic, partly endolagunar with bumps, polesine, islands, dried up by reclamation (Bonifiche Circeo, Ferraresi, Comacchio, Ostiense, Pisana and so on) with ever greater raising of embankments (for example the withdrawal of 1.7 billion cubic meters per year of fresh water, from 20 consortia from Veneto alone).

No inhabited center in Italy is more than from the sea and the Italian municipality farthest from the sea is Madesimo (province of Sondrio) which is from the Ligurian Sea.

===Boundaries===
Italy borders Switzerland (), France (), Austria () and Slovenia (). San Marino () and Vatican City () are enclaves. The total border length is . Including islands, Italy has a coastline of on the Adriatic Sea, Ionian Sea, Tyrrhenian Sea, Ligurian Sea, Sea of Sardinia and Strait of Sicily.

===Latitude and longitude===
* Northernmost point — Testa Gemella Occidentale, Prettau (Predoi), South Tyrol at 
* Southernmost point — Punta Pesce Spada, Lampedusa, Sicily at (whole territory); Capo Spartivento, Palizzi, Calabria at (mainland)
* Westernmost point — Rocca Bernauda, Bardonecchia, Piedmont at 
* Easternmost point — Capo d&#x27;Otranto, Otranto, Apulia at 

The distance that separates the Testa Gemella Occidentale from Punta Pesce Spada is ; the maximum distance between the eastern and western borders is about . The municipalities at the ends of Italy are:

* Predoi, the northernmost municipality
* Lampedusa e Linosa, the southernmost municipality
* Otranto, the easternmost municipality
* Bardonecchia, the westernmost municipality

===Elevation===
* Highest point: Mont Blanc (Aosta Valley) at 
* Lowest point: Jolanda di Savoia (province of Ferrara) at 
* Highest settlement: Trepalle, Livigno at 

===Maritime claims===
* Territorial sea: 
* Continental shelf: or to the depth of exploitation
* Exclusive Economic Zone: 

===Geographical centre===
Although the Istituto Geografico Militare of Florence has repeatedly declared that it is impossible to uniquely determine the center of a non-geometric shape such as that of Italy, there are several locations that, depending on the measurement criteria adopted, compete for the primacy of the geographical centre of Italy:
*Monteluco (province of Perugia);
*Narni (province of Terni);
*Orvieto (province of Terni);
*Rieti (province of Rieti).

==Land use==
* Artificial (urban, industrial etc.): 4.9%
* Agricultural: 52.2%
** Arable land: 27.9%
** Permanent: 7.1%
** Other: 17.2%
* Wood: 41.4%
* Wetlands: 0.4%
* Water (lakes etc.): 1.1%

===Irrigated land===
* 39,510 km2 (2007)

===Total renewable water resources===
* 191.3 km3 (2011)

===Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural)===
*&quot;total&quot;: 45.41 km3/yr (24%/43%/34%)
*&quot;per capita:&quot; 789.8 m3/yr (2008)

==Divisions==
The Italian geographical region, in its traditional and most widely accepted extent, has an area of approximately , which is greater than the area of the entire Italian Republic (). The Italian geographical region also includes territories that are sovereign parts of Croatia, France, Slovenia and Switzerland, as well as the four small independent states of the Principality of Monaco, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of San Marino and the Vatican City State (the Holy See). Italy and the Italian geographical region are both divided into three parts, albeit with some differences.

===Continental Italy===

Continental Italy defined as the southern side of the Alps, the Po Valley, Liguria and the portion of the Apennines bounded by the conventional line that connects La Spezia to Rimini. The region of Nice (corresponding to the historic County of Nice), Italian Switzerland, part of Julian March and other less extensive portions of territory such as Valle Stretta, Gondo and Val Monastero, are not part of the Italian Republic in its continental part but they are part of the Italian geographical region. Conversely, the Val di Lei, the Val di Livigno, the San Candido basin, the Rio Sesto valley and the Tarvisio basin, although part of the Italian Republic, are not included in the Italian geographical region.

===Peninsular Italy===

Peninsular Italy refers to the entire southern part of the aforementioned line, up to Punta Melito in Calabria (which is the southernmost point of the peninsula) and Santa Maria di Leuca in Apulia. San Marino and the Vatican City are foreign territories, although included in the Italian geographical region.

The Italian peninsula occupies a median position between the three main peninsulas of southern Europe, emerging right in the center of the Mediterranean Sea, with large islands and some archipelagos.

===Insular Italy===
Insular Italy is made up of Sardinia, Sicily and numerous smaller islands, scattered or grouped into archipelagos in the seas that bathe the coasts of the peninsula. Corsica is not politically included in insular Italy since it belongs to France, however, it is included in the Italian geographical region.

The five largest islands belonging to the Italian state are, in order of size:

* Sicily ()
* Sardinia ()
* Elba ()
* Sant&#x27;Antioco ()
* Pantelleria ().
Other islands belonging to Italy are grouped into the following archipelagos:

* Archipelago of the Gulf of La Spezia, formed by the island of Palmaria, Tino and Tinetto;
* Tuscan archipelago, formed by the island of Elba, the largest and most important of the group from whose bowels iron has been extracted for centuries. To the north of the island of Elba rise Capraia and Gorgona, to the south Pianosa, Montecristo, Giannutri and the island of Giglio. Minor islets are Cerboli and Palmaiola off the coast of Elba, the Islet of the Sparviero at Punta Ala, the Formiche di Grosseto, the Formica di Burano, the Formica di Montecristo (or Scoglio d&#x27;Africa) and some islets off the coast of promontory of the Argentario including Argentarola, Isola Rossa and Isolotto, in addition to the Secche della Meloria and the Secche di Vada.
* The Phlegraean Islands (Ischia and Procida) plus Capri, in the Gulf of Naples; sometimes the three islands are included in the Campanian Archipelago;
* Pontine islands: Ponza, Palmarola, Zannone and Ventotene, in the gulf of Gaeta;
* Archipelago of the Aeolian Islands or Lipari, which includes Salina, Lipari, the largest of the group, Vulcano, a now almost extinct volcano; Panarea and then Stromboli, an eruptive cone still in activity which was called &quot;Stronghilo&quot; by the ancient Greeks (hence Stromboli), due to its conical shape of an inverted top on the sea; to these must be added Filicudi and Alicudi;
* Aegadian Islands, i.e. the islands of Favignana, Marettimo, Levanzo and Stagnone, which arise between Marsala and Trapani, west of Sicily;
* Pelagie Islands, including Linosa, Lampione and Lampedusa;
* In Sicily we still find Ustica off the Gulf of Palermo and Pantelleria in the middle of the Sicilian Channel;
* The group of the Tremiti Islands and the island of Pianosa, which rise in the Adriatic Sea;
* To the north of Sardinia the Asinara and the archipelago of La Maddalena, to the south San Pietro and Sant&#x27;Antioco.
* The Cheradi Islands of San Pietro and San Paolo in the Gulf of Taranto.

==Orography==
===Mountains===

Almost 40% of the Italian territory is mountainous, with the Alps as the northern boundary and the Apennine Mountains forming the backbone of the peninsula and extending for . The Alpine mountain range is linked with the Apennines with the Colle di Cadibona pass in the Ligurian Alps. Nineteen Italian regions are crossed by either the Alps or the Apennines, or their offshoots. Sardinia has mountains with their own characteristics and are included in the Sardinian-Corsican relief, since it also affects Corsica.

The Alps (formed during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic) surround the Po Valley to the north, east and west, and develop along the entire northern border of Italy (about ), creating a natural border. The Alps contain the highest peak in the European Union, Mont Blanc, at above sea level, located between the Aosta Valley and France.

The Apennines (formed during the Oligocene) rise south of the Po Valley and run from north to south throughout the Italian peninsula, from Liguria to Calabria and continue in northern Sicily ending in the Madonie, acting as a watershed between the Tyrrhenian and Adriatic-Ionian coast.

The highest peaks in Italy are found in the Western Alps, where there are numerous peaks that exceed including Monte Rosa (), the Cervino () and Mont Blanc which with its . The maximum height of the Apennines is the Gran Sasso d&#x27;Italia ().

Famous mountains in Italy are Monte Cervino (Matterhorn), Monte Rosa, Gran Paradiso in the West Alps, and Bernina, Stelvio and Dolomites along the eastern side of the Alps.

===Hills===

The hills cover most of the Italian territory. They are mainly located in the central-southern part of the peninsula, along the sides of the Apennine ridge, but also in the pre-Alpine area, close to the Alps.

The hilly reliefs, which alternate with hollows and valleys, have slight slopes and do not exceed .

The first two hilly systems are the subalpine hills and the Preappennino, two hilly strips arranged between the Alps and the Po Valley and between the Apennines and the Adriatic coast respectively. The subalpine hills widen more in the western part of the Po Valley, where they form the hills of the Langhe and Montferrat. Two other hill systems are the Tyrrhenian Anti-Apennine, which extends from the Colline Metallifere of Tuscany to Vesuvius and the Beneventane Hills in Campania, and the Adriatic Anti-Apennine, present in Puglia with the Murge and Gargano hills.

The Italian hills have different origins:

* The Langhe, Monferrato, Chianti and Murge are sedimentary hills formed by the lifting of the seabed.
* The Beneventane Hills are of tertiary formation, that is, composed of gravel stratifications or masses of pebbles mixed with limestone and sandstone, probably due to the raising of the lake bottom.
* The hills of Brianza, of Canavese and more generally of the entire strip that runs at the foot of the Alps are morainic, that is, made up of deposits of earth and crushed stone transported by ancient glaciers.
* The Euganean Hills and numerous other formations in Tuscany, Lazio, Campania are of volcanic origin, i.e. they are the remains of ancient extinct volcanoes, rounded by a long erosion.

===Plains===

The plains make up 23.2% of the Italian national territory. In between the two lies a large plain in the valley of the Po, the largest river in Italy, which flows eastward from the Cottian Alps to the Adriatic. The Po Valley is the largest plain in Italy, with , and it represents over 70% of the total plain area in the country. The Po Valley is divided into two bands: the high plain, which borders the Alpine and Apennine hills, and the low plain located in the center and extended up to the Po delta.

In the peninsular part and in the islands there are only small plains often located along the coasts and at the mouth of the major rivers, near which they formed: this is the case, for example, of the Tavoliere delle Puglie, of the Campidano in Sardinia or the Maremma in Tuscany.

The Italian plains have different origins:

* Most of it is of alluvial origin, that is, formed by the debris deposited by the rivers along their course. The Po Valley, Valdarno, Pontine Marshes, Campidano, Metapontino, Plain of Sele, Salento, Plain of Sibari, Plain of Catania and Plain of Sant&#x27;Eufemia are alluvial. 
* The second largest Italian plain is the Tavoliere delle Puglie, which is a rising plain, formed from the raising of the seabed.
* Other plains, for example the Plain of Campania, are of volcanic origin where the ashes of the volcanoes have filled the surrounding valleys, transforming them into fertile plains.

==Hydrography==
Italy is surrounded, except to the north, by the sea, and its territory has a rich reserve of inland waters (rivers and lakes). The southern regions, however, are drier than the northern ones, due to the scarcity of rains and the absence of glaciers that can feed the rivers.

===Rivers===
Italian rivers are shorter than those of other European regions due to the Apennines that run along the entire length of the peninsula, dividing the waters into two opposite sides. They are numerous however, due to the relative abundance of rains in Italy in general, and to the presence of the Alpine chain, rich in snowfields and glaciers, in northern Italy.

The fundamental watershed follows the ridge of the Alps and the Apennines and defines five main slopes, corresponding to the seas into which the rivers flow: the Adriatic, Ionic, Tyrrhenian, Ligurian and Mediterranean sides. Italian rivers are categorized into two main groups: the Alpine-Po river rivers and the Apennine-island rivers.

The longest Italian river is the Po (), which flows from the Monviso, runs through the entire Po Valley from west to east, and then flows, with a delta, into the Adriatic Sea. In addition to being the longest, it is also the river with the largest basin and the largest flow at its mouth. The second longest Italian river is the Adige (), which originates near Lake Resia and flows into the Adriatic Sea, after having made a north–south route, near Chioggia. The third longest river in Italy is the Tiber (), the second longest Italian river in terms of hydrographic basin; it was formed on Monte Fumaiolo (in Emilia-Romagna) and flows into the Tyrrhenian Sea after having crossed the center of Rome. After the Tiber, in order of length are the rivers Adda (), Oglio (), Tanaro () and Ticino (, of which is in Italy).

Most of Italy&#x27;s rivers drain either into the Adriatic Sea (such as Po, Piave, Adige, Brenta, Tagliamento, Reno) or into the Tyrrhenian (like Arno, Tiber and Volturno), though the waters from some border municipalities drain into the Black Sea through the basin of the Drava (Innichen and Sexten in Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol, Tarvisio in Friuli-Venezia-Giulia) or the Inn (Livigno in Lombardy), both tributaries of the Danube, and the waters from the Lago di Lei in Lombardy drain into the North Sea through the basin of Rhine.

===Lakes===

In Italy there are more than 1,000 lakes, mostly artificially created by the damming of river valleys.

In the north of the country are a number of subalpine moraine-dammed lakes (the Italian Lakes), including the largest in Italy, the Garda (). Other well known of these subalpine lakes are Lake Maggiore (), whose most northerly section is part of Switzerland, Como (which holds the record of depth in the Italian Republic, which amounts to ) (), Orta, Lugano, Iseo, Idro. These lakes occupy wide valleys carved by ancient glaciers.

In Italy there are also coastal lakes, such as Lake Lesina, separated from the sea by a narrow strip of land, and volcanic lakes (Lake Bolsena, Lake Vico, Lake Bracciano), which occupy the craters of extinct volcanoes. Lake Trasimeno, on the other hand, formed in a hollow in the territory. Other notable lakes in the Italian peninsula are Varano and Omodeo in Sardinia.

The swamps and ponds that in the past covered vast flat areas of Italy, in recent centuries have been largely dried up; the few remaining wetlands, such as the Valli di Comacchio in Emilia-Romagna or the Stagno di Cagliari in Sardinia, are protected as very precious natural environments.

Along the Italian coasts there are lagoons, among which the Venetian Lagoon, that of Grado Lagoon and that of Marano Lagoon in the northern Adriatic stand out for their size and importance, and the Orbetello Lagoon on the Tuscan coast.

===Seas and coasts===

The Italian peninsula overlooks the Mediterranean Sea, which around it is divided into various seas.

The Ligurian Sea bathes the coasts of Liguria and, according to the cartography of the Hydrographic Institute of the Navy, the northern Tuscan coasts to the south as far as the island of Elba.

The Tyrrhenian Sea bathes the western coasts of the peninsula south of the island of Elba (and therefore all the regions from Tuscany to Calabria), the northern coasts of Sicily and the eastern coasts of Sardinia.

The Adriatic Sea bathes the eastern coasts of the peninsula, from Friuli-Venezia Giulia to the Cape of Santa Maria di Leuca, Apulia.

The Ionian Sea bathes the eastern coasts of Sicily and Calabria, the coast of Basilicata and the western coasts of Apulia.

To the south of Sicily lies the Strait of Sicily, while to the west of Sardinia lies the Sea of Sardinia.

Italy has a coastline of approximately , with a great variety of shapes that depends both on the nature of the mainland and on the action of the sea.

The Adriatic coasts are quite straight, characterized to the north by the gulfs of Trieste and Venice, in the center by the Conero promontory, to the south by that of the Gargano, which forms the Gulf of Manfredonia. The Adriatic coasts are low and sandy, with lagoons in the northern section. Only in the Trieste area, in correspondence with the Gargano, the Conero and the lower eastern Salento (between Otranto and Santa Maria di Leuca) do rocky sections follow one another.

The Ionian coasts are mainly low and sandy and are characterized by the wide Gulf of Taranto, closed to the east by the Salento Peninsula (which divides it from the Adriatic) and to the west by the Calabrian peninsula (which divides it from the Tyrrhenian Sea).

The Strait of Messina connects the Ionian and the Tyrrhenian seas.

The Tyrrhenian coasts are very articulated, with rocky stretches alternating with sandy beaches, with numerous gulfs and headlands. Among the many gulfs include Naples, Salerno and Gaeta, between the peninsulas that of Sorrento and the promontories that of Circeo and that of Piombino. In the Tyrrhenian Sea, there are three important channels: between the island of Elba and the Tuscan coast the Strait of Piombino, between Elba and Corsica the Strait of Corsica, and between Sardinia and Corsica the Strait of Bonifacio.

The Ligurian Sea, which has the Gulf of Genoa at its center, has high and rocky coasts in the Riviera di Levante and mixed coasts in the Riviera di Ponente.

==Geology==


The underground thrusts that millions of years ago gave rise to the reliefs of Italy still continue: the earthquakes and the eruptive activity of volcanoes testify to this.

===Earthquakes===

Squeezed between two plates, the African Plate and the Eurasian Plate, Italy is very subject to earthquakes, even intense ones, so much so that it holds the record in Europe. In particular, the areas at greatest seismic risk are the north and south-west of Sicily, the whole Apennines (but in particular the central-southern area), northern Apulia, almost all of Friuli-Venezia Giulia and finally the north-west of Veneto. On the contrary, the areas with little or no seismic risk are the Alps (excluding the extreme western and eastern area), most of the Po Valley, the Tyrrhenian coasts up to Lazio, central-southern Apulia, Sardinia and central Sicily.

===Volcanoes===

Italy is also known for the presence of numerous volcanoes, the most well-known being Vesuvius near Naples, Etna near Catania (which with its is the highest volcano in Europe), Stromboli and Vulcano, in the Aeolian Islands in the province of Messina, in addition to the large caldera formed by the Campi Flegrei in Campania.

The peninsula also has many extinct volcanoes, that is, which have ceased their eruptive activity, such as the Euganean Hills in the province of Padua, Mount Amiata in Tuscany, the Berici Hills in the province of Vicenza and the Castelli Romani area, where there are several lakes that occupy the craters of ancient volcanoes. The lakes of Bracciano, Vico and Bolsena in northern Lazio also had a similar origin.

In recent years, numerous studies have also been conducted to better understand the structure and destructive potential of the submarine volcano Marsili, located about north of Sicily and about west of Calabria. With its of length and of width (equal to of surface) the Marsili is one of the largest volcanoes in Europe.

Many elements of the Italian territory are of volcanic origin. Most of the small islands and archipelagos in the south, like Capraia, Ponza, Ischia, Eolie, Ustica and Pantelleria are volcanic islands.

==Gallery==
== See also ==

* Climate of Italy
* Italy (geographical region)
* List of islands of Italy
* Natural hazards in Italy

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216989" start="4" end="22" title="Geography of Italy" label="geography of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52107" start="59" end="80" title="physical geography" label="physical geographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="93" end="98" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155864" start="150" end="180" title="Italy (geographical region)" label="homonymous geographical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="205" end="211" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="248" end="265" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="281" end="290" title="Apennines" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="313" end="317" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="342" end="351" title="Po Valley" label="Po Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="379" end="385" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="390" end="398" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="421" end="440" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q108489" start="453" end="468" title="Pelagie Islands" label="Pelagie Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255215" start="619" end="622" title="35th parallel north" label="35°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256610" start="627" end="632" title="47th parallel north" label="47° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703768" start="649" end="651" title="6th meridian east" label="6°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705853" start="656" end="661" title="19th meridian east" label="19° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="677" end="688" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="693" end="699" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="704" end="711" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="719" end="727" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="732" end="742" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="750" end="762" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="770" end="777" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="860" end="872" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="874" end="884" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="886" end="900" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42820" start="902" end="914" title="Ligurian Sea" label="Ligurian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q645271" start="916" end="931" title="Sea of Sardinia" label="Sea of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206975" start="936" end="952" title="Strait of Sicily" label="Strait of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155864" start="959" end="986" title="Italian geographical region" label="Italian geographical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1116" end="1132" title="Italian Republic" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="1223" end="1230" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1232" end="1238" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="1240" end="1248" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1253" end="1264" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="1318" end="1340" title="Monaco" label="Principality of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="1346" end="1363" title="Malta" label="Republic of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="1369" end="1391" title="San Marino" label="Republic of San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="1400" end="1418" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City State"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="1424" end="1432" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1458" end="1463" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1512" end="1530" title="European continent" label="European continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="1538" end="1542" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1597" end="1603" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1608" end="1614" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="1635" end="1652" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1685" end="1702" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="1716" end="1723" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1728" end="1746" title="Greece" label="Hellenic peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="1764" end="1781" title="Iberian peninsula" label="Iberian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="1795" end="1807" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="1825" end="1843" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="1983" end="1997" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="2007" end="2017" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="2052" end="2060" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="2065" end="2071" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="2167" end="2185" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q206975" start="2195" end="2212" title="channel of Sicily" label="channel of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="2228" end="2235" title="Salento" label="Salento"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="2248" end="2255" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q164070" start="2294" end="2311" title="Strait of Otranto" label="Strait of Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q367993" start="2319" end="2338" title="Capo d&amp;#x27;Otranto" label="Capo d&amp;#x27;Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="2410" end="2418" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="2441" end="2450" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="2514" end="2526" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="2544" end="2552" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="2557" end="2564" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q645271" start="2605" end="2618" title="Sardinian Sea" label="Sardinian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707809" start="2981" end="2995" title="anthropization" label="anthropization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="3342" end="3348" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="3421" end="3441" title="Comune" label="Italian municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q40931" start="3467" end="3475" title="Madesimo" label="Madesimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16282" start="3477" end="3496" title="province of Sondrio" label="province of Sondrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q42820" start="3516" end="3528" title="Ligurian Sea" label="Ligurian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="3562" end="3573" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3578" end="3584" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="3589" end="3596" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="3604" end="3612" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="3617" end="3627" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="3635" end="3647" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="3655" end="3662" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="3745" end="3757" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="3759" end="3769" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="3771" end="3785" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42820" start="3787" end="3799" title="Ligurian Sea" label="Ligurian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q645271" start="3801" end="3816" title="Sea of Sardinia" label="Sea of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206975" start="3821" end="3837" title="Strait of Sicily" label="Strait of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565500" start="3892" end="3917" title="Testa Gemella Occidentale" label="Testa Gemella Occidentale"/>
<link wikidata="Q474195" start="3919" end="3926" title="Prettau" label="Prettau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="3937" end="3948" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925704" start="3976" end="3993" title="Punta Pesce Spada" label="Punta Pesce Spada"/>
<link wikidata="Q107338" start="3995" end="4004" title="Lampedusa" label="Lampedusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="4006" end="4012" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4035" end="4051" title="Capo Spartivento" label="Capo Spartivento"/>
<link wikidata="Q54632" start="4053" end="4060" title="Palizzi" label="Palizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="4062" end="4070" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154029" start="4107" end="4121" title="Rocca Bernauda" label="Rocca Bernauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9039" start="4123" end="4135" title="Bardonecchia" label="Bardonecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="4137" end="4145" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q367993" start="4172" end="4191" title="Capo d&amp;#x27;Otranto" label="Capo d&amp;#x27;Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q52174" start="4193" end="4200" title="Otranto" label="Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="4202" end="4208" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q474195" start="4420" end="4426" title="Predoi" label="Predoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q224813" start="4460" end="4478" title="Lampedusa e Linosa" label="Lampedusa e Linosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q52174" start="4512" end="4519" title="Otranto" label="Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9039" start="4552" end="4564" title="Bardonecchia" label="Bardonecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="4629" end="4639" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="4641" end="4653" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q95106" start="4675" end="4692" title="Jolanda di Savoia" label="Jolanda di Savoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16168" start="4694" end="4713" title="province of Ferrara" label="province of Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q578156" start="4741" end="4749" title="Trepalle" label="Trepalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40871" start="4751" end="4758" title="Livigno" label="Livigno"/>
<link wikidata="Q108532460" start="4861" end="4884" title="Exclusive economic zone of Italy" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q178954" start="4927" end="4955" title="Istituto Geografico Militare" label="Istituto Geografico Militare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="4959" end="4967" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q590232" start="5207" end="5226" title="geographical centre" label="geographical centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089152" start="5238" end="5247" title="Monteluco" label="Monteluco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240" start="5249" end="5268" title="province of Perugia" label="province of Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10866" start="5272" end="5277" title="Narni" label="Narni"/>
<link wikidata="Q16286" start="5279" end="5296" title="province of Terni" label="province of Terni"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="5300" end="5307" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16286" start="5309" end="5326" title="province of Terni" label="province of Terni"/>
<link wikidata="Q13396" start="5330" end="5335" title="Rieti" label="Rieti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267" start="5337" end="5354" title="province of Rieti" label="province of Rieti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155864" start="5826" end="5853" title="Italian geographical region" label="Italian geographical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5983" end="5999" title="Italian Republic" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="6090" end="6097" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6099" end="6105" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="6107" end="6115" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="6120" end="6131" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="6185" end="6207" title="Monaco" label="Principality of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="6213" end="6230" title="Malta" label="Republic of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="6236" end="6258" title="San Marino" label="Republic of San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="6267" end="6285" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City State"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="6291" end="6299" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="6489" end="6493" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="6499" end="6508" title="Po Valley" label="Po Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="6510" end="6517" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="6541" end="6550" title="Apennines" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8611" start="6598" end="6607" title="La Spezia" label="La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="6611" end="6617" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="6633" end="6637" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q706553" start="6669" end="6683" title="County of Nice" label="County of Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751392" start="6686" end="6705" title="Italian Switzerland" label="Italian Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="6715" end="6727" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6783" end="6796" title="Valle Stretta" label="Valle Stretta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6798" end="6803" title="Gondo (island)" label="Gondo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6808" end="6821" title="Val Monastero" label="Val Monastero"/>
<link wikidata="Q656674" start="6954" end="6964" title="Val di Lei" label="Val di Lei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6970" end="6984" title="Val di Livigno" label="Val di Livigno"/>
<link wikidata="Q474782" start="6990" end="7001" title="San Candido" label="San Candido"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7013" end="7022" title="Rio Sesto" label="Rio Sesto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7038" end="7052" title="Tarvisio basin" label="Tarvisio basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54626" start="7257" end="7269" title="Melito di Porto Salvo" label="Punta Melito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="7273" end="7281" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q649217" start="7337" end="7357" title="Santa Maria di Leuca" label="Santa Maria di Leuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="7361" end="7367" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="7369" end="7379" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="7388" end="7400" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="7485" end="7502" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="7567" end="7582" title="southern Europe" label="southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="7620" end="7637" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q525358" start="7702" end="7715" title="Insular Italy" label="Insular Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="7730" end="7738" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="7740" end="7746" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="7803" end="7814" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="7868" end="7875" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7941" end="7947" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="8092" end="8098" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="8104" end="8112" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45328" start="8118" end="8122" title="Elba" label="Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q286709" start="8128" end="8145" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco"/>
<link wikidata="Q481758" start="8151" end="8162" title="Pantelleria" label="Pantelleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223267" start="8267" end="8284" title="Gulf of La Spezia" label="Gulf of La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q757114" start="8310" end="8318" title="Palmaria (island)" label="Palmaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q660758" start="8320" end="8324" title="Tino (island)" label="Tino"/>
<link wikidata="Q752505" start="8329" end="8336" title="Tinetto" label="Tinetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q212203" start="8340" end="8358" title="Tuscan archipelago" label="Tuscan archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q45328" start="8384" end="8388" title="Elba" label="Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593349" start="8531" end="8538" title="Capraia" label="Capraia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19347" start="8543" end="8550" title="Gorgona (Italy)" label="Gorgona"/>
<link wikidata="Q208114" start="8565" end="8572" title="Pianosa" label="Pianosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q203169" start="8574" end="8585" title="Montecristo" label="Montecristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19378" start="8587" end="8596" title="Giannutri" label="Giannutri"/>
<link wikidata="Q204152" start="8615" end="8621" title="Isola del Giglio" label="Giglio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8640" end="8647" title="Cerboli" label="Cerboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229122" start="8652" end="8661" title="Palmaiola" label="Palmaiola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8689" end="8711" title="Islet of the Sparviero" label="Islet of the Sparviero"/>
<link wikidata="Q478159" start="8715" end="8724" title="Punta Ala" label="Punta Ala"/>
<link wikidata="Q615609" start="8730" end="8750" title="Formiche di Grosseto" label="Formiche di Grosseto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8756" end="8773" title="Formica di Burano" label="Formica di Burano"/>
<link wikidata="Q835755" start="8806" end="8827" title="Scoglio d&amp;#x27;Africa" label="Scoglio d&amp;#x27;Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8862" end="8890" title="promontory of the Argentario" label="promontory of the Argentario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8901" end="8912" title="Argentarola" label="Argentarola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8914" end="8925" title="Isola Rossa (Monte Argentario)" label="Isola Rossa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8930" end="8938" title="Isolotto" label="Isolotto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8959" end="8979" title="Secche della Meloria" label="Secche della Meloria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8988" end="9002" title="Secche di Vada" label="Secche di Vada"/>
<link wikidata="Q75524" start="9010" end="9028" title="Phlegraean Islands" label="Phlegraean Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q189387" start="9030" end="9036" title="Ischia" label="Ischia"/>
<link wikidata="Q72432" start="9041" end="9048" title="Procida" label="Procida"/>
<link wikidata="Q173292" start="9055" end="9060" title="Capri" label="Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q201385" start="9069" end="9083" title="Gulf of Naples" label="Gulf of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q768102" start="9133" end="9154" title="Campanian Archipelago" label="Campanian Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q844829" start="9158" end="9173" title="Pontine islands" label="Pontine islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133295" start="9175" end="9180" title="Ponza" label="Ponza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466491" start="9182" end="9191" title="Palmarola" label="Palmarola"/>
<link wikidata="Q146988" start="9193" end="9200" title="Zannone" label="Zannone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085906" start="9205" end="9214" title="Ventotene" label="Ventotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q929036" start="9223" end="9236" title="gulf of Gaeta" label="gulf of Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q179883" start="9259" end="9274" title="Aeolian Islands" label="Aeolian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q505847" start="9301" end="9307" title="Salina, Sicily" label="Salina"/>
<link wikidata="Q496389" start="9309" end="9315" title="Lipari" label="Lipari"/>
<link wikidata="Q207323" start="9343" end="9350" title="Vulcano" label="Vulcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q654105" start="9382" end="9389" title="Panarea" label="Panarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131148" start="9399" end="9408" title="Stromboli" label="Stromboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="9492" end="9506" title="ancient Greeks" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q743908" start="9605" end="9613" title="Filicudi" label="Filicudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q649957" start="9618" end="9625" title="Alicudi" label="Alicudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q109576" start="9629" end="9645" title="Aegadian Islands" label="Aegadian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q216799" start="9667" end="9676" title="Favignana" label="Favignana"/>
<link wikidata="Q497339" start="9678" end="9687" title="Marettimo" label="Marettimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q497357" start="9689" end="9696" title="Levanzo" label="Levanzo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9701" end="9709" title="Stagnone" label="Stagnone"/>
<link wikidata="Q481514" start="9731" end="9738" title="Marsala" label="Marsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q13664" start="9743" end="9750" title="Trapani" label="Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="9760" end="9766" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q108489" start="9770" end="9785" title="Pelagie Islands" label="Pelagie Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q497321" start="9797" end="9803" title="Linosa" label="Linosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q168820" start="9805" end="9813" title="Lampione" label="Lampione"/>
<link wikidata="Q107338" start="9818" end="9827" title="Lampedusa" label="Lampedusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192129" start="9855" end="9861" title="Ustica" label="Ustica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9870" end="9885" title="Gulf of Palermo" label="Gulf of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q481758" start="9890" end="9901" title="Pantelleria" label="Pantelleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q206975" start="9923" end="9939" title="Sicilian Channel" label="Sicilian Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51930" start="9960" end="9975" title="Tremiti Islands" label="Tremiti Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9994" end="10001" title="Pianosa (Tremiti)" label="Pianosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="10021" end="10033" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q730500" start="10066" end="10073" title="Asinara" label="Asinara"/>
<link wikidata="Q340757" start="10097" end="10109" title="La Maddalena" label="La Maddalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q912934" start="10124" end="10134" title="San Pietro Island" label="San Pietro"/>
<link wikidata="Q286709" start="10139" end="10156" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco"/>
<link wikidata="Q692733" start="10164" end="10179" title="Cheradi Islands" label="Cheradi Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192738" start="10215" end="10230" title="Gulf of Taranto" label="Gulf of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="10325" end="10329" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="10363" end="10381" title="Apennine Mountains" label="Apennine Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108955" start="10504" end="10521" title="Colle di Cadibona" label="Colle di Cadibona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134424" start="10534" end="10547" title="Ligurian Alps" label="Ligurian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="10558" end="10573" title="Italian regions" label="Italian regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="10643" end="10651" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="10770" end="10777" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="10808" end="10816" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="10821" end="10829" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="11015" end="11029" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="11031" end="11041" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="11046" end="11061" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="11083" end="11095" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11100" end="11106" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="11142" end="11151" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="11248" end="11255" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="11259" end="11267" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="11293" end="11299" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858387" start="11314" end="11321" title="Madonie" label="Madonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q74259" start="11440" end="11452" title="Western Alps" label="Western Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q14668" start="11507" end="11517" title="Monte Rosa" label="Monte Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374" start="11526" end="11533" title="Matterhorn" label="Cervino"/>
<link wikidata="Q216869" start="11612" end="11636" title="Gran Sasso d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Gran Sasso d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374" start="11687" end="11697" title="Matterhorn" label="Matterhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14668" start="11700" end="11710" title="Monte Rosa" label="Monte Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372" start="11712" end="11725" title="Gran Paradiso" label="Gran Paradiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q427415" start="11748" end="11755" title="Bernina Range" label="Bernina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334855" start="11757" end="11764" title="Stelvio Pass" label="Stelvio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283" start="11769" end="11778" title="Dolomites" label="Dolomites"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865" start="12440" end="12446" title="Langhe" label="Langhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868" start="12451" end="12461" title="Montferrat" label="Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q478146" start="12543" end="12562" title="Colline Metallifere" label="Colline Metallifere"/>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="12577" end="12585" title="Mount Vesuvius" label="Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051664" start="12684" end="12689" title="Altopiano delle Murge" label="Murge"/>
<link wikidata="Q763332" start="12694" end="12701" title="Gargano" label="Gargano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071629" start="12779" end="12786" title="Chianti (region)" label="Chianti"/>
<link wikidata="Q652729" start="13071" end="13078" title="Brianza" label="Brianza"/>
<link wikidata="Q472780" start="13083" end="13091" title="Canavese" label="Canavese"/>
<link wikidata="Q241136" start="13274" end="13288" title="Euganean Hills" label="Euganean Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="13555" end="13566" title="Po Valley" label="large plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q643" start="13588" end="13590" title="Po River" label="Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251" start="13650" end="13662" title="Cottian Alps" label="Cottian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q302083" start="14176" end="14198" title="Tavoliere delle Puglie" label="Tavoliere delle Puglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q954942" start="14207" end="14216" title="Campidano" label="Campidano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233184" start="14236" end="14243" title="Maremma" label="Maremma"/>
<link wikidata="Q538820" start="14426" end="14434" title="Valdarno" label="Valdarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756467" start="14436" end="14451" title="Pontine Marshes" label="Pontine Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14464" end="14475" title="Metapontino" label="Metapontino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14477" end="14490" title="Plain of Sele" label="Plain of Sele"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="14492" end="14499" title="Salento" label="Salento"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14501" end="14516" title="Plain of Sibari" label="Plain of Sibari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523630" start="14518" end="14534" title="Plain of Catania" label="Plain of Catania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14539" end="14565" title="Plain of Sant&amp;#x27;Eufemia" label="Plain of Sant&amp;#x27;Eufemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14743" end="14760" title="Plain of Campania" label="Plain of Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="15209" end="15214" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q152005" start="15579" end="15588" title="Drainage divide" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q643" start="15934" end="15936" title="Po river" label="Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248" start="15962" end="15969" title="Monviso" label="Monviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="15995" end="16004" title="Po Valley" label="Po Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="16047" end="16052" title="River delta" label="delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="16063" end="16075" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13696" start="16230" end="16235" title="Adige" label="Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249840" start="16262" end="16272" title="Lake Resia" label="Lake Resia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55416" start="16350" end="16358" title="Chioggia" label="Chioggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="16400" end="16405" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q580842" start="16492" end="16506" title="Monte Fumaiolo" label="Monte Fumaiolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263" start="16511" end="16525" title="Emilia-Romagna" label="Emilia-Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="16546" end="16560" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="16596" end="16600" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q63109" start="16653" end="16657" title="Adda (river)" label="Adda"/>
<link wikidata="Q848670" start="16662" end="16667" title="Oglio" label="Oglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q851323" start="16672" end="16678" title="Tanaro" label="Tanaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14366" start="16686" end="16692" title="Ticino (river)" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q213462" start="16796" end="16801" title="Piave (river)" label="Piave"/>
<link wikidata="Q13696" start="16803" end="16808" title="Adige" label="Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q214551" start="16810" end="16816" title="Brenta (river)" label="Brenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q747929" start="16818" end="16829" title="Tagliamento" label="Tagliamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q658594" start="16831" end="16835" title="Reno River" label="Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q115457" start="16866" end="16870" title="Arno" label="Arno"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="16872" end="16877" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q572191" start="16882" end="16890" title="Volturno" label="Volturno"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="16958" end="16967" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="16993" end="16998" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q474782" start="17000" end="17008" title="Innichen" label="Innichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q256337" start="17013" end="17019" title="Sexten" label="Sexten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237" start="17023" end="17051" title="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol" label="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q18801" start="17053" end="17061" title="Tarvisio" label="Tarvisio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250" start="17065" end="17086" title="Friuli-Venezia-Giulia" label="Friuli-Venezia-Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14369" start="17095" end="17098" title="Inn (river)" label="Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q40871" start="17100" end="17107" title="Livigno" label="Livigno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="17111" end="17119" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="17127" end="17138" title="tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="17146" end="17152" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q656674" start="17178" end="17189" title="Lago di Lei" label="Lago di Lei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="17217" end="17226" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="17248" end="17253" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430594" start="17427" end="17441" title="moraine-dammed lake" label="moraine-dammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471925" start="17453" end="17466" title="Italian Lakes" label="Italian Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414" start="17505" end="17510" title="Lake Garda" label="Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q14379" start="17561" end="17574" title="Lake Maggiore" label="Lake Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15523" start="17632" end="17636" title="Como lake" label="Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q63141" start="17718" end="17722" title="Orta lake" label="Orta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14418" start="17724" end="17730" title="Lugano lake" label="Lugano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15648" start="17732" end="17736" title="Iseo lake" label="Iseo"/>
<link wikidata="Q63148" start="17738" end="17742" title="Idro lake" label="Idro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129358" start="17852" end="17863" title="Lake Lesina" label="Lake Lesina"/>
<link wikidata="Q208180" start="17935" end="17947" title="Lake Bolsena" label="Lake Bolsena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246006" start="17949" end="17958" title="Lake Vico" label="Lake Vico"/>
<link wikidata="Q896551" start="17960" end="17974" title="Lake Bracciano" label="Lake Bracciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q188487" start="18024" end="18038" title="Lake Trasimeno" label="Lake Trasimeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q511180" start="18145" end="18151" title="Lago di Varano" label="Varano"/>
<link wikidata="Q878556" start="18156" end="18162" title="Lake Omodeo" label="Omodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="18166" end="18174" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891671" start="18337" end="18355" title="Valli di Comacchio" label="Valli di Comacchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968028" start="18381" end="18399" title="Stagno di Cagliari" label="Stagno di Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q76925" start="18527" end="18542" title="Venetian Lagoon" label="Venetian Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216288" start="18552" end="18564" title="Grado Lagoon" label="Grado Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216288" start="18577" end="18590" title="Marano Lagoon" label="Marano Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18665" end="18681" title="Orbetello Lagoon" label="Orbetello Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="18763" end="18780" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42820" start="18833" end="18845" title="Ligurian Sea" label="Ligurian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="18867" end="18874" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q45328" start="19016" end="19020" title="Elba" label="Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="19027" end="19041" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="19149" end="19156" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="19160" end="19168" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="19194" end="19200" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="19227" end="19235" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="19242" end="19254" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250" start="19304" end="19325" title="Friuli-Venezia Giulia" label="Friuli-Venezia Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q649217" start="19341" end="19361" title="Santa Maria di Leuca" label="Santa Maria di Leuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="19363" end="19369" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="19376" end="19386" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="19450" end="19460" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q206975" start="19528" end="19544" title="Strait of Sicily" label="Strait of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q645271" start="19585" end="19600" title="Sea of Sardinia" label="Sea of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="19837" end="19844" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="19849" end="19855" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479762" start="19878" end="19884" title="Monte Conero" label="Conero"/>
<link wikidata="Q763332" start="19925" end="19932" title="Gargano" label="Gargano"/>
<link wikidata="Q676960" start="19950" end="19969" title="Gulf of Manfredonia" label="Gulf of Manfredonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="20143" end="20150" title="Salento" label="Salento"/>
<link wikidata="Q52174" start="20160" end="20167" title="Otranto" label="Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q649217" start="20172" end="20192" title="Santa Maria di Leuca" label="Santa Maria di Leuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q192738" start="20310" end="20325" title="Gulf of Taranto" label="Gulf of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="20500" end="20517" title="Strait of Messina" label="Strait of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="20725" end="20731" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="20733" end="20740" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q128089" start="20745" end="20750" title="Gaeta" label="Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q72672" start="20783" end="20791" title="Sorrento" label="Sorrento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530284" start="20821" end="20827" title="Circeo" label="Circeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157824" start="20840" end="20848" title="Piombino" label="Piombino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20961" end="20979" title="Strait of Piombino" label="Strait of Piombino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21010" end="21027" title="Strait of Corsica" label="Strait of Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q207911" start="21066" end="21085" title="Strait of Bonifacio" label="Strait of Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065271" start="21120" end="21133" title="Gulf of Genoa" label="Gulf of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124206" start="21182" end="21200" title="Riviera di Levante" label="Riviera di Levante"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124206" start="21225" end="21243" title="Riviera di Ponente" label="Riviera di Ponente"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="21474" end="21480" title="Plate tectonics" label="plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q203548" start="21486" end="21499" title="African Plate" label="African Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="21508" end="21522" title="Eurasian Plate" label="Eurasian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="21620" end="21626" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="21710" end="21716" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="21728" end="21737" title="Apennines" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="21794" end="21800" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250" start="21816" end="21837" title="Friuli-Venezia Giulia" label="Friuli-Venezia Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="21868" end="21874" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="21942" end="21946" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="22009" end="22018" title="Po Valley" label="Po Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="22048" end="22053" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="22080" end="22088" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="22213" end="22221" title="Vesuvius" label="Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="22227" end="22233" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="22235" end="22239" title="Mount Etna" label="Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="22245" end="22252" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q131148" start="22304" end="22313" title="Stromboli" label="Stromboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q207323" start="22318" end="22325" title="Vulcano" label="Vulcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q179883" start="22334" end="22349" title="Aeolian Islands" label="Aeolian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208" start="22357" end="22376" title="province of Messina" label="province of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="22403" end="22410" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q755123" start="22425" end="22438" title="Campi Flegrei" label="Campi Flegrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="22442" end="22450" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q241136" start="22564" end="22578" title="Euganean Hills" label="Euganean Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226" start="22586" end="22603" title="province of Padua" label="province of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q470777" start="22605" end="22617" title="Mount Amiata" label="Mount Amiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="22621" end="22628" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109384" start="22634" end="22646" title="Berici Hills" label="Berici Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q16316" start="22654" end="22673" title="province of Vicenza" label="province of Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048792" start="22682" end="22697" title="Castelli Romani" label="Castelli Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q896551" start="22793" end="22802" title="Lake Bracciano" label="Bracciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246006" start="22804" end="22808" title="Lake Vico" label="Vico"/>
<link wikidata="Q208180" start="22813" end="22820" title="Lake Bolsena" label="Bolsena"/>
<link wikidata="Q674775" start="22994" end="23011" title="submarine volcano" label="submarine volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572574" start="23012" end="23019" title="Marsili" label="Marsili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="23044" end="23050" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="23069" end="23077" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="23282" end="23293" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593349" start="23314" end="23321" title="Capraia" label="Capraia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133295" start="23323" end="23328" title="Ponza" label="Ponza"/>
<link wikidata="Q189387" start="23330" end="23336" title="Ischia" label="Ischia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179883" start="23338" end="23343" title="Aeolian Islands" label="Eolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q192129" start="23345" end="23351" title="Ustica" label="Ustica"/>
<link wikidata="Q481758" start="23356" end="23367" title="Pantelleria" label="Pantelleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161185" start="23372" end="23387" title="volcanic island" label="volcanic island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058503" start="23421" end="23437" title="Climate of Italy" label="Climate of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155864" start="23440" end="23467" title="Italy (geographical region)" label="Italy (geographical region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422116" start="23470" end="23494" title="List of islands of Italy" label="List of islands of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104829787" start="23497" end="23521" title="Natural hazards in Italy" label="Natural hazards in Italy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14700" wikidata="Q1800338" url="?curid=14700" title="Demographics of Italy">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Italy include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.

At the beginning of 2024, Italy had an estimated population of 58.9 million. Its population density, at , is higher than that of most Western European countries. However, the distribution of the population is very uneven: the most densely populated areas are the Po Valley (with about a third of the country&#x27;s population) in northern Italy and the metropolitan areas of Rome and Naples in central and southern Italy, while large rural areas are very sparsely populated, like the plateaus of Basilicata, the Alps and Apennines highlands, and the island of Sardinia.

The population of the country almost doubled during the 20th century, but the pattern of growth was extremely uneven due to large-scale internal migration from the rural South to the industrial cities of the North, due to the Italian economic miracle of the 1950s and 1960s. In addition, after centuries of net emigration, since the 1980s Italy has experienced large-scale immigration for the first time in modern history. Italian government data, in its annual report for 2019, estimated the number of foreign nationals residing within Italy, including immigrants, at about 5.234 million. Due to such large-scale immigration to the country, particularly from the early 2000s to 2014, the population peaked at 60.79 million. Since then, decreasing migration, a continuously falling birth rate, and continuous aging have led to a sharp decrease in the Italian population.

High fertility and birth rates persisted until the 1970s, after which they started to dramatically decline, leading to rapid population aging. At the end of the 2000s decade, one in five Italians was over 65 years old. Italy experienced a short-term growth in birth rates. The total fertility rate temporarily rose from an all-time low of 1.18 children per woman in 1995 to 1.46 in 2010. Since then, fertility rates have resumed their decline, to reach a low of 1.24 in 2022.

Since the revision of the Lateran Treaty in 1984, Italy has no official religion, although it continues to recognize the role the Catholic Church plays in Italian society. In 2017, 78% of the population identified as Catholic, 15% as non-believers or atheists, 2% as other Christians and 6% adhered to other religions.

==Historical overview==

===1861 to early 20th century===

From its unification in 1861 to the Italian economic miracle of the 1950s and 1960s, Italy has been a country of mass emigration. Between 1898 and 1914, the peak years of Italian diaspora, approximately 750,000 Italians emigrated each year. As a consequence, large numbers of people with full or significant Italian ancestry are found in Brazil (32 million Italian Brazilians), Argentina (25 million Italian Argentines), United States (18 million Italian Americans), France (5 million Italian French), Venezuela (5 million Italian Venezuelans), Paraguay (2.5 million Italian Paraguayans), Colombia (2 million Italian Colombians), Uruguay (1.5 million Italian Uruguayans), Peru (1.5 million Italian Peruvians), Canada (1.5 million Italian Canadians), Germany (1.2 million Italian Germans) and Australia (1 million Italian Australians). In addition, Italian communities once thrived in the former African colonies of Eritrea (nearly 100,000 at the beginning of World War II), Somalia and Libya (150,000 Italians settled in Libya, constituting about 18% of the total Libyan population).

=== After World War II ===
After Tito&#x27;s annexation of Istria, Kvarner, most of the Julian March as well as the Dalmatian city of Zara following the Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947, up to 350,000 local ethnic Italians (Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians) left communist Yugoslavia (Istrian–Dalmatian exodus). Furthermore, all of Libya&#x27;s Italians were expelled after Muammar Gaddafi&#x27;s takeover in 1970.

As a result of the profound economic and social changes brought by rapid postwar economic growth, including low birth rates, an aging population and thus a shrinking workforce, by the 1970s emigration had all but stopped and Italy started to have a positive net migration rate. The nation&#x27;s immigrant population reached 5 million by 2015, making up some 8% of the total population. However, the long-lasting effects of the Eurozone crisis double-dip recession strongly slowed down immigration rates in Italy in the 2010s.

In calendar years 2020 and 2021, as a direct effect of COVID-19 pandemic and Deltacron hybrid variant, Italy has registered at least 178,000 excess deaths, a reduction of about 1.4 years in the average life expectancy, a noticeable decrease in birth rates and a marked decrease in immigration rates. Thus, there&#x27;s a record natural population decline of 342,042 units in that year, the largest ever recorded since the start of the pandemic. During the first two years of the pandemic, Italy is one of the total number of highest excess deaths from all causes was the highest recorded since World War I, Spanish flu pandemic, Great Depression, and World War II.

In November 2022, Italy&#x27;s birth rate declined to its lowest level on record since 1861, with fewer than 400,000 births recorded that year.

== Population ==


=== Life expectancy ===

Sources: Our World In Data and the United Nations.
1871–1950
1950–2020

Source: &quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;

===Fertility===
By 2021, the number of births had fallen to 400,249, a decrease of 25% compared to 2011. If the trend is not reversed, it may adversely affect GDP growth and social security benefits. The reasons that Italians give for not having children are economic costs, fear of losing their job and lack of services for families, but it is claimed that these problems have ceased to be the main motivation for childlessness. Other countries such as Sweden and France with superior childcare service and better job conditions also have birth rates below the population replacement level, which is approximately 2.1.

===Historical fertility rates===

The total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. This table is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World in Data and Gapminder Foundation.
In 2021 this was 1.47 children born/woman.

Mother&#x27;s mean age at first birth; 31.1 years (2017 est.)

===Internal migration===

Internal migration in Italy is a human migration within the Italian geographical region that occurred for similar reasons to emigration, primarily socioeconomic. Its largest wave consisted of 4 million people moving from Southern Italy to Northern Italy (and mostly to Northern or Central Italian industrial cities like Rome or Milan, etc.), between the 1950s and 1970s.

The oldest migration goes back to the 11th century when soldiers and settlers from Northern Italy (at the time collectively called &quot;Lombardy&quot;), settled the central and eastern part of Sicily during the Norman conquest of southern Italy. After the marriage between the Norman king Roger I of Sicily with Adelaide del Vasto, member of Aleramici family, many Lombard colonisers left their homeland, in the Aleramici&#x27;s possessions in Piedmont and Liguria, to settle on the island of Sicily. The migration of people from Northern Italy to Sicily continued until the end of the 13th century.

=== Age structure ===
:&quot;0-14 years:&quot; 0–14 years: 13.45% (male 4,292,431/female 4,097,732)
:&quot;15-24 years:&quot; 9.61% (male 3,005,402/female 2,989,764)
:&quot;25-54 years:&quot; 40.86% (male 12,577,764/female 12,921,614)
:&quot;55-64 years:&quot; 14% (male 4,243,735/female 4,493,581)
:&quot;65 years and over:&quot; 22.08% (male 5,949,560/female 7,831,076) (2020 est.)

Median age
:total: 46.5 years. Country comparison to the world: 5th
:male: 45.4 years
:female: 47.5 years (2020 est.)

=== Cities ===
70.4% of Italian population is classified as urban, a relatively low figure among developed countries. Italy&#x27;s administrative boundaries have seen significant devolution in recent decades; the metropolitan area was created as a new administrative unit, and major cities and metro areas now have a provincial status.

According to OECD, the largest conurbations are:
* Milan – 7.4 million
* Rome – 3.7 million
* Naples – 3.1 million
* Turin – 2.2 million
Urbanization
:urban population: 71% of total population (2020)
:rate of urbanization: 0.29% annual rate of change (2015–20 est.)

== Vital statistics ==
In the year 2023 80,942 babies were born to at least one foreign parent which makes up 21.31% of all newborns in that year (20,084 or 5.29% were born to foreign mothers, 9,411 or 2.48% to foreign fathers, and 51,447 or 13.54% to two foreign parents). In Southern Italy (including Sicily and Sardinia) only 9.01 percent of all newborns had 1 or 2 foreign parents, while in Central and Northern Italy their share reached 23.72 and 30.01 percent, respectively.

===Current vital statistics===


===Total fertility rates by region===
Total fertility rate (TFR) in Italy by region as of 2023:
===Structure of the population===

==Health==
Obesity – adult prevalence rate
: 19.9% (2016) Country comparison to the world: 108

== Employment and income ==
Unemployment, youth ages 15–24:
:total: 32.2%. Country comparison to the world: 26th
:male: 30.4%
:female: 34.8% (2018 est.)

== Immigration ==

Since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, and more recently, the 2004 and 2007 enlargements of the European Union, Italy received growing flows of migrants from the former socialist countries of Eastern Europe (especially Romania, Albania, Ukraine and Poland). The second most important area of immigration to Italy has always been the neighboring North Africa (especially Morocco, Egypt, Tunisia and Algeria). Furthermore, in recent years, growing migration fluxes from the Far East (notably, China and the Philippines) and Latin America (Ecuador, Peru) have been recorded.

Italy does not collect data on ethnicity or race of the country, but does collect data on nationality of its residents.

In 2021, Istat estimated that 5,171,894 foreign citizens lived in Italy, representing about 8.7% of the total population. These figures do not include naturalized foreign-born residents (121,457 foreigners acquired Italian citizenship in 2021) as well as illegal immigrants, the so-called &quot;clandestini&quot;, whose numbers, difficult to determine, are thought to be at least 670,000. Romanians made up the largest community in the country (1,145,718; around 10% of them being ethnic Romani people), followed by Albanians (441,027) and Moroccans (422,980).

The fourth largest community of foreign residents in Italy was represented by the Chinese. The majority of Chinese living in Italy are from the city of Wenzhou in the province of Zhejiang. Breaking down the foreign-born population by continent, in 2020 the figures were as follows: Europe (54%), Africa (22%), Asia (16%), the Americas (8%) and Oceania (0.06%). The distribution of immigrants is largely uneven in Italy: 83% of immigrants live in the northern and central parts of the country (the most economically developed areas), while only 17% live in the southern half of the peninsula.

;Net migration rate
: 3.21 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2021 est.) Country comparison to the world: 34th


There are, as of 2022, 5,030,716 Foreign-born residents, accounting for 8.5% of the total population.

Their distribution by country of origin was as follows:

===Italy migration data===



== Languages ==

Italy&#x27;s official language is Italian; Ethnologue has estimated that there are about 55 million speakers of Italian in the country and a further 6.7 million outside of it, primarily in the neighboring countries and in the Italian diaspora worldwide. Italian, adopted by the central state after the unification of Italy, is a language based on the Florentine variety of Tuscan and is somewhat intermediate between the Italo-Dalmatian languages and the Gallo-Romance languages. Its development was also influenced by the Germanic languages of the post-Roman invaders. When Italy unified in 1861, only 3% of the population spoke Italian, even though an estimated 90% of Italians speak Italian as their L1 nowadays.

Italy is in fact one of the most linguistically diverse countries in Europe, as there are not only varieties of Italian specific to each cultural region, but also distinct regional and minority languages. The establishment of the national education system has led to the emergence of the former and a decrease in the use of the latter. The spread of Italian was further expanded in the 1950s and 1960s, because of the economic growth and the rise of mass media and television, with the state broadcaster (RAI) setting a colloquial variety of Italian to which the population would be exposed.

As a way to distance itself from the Italianization policies promoted because of nationalism, Italy recognized twelve languages as the Country&#x27;s &quot;historical linguistic minorities&quot;, which are promoted alongside Italian in their respective territories. French is co-official in the Aosta Valley as the province&#x27;s prestige variety, under which the more commonly spoken Franco-Provencal dialects have been historically roofed. German has the same status in the province of South Tyrol as, in some parts of that province and in parts of the neighbouring Trentino, does Ladin. Slovene and Friulian are officially recognised in the provinces of Trieste, Gorizia and Udine in Venezia Giulia. In Sardinia, the Sardinian language has been the language traditionally spoken and is often regarded by linguists as constituting its own branch of Romance; in the 1990s, Sardinian has been recognized as &quot;having equal dignity&quot; with Italian, the introduction of which to the island officially started under the rule of the House of Savoy in the 18th century.

In these regions, official documents are either bilingual (trilingual in Ladin communities) in the co-official language(s) by default, or available as such upon request. Traffic signs are also multilingual, except in the Valle d&#x27;Aosta where French toponyms are generally used, with the exception of Aosta itself, which has retained its Latin form in Italian as well as English. Attempts to Italianize them, especially during the Fascist period, have been formally abandoned. Education is possible in minority languages where such schools are operating.

UNESCO and other authorities recognize a number of other languages which are not legally protected by Italian government: Piedmontese, Venetian, Ligurian, Lombard, Emilian-Romagnolo, Neapolitan and Sicilian.

== Religion ==
Roman Catholicism is by far the largest religion in the country, although the Catholic Church is no longer officially the state religion. In 2006, 87.8% of Italy&#x27;s population self-identified as Roman Catholic, although only about one-third of these described themselves as active members (36.8%). In 2016, 71.1% of &quot;Italian citizens&quot; self-identified as Roman Catholic. This increased again to 78% in 2018.

Most Italians believe in God, or a form of a spiritual life force. According to a Eurobarometer Poll in 2005: 74% of Italian citizens responded that &#x27;they believe there is a God&#x27;, 16% answered that &#x27;they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force&#x27; and 6% answered that &#x27;they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, God, or life force&#x27;. There are no data collected through census.

===Christianity===
The Italian Catholic Church is part of the global Roman Catholic Church, under the leadership of the Pope, curia in Rome, and the Conference of Italian Bishops. In addition to Italy, two other sovereign nations are included in Italian-based dioceses, San Marino and Vatican City. There are 225 dioceses in the Italian Catholic Church, see further in this article and in the article List of the Roman Catholic dioceses in Italy. Even though by law Vatican City is not part of Italy, it is in Rome, and along with Latin, Italian is the most spoken and second language of the Roman Curia.

Italy has a rich Catholic culture, especially as numerous Catholic saints, martyrs and popes were Italian themselves. Roman Catholic art in Italy especially flourished during the Middle Ages, Renaissance and Baroque periods, with numerous Italian artists, such as Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Caravaggio, Fra Angelico, Gian Lorenzo Bernini, Sandro Botticelli, Tintoretto, Titian and Giotto. Roman Catholic architecture in Italy is equally as rich and impressive, with churches, basilicas and cathedrals such as St Peter&#x27;s Basilica, Florence Cathedral and St Mark&#x27;s Basilica. Roman Catholicism is the largest religion and denomination in Italy, with around 71.1% of Italians considering themselves Catholic. Italy is also home to the greatest number of cardinals in the world, and is the country with the greatest number of Roman Catholic churches per capita.
Even though the main Christian denomination in Italy is Roman Catholicism, there are some minorities of Protestant, Waldensian, Eastern Orthodox and other Christian churches.

Immigration from Western, Central, and Eastern Africa at the beginning of the 21st century has increased the size of Baptist, Anglican, Pentecostal and Evangelical communities in Italy, while immigration from Eastern Europe has produced large Eastern Orthodox communities.

In 2006, Protestants made up 2.1% of Italy&#x27;s population, and members of Eastern Orthodox churches comprised 1.2% or more than 700,000 Eastern Orthodox Christians including 180,000 Greek Orthodox, 550,000 Pentecostals and Evangelists (0.8%), of whom 400,000 are members of the Assemblies of God, about 250,000 are Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses (0.4%), 30,000 Waldensians, 25,000 Seventh-day Adventists, 22,000 Mormons, 15,000 Baptists (plus some 5,000 Free Baptists), 7,000 Lutherans, 4,000 Methodists (affiliated with the Waldensian Church).

===Other religions===
The longest-established religious faith in Italy is Judaism, Jews having been present in Ancient Rome before the birth of Christ. Italy has seen many influential Italian-Jews, such as prime minister Luigi Luzzatti, who took office in 1910, Ernesto Nathan served as mayor of Rome from 1907 to 1913 and Shabbethai Donnolo (died 982). During the Holocaust, Italy took in many Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany. However, with the creation of the Nazi-backed puppet Italian Social Republic, about 15% of 48,000 Italian Jews were killed. This, together with the emigration that preceded and followed the Second World War, has left only a small community of around 45,000 Jews in Italy today.

Due to immigration from around the world, there has been an increase in non-Christian religions. As of 2009, there were 1.0 million Muslims in Italy forming 1.6 percent of population; independent estimates put the Islamic population in Italy anywhere from 0.8 million to 1.5 million. 50,000 Italian Muslims hold Italian citizenship.

There are more than 200,000 followers of faiths originating in the Indian subcontinent, including some 70,000 Sikhs with 22 gurdwaras across the country, 70,000 Hindus, and 50,000 Buddhists. There were an estimated 4,900 Bahá&#x27;ís in Italy in 2005.

== Education ==
Literacy
: &quot;definition:&quot; age 15 and over can read and write
:total population: 99.2%
:male: 99.4%
:female: 99% (2018 est.)
School life expectancy (primary to tertiary education)
:total: 16 years
:male: 16 years
:female: 17 years (2018)

==Genetics and ethnic groups==

The genetic history of Italy is greatly influenced by geography and history. The ancestors of Italians are mostly Indo-European speakers (Italic peoples such as Latins, Umbrians, Samnites, Oscans, Sicels and Adriatic Veneti, as well as Celts, Iapygians and Greeks) and pre-Indo-European speakers (Etruscans, Ligures, Rhaetians and Camunni in mainland Italy, Sicani and Elymians in Sicily and the Nuragic people in Sardinia). During the imperial period of Ancient Rome, the city of Rome was also home to people from various regions throughout the Mediterranean basin, including Southern Europe, North Africa and the Middle East. Based on DNA analysis, there is evidence of ancient regional genetic substructure and continuity within modern Italy dating to the pre-Roman and Roman periods.

Within the Italian population, there is enough cultural, linguistic, genetic and historical diversity for them to constitute several distinct groups throughout the peninsula. In this regard, peoples like the Friulians, the Ladins, the Sardinians and the South Tyroleans, who also happen to constitute recognized linguistic minorities, or even the Sicilians who are not, are cases in point, attesting to such internal diversity.

Linguistic minorities in Italy include Sardu-speakers 1 million, Tyrolese German-speakers 350,000, Albanians 70,000 – 100,000, Slovenes 60,000, Franco-Provençal-speakers 50,000 – 70,000, Occitans 20,000 – 40,000, Ladins 30,000, Catalans 15,000, Greek-speakers 12,000, Croatians 3,000 and Friulians 600,000. The Roma community is one of the largest ethnic minorities in Italy. Due to the lack of disaggregated data the size of the Italian Roma community remains unknown. The Council of Europe estimates that between 120,000 and 180,000 Roma live in Italy. A significant proportion of Roma in Italy do not have Italian citizenship.

==See also==

* List of Italians
* Italian diaspora
*Italian Americans
* Italian Brazilians
* Italian Argentines
*Italian Venezuelans
* Romani people in Italy

==Footnotes==

==References==

==External links==

* Demographic page 
* Demographic Profile Italy Allianz Knowledge</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="42" end="47" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="56" end="74" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="76" end="85" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q970825" start="145" end="167" title="Religion in Italy" label="religious affiliations"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="451" end="460" title="Po Valley" label="Po Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="518" end="532" title="northern Italy" label="northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="563" end="567" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="572" end="578" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127320" start="582" end="589" title="Central Italy" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="594" end="608" title="southern Italy" label="southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="684" end="694" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="700" end="704" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="709" end="718" title="Apennines" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="748" end="756" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131696551" start="895" end="972" title="Internal migration in Italy" label="internal migration from the rural South to the industrial cities of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q492173" start="985" end="1009" title="Italian economic miracle" label="Italian economic miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796700" start="1373" end="1384" title="Immigration to Italy" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q193270" start="2134" end="2148" title="Lateran Treaty" label="Lateran Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2238" end="2253" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="2492" end="2507" title="Unification of Italy" label="its unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q492173" start="2523" end="2547" title="Italian economic miracle" label="Italian economic miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="2658" end="2674" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149102" start="2844" end="2862" title="Italian Brazilians" label="Italian Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056744" start="2887" end="2905" title="Italian Argentines" label="Italian Argentines"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="2934" end="2951" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026382" start="2972" end="2986" title="Italians in France" label="Italian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616006" start="3010" end="3029" title="Italian Venezuelans" label="Italian Venezuelans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804365" start="3054" end="3073" title="Italian Paraguayans" label="Italian Paraguayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916544" start="3096" end="3113" title="Italian Colombian" label="Italian Colombian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617408" start="3138" end="3156" title="Italian Uruguayans" label="Italian Uruguayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804367" start="3177" end="3194" title="Italian Peruvians" label="Italian Peruvians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254415" start="3217" end="3234" title="Italian Canadians" label="Italian Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q481161" start="3258" end="3273" title="Italians in Germany" label="Italian Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257191" start="3300" end="3319" title="Italian Australians" label="Italian Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="3390" end="3398" title="Italian colonial empire" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232988" start="3402" end="3409" title="Italian Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q319984" start="3461" end="3468" title="Italian Somaliland" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="3473" end="3478" title="Italian Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617693" start="3488" end="3513" title="Italian settlers in Libya" label="Italians settled in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="3605" end="3609" title="Marshal Tito" label="Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="3631" end="3637" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q938838" start="3639" end="3646" title="Kvarner Gulf" label="Kvarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="3660" end="3672" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="3688" end="3696" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="3706" end="3710" title="Zadar" label="Zara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314717" start="3725" end="3757" title="Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947" label="Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="3786" end="3794" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="3796" end="3812" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="3817" end="3835" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="3842" end="3862" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="communist Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714904" start="3864" end="3888" title="Istrian–Dalmatian exodus" label="Istrian–Dalmatian exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107218" start="3953" end="3984" title="Libyan Revolution of 1969" label="Muammar Gaddafi&amp;#x27;s takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="4423" end="4438" title="Eurozone crisis" label="Eurozone crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302389" start="4439" end="4459" title="double-dip recession" label="double-dip recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q84104992" start="4578" end="4595" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Italy" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107055182" start="4600" end="4605" title="SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant" label="Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q109739412" start="4605" end="4609" title="SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant" label="cron"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="4725" end="4740" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136905" start="5117" end="5128" title="Italy in World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="5130" end="5150" title="Spanish flu pandemic" label="Spanish flu pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5152" end="5168" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550755" start="5174" end="5186" title="Italy in World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680080" start="5387" end="5404" title="Our World In Data" label="Our World In Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q14819852" start="5540" end="5546" title="births" label="births"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="5660" end="5670" title="GDP growth" label="GDP growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="5675" end="5690" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="5718" end="5726" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="5813" end="5821" title="Public service" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q8436" start="5826" end="5834" title="families" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421842" start="5916" end="5929" title="childlessness" label="childlessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="5955" end="5961" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5966" end="5972" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="5987" end="5996" title="childcare" label="childcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q598949" start="6041" end="6091" title="Sub-replacement fertility" label="birth rates below the population replacement level"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="6160" end="6180" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680080" start="6295" end="6312" title="Our World in Data" label="Our World in Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790593" start="6317" end="6337" title="Gapminder Foundation" label="Gapminder Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131696551" start="6472" end="6499" title="Internal migration in Italy" label="Internal migration in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="6505" end="6520" title="human migration" label="human migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155864" start="6532" end="6559" title="Italian geographical region" label="Italian geographical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="6597" end="6607" title="Italian diaspora" label="emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="6693" end="6707" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="6711" end="6725" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="6927" end="6941" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="7038" end="7044" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q74011" start="7056" end="7089" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy" label="Norman conquest of southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q315297" start="7134" end="7151" title="Roger I of Sicily" label="Roger I of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q51000" start="7157" end="7175" title="Adelaide del Vasto" label="Adelaide del Vasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032243" start="7187" end="7196" title="Aleramici" label="Aleramici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="7289" end="7297" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="7302" end="7309" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="8010" end="8015" title="Urban population" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="8129" end="8139" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800793" start="8163" end="8180" title="Metropolitan Area (Italy)" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089" start="8267" end="8277" title="Provinces of Italy" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="8300" end="8304" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="8338" end="8343" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="8360" end="8364" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="8381" end="8387" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="8404" end="8409" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="9107" end="9127" title="Total fertility rate" label="Total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="9146" end="9152" title="Regions of Italy" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="9535" end="9539" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="9544" end="9548" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="9692" end="9699" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="9701" end="9708" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="9710" end="9717" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="9722" end="9728" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="9843" end="9850" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="9852" end="9857" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="9859" end="9866" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="9871" end="9878" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9964" end="9969" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="9978" end="9989" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="10010" end="10017" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="10019" end="10023" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q214195" start="10176" end="10181" title="Istat" label="Istat"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="10318" end="10329" title="naturalized" label="naturalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274327" start="10382" end="10401" title="Italian citizenship" label="Italian citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="10422" end="10440" title="illegal immigrants" label="illegal immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="10556" end="10565" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="10655" end="10668" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="10683" end="10692" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891793" start="10707" end="10716" title="Moroccans" label="Moroccans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="10811" end="10818" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42635" start="10881" end="10888" title="Wenzhou" label="Wenzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="10908" end="10916" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="11679" end="11689" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="11862" end="11878" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="11938" end="11958" title="unification of Italy" label="unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460907" start="11987" end="11997" title="Florentine dialect" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990745" start="12009" end="12015" title="Tuscan language" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313381" start="12057" end="12082" title="Italo-Dalmatian languages" label="Italo-Dalmatian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q500394" start="12091" end="12114" title="Gallo-Romance languages" label="Gallo-Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="12185" end="12204" title="Migration period" label="post-Roman invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098467" start="12452" end="12472" title="Regional Italian" label="varieties of Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085198" start="12525" end="12556" title="Languages of Italy" label="regional and minority languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="12858" end="12861" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675071" start="12983" end="12997" title="Italianization" label="Italianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093359" start="13027" end="13038" title="Italian nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13102" end="13134" title="Languages of Italy#Historical linguistic minorities" label="historical linguistic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="13241" end="13253" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="13277" end="13293" title="Prestige (linguistics)" label="prestige variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087" start="13332" end="13348" title="Franco-Provencal" label="Franco-Provencal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="13435" end="13446" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q16289" start="13515" end="13523" title="Trentino" label="Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q36202" start="13530" end="13535" title="Ladin language" label="Ladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="13537" end="13544" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q33441" start="13549" end="13557" title="Friulian language" label="Friulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16293" start="13604" end="13611" title="Province of Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q16184" start="13613" end="13620" title="Province of Gorizia" label="Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16294" start="13625" end="13630" title="Province of Udine" label="Udine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250" start="13634" end="13648" title="Friuli-Venezia Giulia" label="Venezia Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="13653" end="13661" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="13667" end="13685" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="13982" end="13996" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367" start="14323" end="14328" title="Aosta" label="Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="14578" end="14584" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15085" start="14700" end="14711" title="Piedmontese language" label="Piedmontese"/>
<link wikidata="Q32724" start="14713" end="14721" title="Venetian language" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="14723" end="14731" title="Ligurian (Romance language)" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33754" start="14733" end="14740" title="Lombard language" label="Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q242648" start="14742" end="14759" title="Emiliano-Romagnolo language" label="Emilian-Romagnolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="14761" end="14771" title="Neapolitan language" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="14776" end="14784" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="14802" end="14819" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="14924" end="14938" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q748216" start="15306" end="15319" title="Eurobarometer" label="Eurobarometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q835567" start="15773" end="15778" title="curia" label="curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q164448" start="15796" end="15825" title="Conference of Italian Bishops" label="Conference of Italian Bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="15917" end="15927" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="15932" end="15944" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054840" start="16048" end="16092" title="List of the Roman Catholic dioceses in Italy" label="List of the Roman Catholic dioceses in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16178" end="16183" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="16239" end="16250" title="Roman Curia" label="Roman Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907236" start="16270" end="16286" title="Catholic culture" label="Catholic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="16320" end="16325" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="16328" end="16334" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="16432" end="16443" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="16445" end="16456" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="16461" end="16468" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="16517" end="16529" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="16531" end="16548" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="16550" end="16557" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="16559" end="16569" title="Caravaggio" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664" start="16571" end="16583" title="Fra Angelico" label="Fra Angelico"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="16585" end="16605" title="Gian Lorenzo Bernini" label="Gian Lorenzo Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="16607" end="16624" title="Sandro Botticelli" label="Sandro Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9319" start="16626" end="16636" title="Tintoretto" label="Tintoretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="16638" end="16644" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="16649" end="16655" title="Giotto" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="16777" end="16801" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="16803" end="16821" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="16826" end="16849" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="17028" end="17036" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="17239" end="17249" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="17251" end="17261" title="Waldensian" label="Waldensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="17263" end="17279" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="17328" end="17335" title="Western Africa" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="17337" end="17344" title="Central Africa" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="17428" end="17435" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="17437" end="17445" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="17770" end="17784" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="17866" end="17883" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="17903" end="17927" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="17943" end="17954" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="17963" end="17985" title="Seventh-day Adventists" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="18058" end="18067" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="18075" end="18085" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="18239" end="18251" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q710026" start="18349" end="18363" title="Luigi Luzzatti" label="Luigi Luzzatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q969393" start="18390" end="18404" title="Ernesto Nathan" label="Ernesto Nathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q971757" start="18451" end="18469" title="Shabbethai Donnolo" label="Shabbethai Donnolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="18493" end="18502" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="18544" end="18548" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="18611" end="18634" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="18969" end="18976" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274327" start="19149" end="19168" title="Italian citizenship" label="Italian citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="19281" end="19286" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="19295" end="19304" title="gurdwaras" label="gurdwaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="19332" end="19338" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="19351" end="19360" title="Buddhists" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="19392" end="19404" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;ís"/>
<link wikidata="Q261364" start="19723" end="19747" title="genetic history of Italy" label="genetic history of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="19833" end="19846" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617880" start="19857" end="19871" title="Italic peoples" label="Italic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q202335" start="19880" end="19886" title="Latins (Italic tribe)" label="Latins"/>
<link wikidata="Q389236" start="19888" end="19893" title="Umbri" label="Umbri"/>
<link wikidata="Q500272" start="19898" end="19906" title="Samnites" label="Samnites"/>
<link wikidata="Q487908" start="19908" end="19914" title="Oscans" label="Oscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q959419" start="19916" end="19922" title="Sicels" label="Sicels"/>
<link wikidata="Q220379" start="19927" end="19942" title="Adriatic Veneti" label="Adriatic Veneti"/>
<link wikidata="Q199728" start="19955" end="19960" title="Cisalpine Gaul" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q841576" start="19962" end="19971" title="Iapygians" label="Iapygians"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="19976" end="19982" title="Magna Graecia" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q536187" start="19988" end="20005" title="pre-Indo-European languages" label="pre-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="20016" end="20025" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q207023" start="20027" end="20034" title="Ligures" label="Ligures"/>
<link wikidata="Q685035" start="20036" end="20045" title="Rhaetians" label="Rhaetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031802" start="20050" end="20057" title="Camunni" label="Camunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q952123" start="20077" end="20083" title="Sicani" label="Sicani"/>
<link wikidata="Q931423" start="20088" end="20096" title="Elymians" label="Elymians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421436" start="20115" end="20129" title="Nuragic civilization" label="Nuragic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="20133" end="20141" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="20155" end="20170" title="Roman Empire" label="imperial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="20174" end="20186" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="20192" end="20204" title="city of Rome" label="city of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="20296" end="20311" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="20313" end="20325" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="20334" end="20345" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992919" start="20555" end="20563" title="Italian culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085198" start="20565" end="20575" title="Languages of Italy" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q261364" start="20577" end="20584" title="Genetic history of Italy" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20589" end="20599" title="History of Italy#Unification (1814–1861)" label="historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q605843" start="20716" end="20725" title="Friulians" label="Friulians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799968" start="20731" end="20737" title="Ladin people" label="Ladins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="20743" end="20753" title="Sardinian people" label="Sardinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="20762" end="20773" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40554819" start="20855" end="20864" title="Sicilians" label="Sicilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="21248" end="21252" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="21411" end="21428" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269631" start="21584" end="21600" title="List of Italians" label="List of Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="21603" end="21619" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="21621" end="21638" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149102" start="21641" end="21659" title="Italian Brazilians" label="Italian Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056744" start="21662" end="21680" title="Italian Argentines" label="Italian Argentines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616006" start="21682" end="21701" title="Italian Venezuelans" label="Italian Venezuelans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940400" start="21704" end="21726" title="Romani people in Italy" label="Romani people in Italy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14701" wikidata="Q669701" url="?curid=14701" title="Politics of Italy">
<text>The politics of Italy are conducted through a parliamentary republic with a multi-party system. Italy has been a democratic republic since 2 June 1946, when the monarchy was abolished by popular referendum and a constituent assembly, formed by the representatives of all the anti-fascist forces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the liberation of Italy, was elected to draft a constitution, which was promulgated on 1 January 1948.

Executive power is exercised by the Council of Ministers, which is led by the Prime Minister, officially referred to as &quot;President of the Council&quot; (&quot;Presidente del Consiglio&quot;). Legislative power is vested primarily in the two houses of Parliament and secondarily in the Council of Ministers, which can introduce bills and holds the majority in both houses. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislative branches. It is headed by the High Council of the Judiciary, a body presided over by the President, who is the head of state, though this position is separate from all branches. The current president is Sergio Mattarella, and the current prime minister is Giorgia Meloni.

The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Italy as a &quot;flawed democracy&quot; in 2019. According to the 2023 V-Dem Democracy indices Italy was the 21st most electoral democratic country in the world. A high degree of fragmentation and instability, leading to often short-lived coalition governments, is characteristic of Italian politics. Since the end of World War II in 1945, Italy has had 69 governments, at an average of one every 1.11 years.

==Government==
The Italian constitution is the result of the work of the Constituent Assembly, which was formed by the representatives of all the anti-fascist forces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the liberation of Italy. Article 1 of the Italian constitution states:

By stating that Italy is a democratic republic, the article solemnly declares the results of the constitutional referendum which took place on 1 June 1946. The State is not a hereditary property of the ruling monarch, but it is instead a &quot;Res Publica&quot;, belonging to everyone.

The people who are called to temporarily administer the republic are not owners, but servants; and the governed are not subjects, but citizens. And the sovereignty, that is the power to make choices that involve the entire community, belongs to the people, in accordance with the concept of a democracy, from the Greek &quot;demos&quot; (people) and &quot;kratìa&quot; (power). However, this power is not to be exercised arbitrarily, but in the forms and within the limits established by the rule of law.

===Head of state===
As the head of state, the President of Italy, officially denoted as President of the Italian Republic, represents national unity, and guarantees that Italian politics comply with the Constitution. In these duties he or she serves as a point of connection between the three branches of the government, but has got considerably less powers than those previously given to the King of Italy. The President of Italy is the commander-in-chief of the Italian Armed Forces and chairs the High Council of the Judiciary. A president&#x27;s term of office lasts for seven years.

The President of Italy is elected by an electoral college of minimum 658 members (according to the number of senators for life). It comprises both chambers of the Italian Parliament—the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate of the Republic—meeting in joint session, combined with 58 special electors appointed by the regional councils of the 20 regions of Italy. Three representatives come from each region (save for the Aosta Valley, which due to its small size only appoints one), so as to guarantee representation for localities and minorities.

===Legislative branch===
With article 48 of the Constitution, which guarantees the right to vote, the people exercise their power through their elected representatives in the Parliament. The Parliament has a bicameral system, and consists of the Chamber of deputies and the Senate, elected every five years. The two houses together form a perfect bicameral system, meaning they perform identical functions, but do so separately.

The Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of the bicameral Italian Parliament, has 400 members, of which 392 are elected from Italian constituencies and 8 from Italian citizens living abroad. Members of the Chamber of Deputies are styled &quot;The Honourable&quot; (Italian: &quot;Onorevole&quot;) and meet at Palazzo Montecitorio in Rome.

The Senate of the Republic, the upper house of the bicameral Italian Parliament, has 200 members, of which 196 are elected from Italian constituencies and 4 from Italian citizens living abroad. In addition, there is a variable number (currently 6) of senators for life (&quot;senatori a vita&quot;), either appointed by the President of the Republic or rightfully so as former Presidents of the Republic. Members of the Senate are styled &quot;Senator&quot; or &quot;The Honourable Senator&quot; (Italian: &quot;Onorevole Senatore&quot;) and meet at Palazzo Madama in Rome.

===Executive branch ===

The Constitution establishes the Government of Italy as composed of the president of the council (Prime Minister of Italy) and ministers. The President of Italy appoints the prime minister and, on their proposal, the ministers that form its cabinet.

The Prime Minister of Italy, officially the President of the Council of Ministers of the Italian Republic, is the head of government of the Italian Republic. The Prime Minister of Italy must have the confidence of the Italian Parliament to stay in office. The Prime Minister of Italy is the president of the Council of Ministers which holds executive power and the position is similar to those in most other parliamentary systems. The formal Italian order of precedence lists the office as being, ceremonially, the fourth-highest Italian state office after the president and the heads of the legislative chambers.

The Council of Ministers is the principal executive organ of the Government of Italy. It comprises the President of the council (the Prime Minister of Italy), all the ministers, and the undersecretary to the President of the council. Deputy ministers () and junior ministers () are part of the government, but are not members of the Council of Ministers.

===Judicial branch===

The law of Italy has a plurality of sources of production. These are arranged in a hierarchical scale, under which the rule of a lower source cannot conflict with the rule of an upper source (hierarchy of sources). The Constitution of 1948 is the main source.

The Constitution states that justice is administered in the name of the people and that judges are subject only to the law. So the judiciary is a branch that is completely autonomous and independent of all other branches of power, even though the Minister of Justice is responsible for the organization and functioning of those services involved with justice and has the power to originate disciplinary actions against judges, which are then administered by the High Council of the Judiciary, presided over by the President.

The judiciary of Italy is based on Roman law, the Napoleonic code and later statutes. It is based on a mix of the adversarial and inquisitorial civil law systems, although the adversarial system was adopted in the Appeal Courts in 1988. Appeals are treated almost as new trials, and three degrees of trial are present. The third is a legitimating trial.

In November 2014, Italy accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice.

==Political parties and elections==

Before 2021, the minimum voting age for all elections was 18 years old, aside for Senate elections, where the minimum voting age was 25 years old. Following the approval of Constitutional Law No. 1/2021, the minimum voting age for the Senate of the Republic became the same as for the Chamber of Deputies (18 years old and no longer 25). The 2022 Italian general election was the first one in which both chambers had identical electoral bodies.

===Chamber of Deputies===


===Senate of the Republic===

===Political parties===

Italy&#x27;s dramatic self-renewal transformed the political landscape between 1992 and 1997. Scandal investigations touched thousands of politicians, administrators and businessmen; the shift from a proportional to the scorporo system (with the requirement to obtain a minimum of 4% of the national vote to obtain representation) also altered the political landscape. Party changes were sweeping. The Christian Democratic party dissolved; the Italian People&#x27;s Party and the Christian Democratic Center emerged. Other major parties, such as the Socialists, saw support plummet. A new liberal movement, , gained wide support among moderate voters. The National Alliance broke from the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement (MSI). A trend toward two large coalitions (one on the center-left and the other on the center-right) emerged from the April 1995 regional elections. For the 1996 national elections, the center-left parties created the Olive Tree coalition while the center-right united again under the House of Freedoms. These coalitions continued into the 2001 and 2007 national elections.

This emerging bipolarity represents a major break from the fragmented, multi-party political landscape of the postwar era, although it appears to have reached a plateau since efforts via referendums to further curtail the influence of small parties were defeated in 1999, 2000 and 2009.

==Regional governments==

Five regions (Aosta Valley, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Sardinia, Sicily and Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol) have special charters granting them varying degrees of autonomy. The &quot;raisons d&#x27;être&quot; of these charters is in most cases the presence of significant linguistic and cultural minorities, but in the case of Sicily it was to calm down separatist movements. The other 15 regions were in practice established in 1970, even if their ideation had been a much earlier idea.

==History of the post-war political landscape==

===First Republic: 1946–1994===


There have been frequent government turnovers since 1945, indeed there have been 66 governments in this time. The dominance of the Christian Democratic party (DC) during much of the post-war period lent continuity and comparative stability to Italy&#x27;s political situation, mainly dominated by the attempt of keeping the Italian Communist Party (PCI) out of power in order to maintain Cold War equilibrium in the region (see May 1947 crisis).

The Italian Communists were in the government only in the national unity governments before 1948, in which their party&#x27;s secretary Palmiro Togliatti was minister of Justice. After the first democratic elections with universal suffrage in 1948 in which the Christian Democracy and their allies won against the popular front of the Italian Communist and Socialist (PSI) parties, the Italian Communist Party never returned in the government.

The system had been nicknamed the &quot;imperfect bipolarism&quot;, referring to more proper bipolarism in other Western countries (such as France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States) where right-wing and left-wing parties alternated in government. Meanwhile, rising post-war tensions between right-wing and left-wing parties in Italy brought to the radicalization and proliferation of numerous far-left and far-right terrorist organizations throughout the country.

====Entrance of the Socialists to the government====
The main event in the First Republic in the 1960s was the inclusion of the Italian Socialist Party in the government after the reducing edge of the Christian Democracy (DC) had forced them to accept this alliance. In 1960, attempts to incorporate the Italian Social Movement (MSI) within the Tambroni Cabinet, a neo-fascist far-right party and the only surviving political remnant of the Republican Fascist Party that was disbanded in the aftermath of the Italian Civil War (1943–1945), led to short-lived riots in the summer of the same year; as a consequence, Fernando Tambroni was eventually replaced by the Christian Democrat politician Amintore Fanfani as Prime Minister of Italy.

Aldo Moro, a relatively left-leaning Christian Democrat, inspired the alliance between the Christian Democracy and the Italian Socialist Party. He would later try to include the Italian Communist Party as well with a deal called the &quot;historic compromise&quot;. However, this attempt at compromise was stopped by the kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro in 1978 by the Red Brigades (BR), an extremist left-wing terrorist organization.

The Italian Communist Party was at this point the largest communist party in Western Europe, and remained such for the rest of its existence. Their ability to attract members was largely due to their pragmatic stance, especially their rejection of political extremism and to their growing independence from the Soviet Union (see Eurocommunism). The Italian Communist Party was especially strong in regions like Emilia-Romagna and Tuscany, where communists had been elected to stable government positions. This practical political experience may have contributed to their taking a more pragmatic approach to politics.

====Years of Lead====
On 12 December 1969, a roughly decade-long period of extremist left- and right-wing political terrorism, known as The Years of Lead (as in the metal of bullets, ), began with the Piazza Fontana bombing in the center of Milan. Neofascist Vincenzo Vinciguerra later declared the bombing to be an attempt to push the Italian state to declare a state of emergency in order to lead to a more authoritative state. A bomb left in a bank killed about twenty and was initially blamed on anarchist Giuseppe Pinelli. This accusation was hotly contested by left-wing circles, especially the Maoist Student Movement, which had support in those years from some students of Milan&#x27;s universities and who considered the bombing to have all the marks of a fascist operation. Their guess proved correct, but only after many years of difficult investigations.
The strategy of tension attempted to blame the left for bombings carried out by right-wing terrorists. Fascist &quot;black terrorists&quot;, such as &quot;Ordine Nuovo&quot; and the &quot;Avanguardia Nazionale&quot;, were in the 1980s and 1990s found to be responsible for several terrorist attacks. On the other extreme of the political spectrum, the leftist Red Brigades carried out assassinations against specific persons, but were not responsible for any blind bombings. The Red Brigades killed socialist journalist Walter Tobagi and in their most famous operation kidnapped and assassinated Aldo Moro, president of the Christian Democracy, who was trying to involve the Communist Party in the government through the &quot;compromesso storico&quot; (&quot;historic compromise&quot;), to which the radical left as well as Washington were opposed.

The last and largest of the bombings, known as the Bologna massacre, destroyed the city&#x27;s railway station in 1980. This was found to be a neofascist bombing, in which Propaganda Due was involved. On 24 October 1990, Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti (DC) revealed to the Parliament the existence of Gladio, NATO&#x27;s secret &quot;stay-behind&quot; networks which stocked weapons in order to facilitate an armed resistance in case of a communist coup. In 2000, a Parliament Commission report from the Olive Tree (centre-left) coalition concluded that the strategy of tension followed by Gladio had been supported by the United States to &quot;stop the PCI and, to a certain degree, the PSI [Italian Socialist Party] from reaching executive power in the country&quot;.

====1980s====

With the end of the lead years, the Communist Party gradually increased their votes under the leadership of Enrico Berlinguer. The Italian Socialist Party, led by Bettino Craxi, became more and more critical of the communists and of the Soviet Union; Craxi himself pushed in favor of Ronald Reagan&#x27;s positioning of Pershing II missiles in Italy, a move many communists strongly disapproved of.

As the Socialist Party moved to more moderate positions, it attracted many reformists, some of whom were irritated by the failure of the communists to modernize. Increasingly, many on the left began to see the communists as old and out of fashion while Craxi and the socialists seemed to represent a new liberal socialism. The Communist Party surpassed the Christian Democrats only in the European elections of 1984, held barely two days after Berlinguer&#x27;s death, a passing that likely drew sympathy from many voters. The election of 1984 was to be the only time the Christian Democrats did not emerge as the largest party in a nationwide election in which they participated.

In 1987, one year after the Chernobyl disaster following a referendum in that year, a nuclear phase-out was commenced. Italy&#x27;s four nuclear power plants were closed down, the last in 1990. A moratorium on the construction of new plants, originally in effect from 1987 until 1993, has since been extended indefinitely.

In these years, corruption began to be more extensive, a development that would be exposed in the early 1990s and nicknamed &quot;Tangentopoli&quot;. With the &quot;mani pulite&quot; investigation, starting just one year after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the whole power structure faltered and seemingly indestructible parties, such as the Christian Democrats and the Socialist Party, disbanded whereas the Communist Party changed its name to the Democratic Party of the Left and took the role of the Socialist Party as the main social democratic party in Italy. What was to follow was then called the transition to the Second Republic.

===Second Republic: 1994–present===
From 1992 to 1997, Italy faced significant challenges as voters, disenchanted with past political paralysis, massive government debt, extensive corruption and organized crime&#x27;s considerable influence, collectively called &quot;Tangentopoli&quot; after being uncovered by &quot;mani pulite&quot;, demanded political, economic and ethical reforms.

In the Italian referendums of 1993, voters approved substantial changes, including moving from a proportional to the scorporo system which is largely dominated by a majoritarian electoral system and the abolition of some ministries, some of which have been reintroduced with only partly modified names, such as the Ministry of Agriculture reincarnated as the Ministry of Agricultural Resources.

Major political parties, beset by scandal and loss of voter confidence, underwent far-reaching changes. New political forces and new alignments of power emerged in the March 1994 national elections. This election saw a major turnover in the new parliament, with 452 out of 630 deputies and 213 out of 315 senators elected for the first time.
The 1994 elections also swept media magnate Silvio Berlusconi (leader of Pole of Freedoms coalition) into office as prime minister. However, Berlusconi was forced to step down in December 1994 when the Northern League withdrew support. The Berlusconi government was succeeded by a technical government headed by Prime Minister Lamberto Dini, which left office in early 1996.

A series of center-left coalitions dominated Italy&#x27;s political landscape between 1996 and 2001. In April 1996, national elections led to the victory of a center-left coalition, The Olive Tree, under the leadership of Romano Prodi. Prodi&#x27;s government became the third-longest to stay in power before he narrowly lost a vote of confidence, by three votes, in October 1998.

In May 1999, the Parliament selected Carlo Azeglio Ciampi as the President of the Republic. Ciampi, a former prime minister and Minister of the Treasury and before entering the government also the governor of the Bank of Italy, was elected on the first ballot by a comfortable margin over the required two-thirds of the votes.

A new government was formed by the Democrats of the Left leader and former communist Massimo D&#x27;Alema, but in April 2000 he resigned following poor performance by his coalition in regional elections.

The succeeding center-left government, including most of the same parties, was headed by Giuliano Amato, a social democrat, who had previously served as prime minister in 1992–1993 and had at the time sworn never to return to active politics.

National elections held on 13 May 2001 returned Berlusconi to power at the head of the five-party center-right House of Freedoms coalition, comprising the Prime Minister&#x27;s own party, Forza Italia, the National Alliance, the Northern League, the Christian Democratic Centre and the United Christian Democrats.

Between 17 May 2006 and 21 February 2007, Romano Prodi served as prime minister of Italy following the narrow victory of his The Union coalition over the House of Freedoms led by Silvio Berlusconi in the April 2006 Italian elections. Following a government crisis, Prodi submitted his resignation on 21 February 2007. Three days later, he was asked by President Giorgio Napolitano to stay on as prime minister and he agreed to do so. On 28 February 2007, Prodi narrowly survived a senate no confidence vote.

On 24 January 2008, the Prodi II Cabinet went through a new crisis because Minister of Justice Clemente Mastella retracted his support to the Cabinet. Consequently, the Prodi Cabinet lost the vote of confidence and the President Giorgio Napolitano called a new general election.

The election set against two new parties, the Democratic Party (founded in October 2007 by the union of the Democrats of the Left and The Daisy) led by Walter Veltroni: and The People of Freedom (federation of Forza Italia, National Alliance and other parties) led by Silvio Berlusconi. The Democratic Party was in alliance with Italy of Values while The People of Freedom forged an alliance with the Northern League and the Movement for Autonomy. The coalition led by Berlusconi won the election and the leader of the centre-right created the Berlusconi IV Cabinet.

The Monti government had the highest average age in the western world (64 years), with its youngest members being 57. The previous Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti is 70, his predecessor Silvio Berlusconi was 75 at the time of resignation (2011), the previous head of the government Romano Prodi was 70 when he stepped down (2008), the Italian President Giorgio Napolitano is 88 and his predecessor Carlo Azeglio Ciampi was 86. In 2013, the youngest among the candidates for prime minister (Pier Luigi Bersani) is 62, the others being 70 and 78. The current average age of Italian university professors is 63, of bank directors and CEOs 67, of members of parliament 56 and of labor union representatives 59.

The new Italian government headed by Enrico Letta took two months to form and made international news when Luigi Preiti shot at policemen near the building where they were swearing in the new government on Sunday 28 April 2013.

Former Prime Minister Matteo Renzi became the youngest prime minister at 39 years and his government had the youngest average age in Europe.

==== Grand coalition governments ====
At different times since his entering the Italian Parliament, Silvio Berlusconi, leader of the centre-right, had repeatedly vowed to stop the &quot;communists&quot;, while leftist parties had insisted that they would oust Berlusconi. Thus, despite the fact that the executive branch bears responsibility toward the Parliament, the governments led by Mario Monti (since 2011) and by Enrico Letta (since 2013) were called &quot;unelected governments&quot; because they won a vote of confidence by a Parliament coalition formed by centre-right and left-right parties that had in turn obtained parliamentary seats by taking part in the elections as competitors, rather than allies. While formally complying with law and procedures, the creation of these governments did not comply with the decision made by people through the election.

Meanwhile, in 2013, a ruling by the Constitutional Court of Italy established that the Italian electoral system employed to elect the Parliament breached a number of Constitutional requirements. Notably, the Court observed the following four facts: 1) &quot;such a legislation deprives the elector of any margin of choice of its representatives&quot;; 2) &quot;all of the elected parliamentarians, with no exception, lack the support of a personal designation by the citizens&quot;; 3) the electoral law has regulations which &quot;exclude any ability on the part of the elector to have an influence on the election of his/her representatives&quot;; 4) and contains conditions such that &quot;they alter the representative relationship between electors and elected people...they coerce the electors&#x27; freedom of choice in the election of their representatives to the Parliament...and consequently they are at odds with the democratic principle, by affecting the very freedom of vote provided for by art. 48 of the Constitution&quot;. This implies that, despite being called – and acting as – a legitimate &quot;parliament&quot;, the legislative assembly of Italy was chosen with a vote system by which the right to vote was not exercised according to the Italian fundamental chart of citizen&#x27;s rights and duties. The issue was a major one, to the extent that the Constitutional Court itself ruled that the Italian Parliament should remain in charge only to reform the electoral system and then should be dissolved.

The new government led by Matteo Renzi proposed a new electoral law. The so-called Italicum was approved in 2015 and came into force on 1 July 2016.

==== Since 2016 ====
Renzi resigned after losing a constitutional referendum in December 2016, and was succeeded by Paolo Gentiloni. The centre-left cabinets were plagued by the aftermath of the European debt crisis and the European migrant crisis, that fueled support for populist and right-wing parties. In 2017, the so-called Italicum was replaced by a new electoral law, which uses a parallel voting system to assign seats.
The 2018 general election produced once again a hung parliament that resulted in the birth of an unlikely populist government between the anti-system Five Star Movement (M5S) and Salvini&#x27;s League, led by Giuseppe Conte. After fourteen months, the League withdrew its support to Conte. The M5S subsequently allied with the Democratic Party and other smaller left-wing parties to form a new cabinet, once again headed by Conte.

In 2020, Italy was severely hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. From March to May, Conte&#x27;s government imposed a national quarantine as a measure to limit the spread of the pandemic. The measures, despite being widely approved by public opinion, were also described as the largest suppression of constitutional rights in the history of the republic. With more than 100,000 confirmed victims, Italy was one of the countries with the highest total number of deaths in the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic caused also a severe economic disruption, which resulted in Italy being one of the most affected countries. In February 2021, these extraordinary circumstances brought to the formation of a national coalition government led by former president of the European Central Bank Mario Draghi, following IV&#x27;s decision to withdraw its support to the second Conte cabinet. On 13 February 2021, Draghi was sworn in as Italy&#x27;s new prime minister. The Draghi Cabinet had support across the broad political spectrum. In January 2022, Italian President Sergio Mattarella was re-elected to serve a second consecutive seven-year term.

On 21 July 2022, following a government crisis which ended with FI, League and the M5S deciding to withdraw their support to the government, Prime Minister Draghi resigned. President Sergio Mattarella consequently dissolved the Parliament and called a snap election, which resulted in the centre-right coalition, led by Giorgia Meloni, gaining an absolute majority of seats. Meloni was formally sworn in as Italy&#x27;s first female prime minister on 22 October 2022.

==See also ==

* Elections in Italy
* History of Italy
* List of political parties in Italy
* List of presidents of Italy
* List of prime ministers of Italy
* Political history
* Anti-fascism
* Post–World War II anti-fascism

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
::Discusses political historians such as Silvio Lanaro, Aurelio Lepre, and Nicola Tranfaglia, and studies of Fascism, the Italian Communist party, the role of the Christian Democrats in Italian society, and the development of the Italian parliamentary Republic. excerpt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q669701" start="4" end="21" title="Politics of Italy" label="politics of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="46" end="68" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="76" end="94" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="96" end="101" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255892" start="113" end="132" title="democratic republic" label="democratic republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="157" end="169" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="187" end="205" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="popular referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053185" start="212" end="232" title="Constituent Assembly of Italy" label="constituent assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="275" end="287" title="anti-fascist" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="364" end="383" title="liberation of Italy" label="liberation of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="408" end="420" title="Constitution of Italy" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="464" end="479" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687318" start="500" end="520" title="Council of Ministers (Italy)" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="542" end="556" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="661" end="678" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="706" end="716" title="Bicameralism" label="two houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="720" end="730" title="Italian Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303109" start="845" end="854" title="Judiciary of Italy" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059233" start="858" end="869" title="Judicial independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054168" start="937" end="966" title="High Council of the Judiciary (Italy)" label="High Council of the Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="996" end="1005" title="President of Italy" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="1018" end="1031" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956186" start="1110" end="1127" title="Sergio Mattarella" label="Sergio Mattarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q451791" start="1163" end="1177" title="Giorgia Meloni" label="Giorgia Meloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="1184" end="1211" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="1235" end="1251" title="Democracy Index" label="flawed democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="1289" end="1312" title="V-Dem Democracy indices" label="V-Dem Democracy indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="1457" end="1477" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1536" end="1548" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="1647" end="1667" title="Italian constitution" label="Italian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053185" start="1701" end="1721" title="Constituent Assembly of Italy" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="1774" end="1786" title="anti-fascist" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="1863" end="1882" title="liberation of Italy" label="liberation of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255892" start="1958" end="1977" title="democratic republic" label="democratic republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="2028" end="2053" title="1946 Italian constitutional referendum" label="constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2091" end="2096" title="Italy" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="2133" end="2147" title="King of Italy" label="ruling monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994847" start="2175" end="2186" title="Res Publica" label="Res Publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443060" start="2338" end="2346" title="Commoners" label="subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="2352" end="2360" title="Citizenship" label="citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="2370" end="2381" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="2511" end="2520" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191031" start="2639" end="2650" title="Rule of the mob" label="arbitrarily"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="2710" end="2721" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="2751" end="2764" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="2770" end="2788" title="President of Italy" label="President of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="2927" end="2939" title="Constitution of Italy" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="3011" end="3043" title="Separation of powers" label="three branches of the government"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="3117" end="3130" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="3162" end="3180" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q349511" start="3188" end="3208" title="Italian Armed Forces" label="Italian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054168" start="3224" end="3253" title="High Council of the Judiciary (Italy)" label="High Council of the Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141323" start="3353" end="3370" title="electoral college" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q826589" start="3422" end="3439" title="Senators for life in Italy" label="senators for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q841424" start="3499" end="3518" title="Chamber of Deputies (Italy)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q633872" start="3527" end="3549" title="Senate of the Republic (Italy)" label="Senate of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269551" start="3561" end="3574" title="joint session" label="joint session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077701" start="3627" end="3644" title="Regional council (Italy)" label="regional councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="3655" end="3671" title="regions of Italy" label="regions of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="3731" end="3743" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3907" end="3919" title="Constitution of Italy#The Parliament .28Articles 55-82.29" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="3942" end="3955" title="right to vote" label="right to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="4003" end="4026" title="elected representatives" label="elected representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="4034" end="4044" title="Italian Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="4050" end="4060" title="Italian Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="4067" end="4083" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q841424" start="4105" end="4124" title="Italian Chamber of Deputies" label="Chamber of deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q633872" start="4133" end="4139" title="Italian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q841424" start="4293" end="4312" title="Chamber of Deputies (Italy)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746176" start="4532" end="4546" title="The Honourable" label="The Honourable"/>
<link wikidata="Q781417" start="4598" end="4618" title="Palazzo Montecitorio" label="Palazzo Montecitorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="4622" end="4626" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q633872" start="4633" end="4655" title="Senate of the Republic (Italy)" label="Senate of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786200" start="4880" end="4897" title="senator for life" label="senators for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570643" start="5073" end="5080" title="Senator" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746176" start="5096" end="5110" title="The Honourable" label="The Honourable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755046" start="5179" end="5193" title="Palazzo Madama, Rome" label="Palazzo Madama"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="5197" end="5201" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5233" end="5245" title="Constitution of Italy#The Government .28Articles 92-100.29" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5276" end="5281" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="5327" end="5350" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Prime Minister of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="5371" end="5389" title="President of Italy" label="President of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687318" start="5470" end="5477" title="Cabinet of Italy" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="5484" end="5507" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Prime Minister of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="5594" end="5612" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5620" end="5636" title="Italy" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="5698" end="5716" title="Italian Parliament" label="Italian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687318" start="5788" end="5808" title="Council of Ministers of Italy" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="5888" end="5908" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113678" start="5922" end="5949" title="Italian order of precedence" label="Italian order of precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687318" start="6099" end="6119" title="Council of Ministers (Italy)" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773971" start="6160" end="6179" title="Government of Italy" label="Government of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="6228" end="6251" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Prime Minister of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="6262" end="6271" title="Minister (government)" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135331" start="6478" end="6490" title="law of Italy" label="law of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="6693" end="6713" title="Constitution of Italy" label="Constitution of 1948"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6739" end="6751" title="Constitution of Italy#The Judicial Branch .28Articles 101-113.29" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="6764" end="6771" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="6823" end="6828" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="6854" end="6857" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="6866" end="6875" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="6937" end="6964" title="Separation of powers" label="all other branches of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714336" start="6982" end="7001" title="Ministry of Justice (Italy)" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="7086" end="7093" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="7154" end="7159" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054168" start="7197" end="7226" title="High Council of the Judiciary (Italy)" label="High Council of the Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="7249" end="7258" title="President of Italy" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303109" start="7265" end="7283" title="judiciary of Italy" label="judiciary of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="7296" end="7305" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="7311" end="7326" title="Napoleonic code" label="Napoleonic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="7337" end="7344" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801315" start="7375" end="7386" title="adversarial system" label="adversarial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25669" start="7391" end="7404" title="inquisitorial system" label="inquisitorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="7405" end="7414" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801315" start="7437" end="7455" title="adversarial system" label="adversarial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="7684" end="7714" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q338753" start="7970" end="7980" title="voting age" label="voting age"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379923" start="8096" end="8125" title="2022 Italian general election" label="2022 Italian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952765" start="8503" end="8518" title="Scorporo" label="scorporo system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="8872" end="8879" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q662849" start="8939" end="8956" title="National Alliance (Italy)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126102" start="8984" end="9007" title="Italian Social Movement" label="Italian Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134161" start="9227" end="9237" title="The Olive Tree (Italy)" label="Olive Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046657" start="9294" end="9311" title="House of Freedoms" label="House of Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="9712" end="9724" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250" start="9726" end="9747" title="Friuli-Venezia Giulia" label="Friuli-Venezia Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="9749" end="9757" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="9759" end="9765" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237" start="9770" end="9798" title="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol" label="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9952" end="9998" title="Languages of Italy#Historical linguistic minorities" label="significant linguistic and cultural minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="10395" end="10415" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Christian Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="10588" end="10611" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="10652" end="10660" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796277" start="10692" end="10707" title="May 1947 crisis" label="May 1947 crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310158" start="10847" end="10864" title="Palmiro Togliatti" label="Palmiro Togliatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q632933" start="10900" end="10926" title="1948 Italian general election" label="first democratic elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="10932" end="10950" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="11068" end="11077" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="11269" end="11286" title="Western countries" label="Western countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11296" end="11302" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="11304" end="11311" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11317" end="11331" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11341" end="11354" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416483" start="11522" end="11536" title="radicalization" label="radicalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045243" start="11567" end="11575" title="Left-wing terrorism" label="far-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782463" start="11580" end="11589" title="Right-wing terrorism" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q312484" start="11590" end="11612" title="terrorist organization" label="terrorist organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="11840" end="11859" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Christian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126102" start="11943" end="11966" title="Italian Social Movement" label="Italian Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773955" start="11984" end="12000" title="Tambroni Cabinet" label="Tambroni Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="12004" end="12015" title="Neo-fascism" label="neo-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376126" start="12080" end="12104" title="Republican Fascist Party" label="Republican Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118964" start="12148" end="12165" title="Italian Civil War" label="Italian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="12198" end="12202" title="riot" label="riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q314004" start="12254" end="12271" title="Fernando Tambroni" label="Fernando Tambroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q273228" start="12333" end="12349" title="Amintore Fanfani" label="Amintore Fanfani"/>
<link wikidata="Q171834" start="12379" end="12388" title="Aldo Moro" label="Aldo Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620962" start="12618" end="12637" title="Historic Compromise" label="historic compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634609" start="12700" end="12734" title="kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro" label="kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q194019" start="12750" end="12762" title="Red Brigades" label="Red Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045243" start="12782" end="12814" title="Left-wing terrorism" label="left-wing terrorist organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="12894" end="12908" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13128" end="13140" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q206743" start="13146" end="13159" title="Eurocommunism" label="Eurocommunism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263" start="13228" end="13242" title="Emilia-Romagna" label="Emilia-Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="13247" end="13254" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q891865" start="13636" end="13658" title="Piazza Fontana bombing" label="Piazza Fontana bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="13676" end="13681" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034934" start="13694" end="13714" title="Vincenzo Vinciguerra" label="Vincenzo Vinciguerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="13798" end="13816" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="13935" end="13944" title="anarchism" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q982789" start="13945" end="13961" title="Giuseppe Pinelli" label="Giuseppe Pinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="14036" end="14042" title="Maoist" label="Maoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="14129" end="14141" title="university" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664761" start="14457" end="14469" title="Ordine Nuovo" label="Ordine Nuovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q790144" start="14490" end="14511" title="National Vanguard (Italy)" label="Avanguardia Nazionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018031" start="14822" end="14835" title="Walter Tobagi" label="Walter Tobagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171834" start="14898" end="14907" title="Aldo Moro" label="Aldo Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="14926" end="14945" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Christian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="14977" end="14992" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620962" start="15029" end="15048" title="historic compromise" label="compromesso storico"/>
<link wikidata="Q569287" start="15204" end="15220" title="Bologna massacre" label="Bologna massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q954078" start="15325" end="15339" title="Propaganda Due" label="Propaganda Due"/>
<link wikidata="Q50005" start="15389" end="15405" title="Giulio Andreotti" label="Giulio Andreotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q157678" start="15455" end="15461" title="Gladio" label="Gladio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="15463" end="15467" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134161" start="15658" end="15668" title="The Olive Tree (Italy)" label="Olive Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q164995" start="16049" end="16066" title="Enrico Berlinguer" label="Enrico Berlinguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="16072" end="16095" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192818" start="16104" end="16117" title="Bettino Craxi" label="Bettino Craxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="16178" end="16190" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="16225" end="16238" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203109" start="16261" end="16272" title="Pershing II" label="Pershing II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11867" start="16730" end="16756" title="1984 European Parliament election in Italy" label="European elections of 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="17051" end="17069" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17155" end="17180" title="List of nuclear reactors#Italy" label="four nuclear power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="17363" end="17373" title="political corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q921474" start="17477" end="17489" title="Tangentopoli" label="Tangentopoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q921474" start="17512" end="17523" title="mani pulite" label="mani pulite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294923" start="17800" end="17828" title="Democratic Party of the Left" label="Democratic Party of the Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="17882" end="17899" title="Social democracy" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11872679" start="18171" end="18181" title="Corruption in Italy" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102072" start="18186" end="18201" title="organized crime in Italy" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518511" start="18386" end="18405" title="Referendums in Italy" label="Italian referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952765" start="18496" end="18504" title="scorporo" label="scorporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="18544" end="18573" title="First Past the Post electoral system" label="majoritarian electoral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="19161" end="19178" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102613" start="19190" end="19206" title="Pole of Freedoms" label="Pole of Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q47750" start="19319" end="19334" title="Lega Nord" label="Northern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q190044" start="19398" end="19418" title="technical government" label="technical government"/>
<link wikidata="Q208100" start="19444" end="19457" title="Lamberto Dini" label="Lamberto Dini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134161" start="19675" end="19689" title="The Olive Tree (Italy)" label="The Olive Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q38484" start="19715" end="19727" title="Romano Prodi" label="Romano Prodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224" start="19912" end="19932" title="Carlo Azeglio Ciampi" label="Carlo Azeglio Ciampi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178430" start="19940" end="19965" title="List of Presidents of the Italian Republic" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q806176" start="20088" end="20101" title="Banca d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Bank of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q541679" start="20238" end="20259" title="Democrats of the Left" label="Democrats of the Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q47602" start="20288" end="20308" title="Massimo D&amp;#x27;Alema" label="Massimo D&amp;#x27;Alema"/>
<link wikidata="Q202209" start="20497" end="20511" title="Giuliano Amato" label="Giuliano Amato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046657" start="20763" end="20780" title="House of Freedoms" label="House of Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q215350" start="20840" end="20852" title="Forza Italia" label="Forza Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q662849" start="20858" end="20875" title="National Alliance (Italy)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q47750" start="20881" end="20896" title="Lega Nord" label="Northern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054279" start="20902" end="20929" title="Christian Democratic Centre" label="Christian Democratic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140350" start="20938" end="20964" title="United Christian Democrats" label="United Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220" start="21329" end="21347" title="Giorgio Napolitano" label="Giorgio Napolitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="21455" end="21473" title="no confidence vote" label="no confidence vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720224" start="21500" end="21516" title="Prodi II Cabinet" label="Prodi II Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544009" start="21532" end="21542" title="2008 Italian political crisis" label="new crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540253" start="21551" end="21570" title="Italian Minister of Justice" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394911" start="21571" end="21588" title="Clemente Mastella" label="Clemente Mastella"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="21668" end="21686" title="vote of confidence" label="vote of confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166185" start="21731" end="21753" title="2008 Italian general election" label="a new general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47729" start="21802" end="21818" title="Democratic Party (Italy)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141788" start="21890" end="21899" title="Democracy is Freedom – The Daisy" label="The Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319547" start="21908" end="21923" title="Walter Veltroni" label="Walter Veltroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q47720" start="21929" end="21950" title="The People of Freedom" label="The People of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q47768" start="22085" end="22100" title="Italy of Values" label="Italy of Values"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233269" start="22181" end="22202" title="Movement for Autonomy" label="Movement for Autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q715959" start="22300" end="22321" title="Berlusconi IV Cabinet" label="Berlusconi IV Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47904" start="22478" end="22489" title="Mario Monti" label="Mario Monti"/>
<link wikidata="Q47556" start="22817" end="22835" title="Pier Luigi Bersani" label="Pier Luigi Bersani"/>
<link wikidata="Q674957" start="23072" end="23084" title="Enrico Letta" label="Enrico Letta"/>
<link wikidata="Q47563" start="23286" end="23298" title="Matteo Renzi" label="Matteo Renzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="23506" end="23523" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q981005" start="24313" end="24342" title="Constitutional Court of Italy" label="Constitutional Court of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47563" start="25828" end="25840" title="Matteo Renzi" label="Matteo Renzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q520810" start="25885" end="25893" title="Italicum" label="Italicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022426" start="26003" end="26028" title="2016 Italian constitutional referendum" label="constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071031" start="26068" end="26083" title="Paolo Gentiloni" label="Paolo Gentiloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="26147" end="26167" title="European debt crisis" label="European debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857240" start="26176" end="26199" title="European migrant crisis" label="European migrant crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42327709" start="26308" end="26325" title="Italian electoral law of 2017" label="new electoral law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062211" start="26340" end="26355" title="parallel voting" label="parallel voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970032" start="26384" end="26405" title="2018 Italian general election" label="2018 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="26428" end="26443" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q54557459" start="26486" end="26505" title="Conte I Cabinet" label="populist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q47817" start="26530" end="26548" title="Five Star Movement" label="Five Star Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776185" start="26574" end="26580" title="Lega (political party)" label="League"/>
<link wikidata="Q53844829" start="26589" end="26603" title="Giuseppe Conte" label="Giuseppe Conte"/>
<link wikidata="Q66823380" start="26628" end="26668" title="2019 Italian government crisis" label="the League withdrew its support to Conte"/>
<link wikidata="Q47729" start="26707" end="26723" title="Democratic Party (Italy)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q67123745" start="26770" end="26781" title="Conte II Cabinet" label="new cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q84104992" start="26851" end="26868" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Italy" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87348909" start="26923" end="26942" title="2020 Italy coronavirus lockdown" label="national quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068570" start="27106" end="27126" title="constitutional right" label="constitutional right"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="27280" end="27297" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q96175652" start="27326" end="27352" title="Economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic" label="severe economic disruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460407" start="27502" end="27531" title="Draghi Cabinet" label="national coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q294460" start="27585" end="27597" title="Mario Draghi" label="Mario Draghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q67785862" start="27609" end="27611" title="Italia Viva" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q104830368" start="27631" end="27679" title="2021 Italian government crisis" label="withdraw its support to the second Conte cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460407" start="27762" end="27776" title="Draghi Cabinet" label="Draghi Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956186" start="27861" end="27878" title="Sergio Mattarella" label="Sergio Mattarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q113111933" start="27971" end="27988" title="2022 Italian government crisis" label="government crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956186" start="28125" end="28142" title="Sergio Mattarella" label="Sergio Mattarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379923" start="28194" end="28207" title="2022 Italian general election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059248" start="28231" end="28253" title="Centre-right coalition (Italy)" label="centre-right coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q451791" start="28262" end="28276" title="Giorgia Meloni" label="Giorgia Meloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650619" start="28428" end="28446" title="Elections in Italy" label="Elections in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791" start="28449" end="28465" title="History of Italy" label="History of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517200" start="28468" end="28502" title="List of political parties in Italy" label="List of political parties in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178430" start="28505" end="28532" title="List of presidents of Italy" label="List of presidents of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213928" start="28535" end="28567" title="List of prime ministers of Italy" label="List of prime ministers of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147507" start="28570" end="28587" title="Political history" label="Political history"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="28590" end="28602" title="Anti-fascism" label="Anti-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q278364" start="28605" end="28635" title="Post–World War II anti-fascism" label="Post–World War II anti-fascism"/>
</links>
</doc>
