<doc id="13806" wikidata="Q1064598" url="?curid=13806" title="History of Malaysia">
<text>Malaysia is a modern concept, created in the second half of the 20th century. However, contemporary Malaysia regards the entire history of Malaya and Borneo, spanning thousands of years back to prehistoric times, as its own history. Significant events in Malaysia&#x27;s modern history include the formation of the federation, the separation of Singapore, the racial riots, and Mahathir Mohamad&#x27;s era of industrialisation and privatisation.

The first evidence of archaic human occupation in the region dates back at least 1.83 million years, while the earliest remnants of anatomically modern humans are approximately 40,000 years old. The ancestors of the present-day population of Malaysia entered the area in multiple waves during prehistoric and historical times. 

Hinduism and Buddhism from India and China dominated early regional history, reaching their peak from the 7th to the 13th centuries during the reign of the Sumatra-based Srivijaya civilisation. Islam made its initial presence in the Malay Peninsula as early as the 10th century, but it was during the 15th century that the religion firmly took root, at least among the court elites, leading to the rise of several sultanates, the most prominent being the Sultanate of Malacca and the Sultanate of Brunei.

The Portuguese were the first European colonial power to establish themselves on the Malay Peninsula and in Southeast Asia, capturing Malacca in 1511. This event led to the establishment of several sultanates, such as Johor and Perak. Dutch hegemony over the Malay sultanates increased during the 17th to 18th centuries, with the Dutch capturing Malacca in 1641 with the aid of Johor. In the 19th century, the English ultimately gained hegemony across the territory that is now Malaysia. The Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824 defined the boundaries between British Malaya and the Dutch East Indies (which became Indonesia), and the Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909 defined the boundaries between British Malaya and Siam (which became Thailand). The fourth phase of foreign influence was marked by a wave of immigration of Chinese and Indian workers to meet the needs created by the colonial economy in the Malay Peninsula and Borneo.

The Japanese invasion during World War II ended British rule in Malaya. After the Empire of Japan was defeated by the Allies, the Malayan Union was established in 1946 and reorganized as the Federation of Malaya in 1948. In the peninsula, the Malayan Communist Party (MCP) took up arms against the British, leading to the declaration of emergency rule from 1948 to 1960. A forceful military response to the communist insurgency, followed by the Baling Talks in 1955, led to Malayan independence on August 31, 1957, through diplomatic negotiation with the British. On 16 September 1963, the Federation of Malaysia was formed, but in August 1965, Singapore was expelled from the federation and became a separate independent country. A racial riot in 1969 resulted in the imposition of emergency rule, the suspension of parliament and the proclamation of the Rukun Negara, a national philosophy promoting unity among citizens. The New Economic Policy (NEP), adopted in 1971, sought to eradicate poverty and restructure society to eliminate the identification of race with economic function.

Under Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia experienced rapid economic growth and urbanization beginning in the 1980s. The National Development Policy (NDP), succeeding the previous economic policy, was implemented from 1991 to 2000. The Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s nearly caused the country&#x27;s currency, stock, and property markets to collapse, though they subsequently recovered. The 1MDB scandal came to prominence in 2015 as a significant global corruption scandal, implicating then-Prime Minister Najib Razak. The scandal significantly influenced the 2018 general election, resulting in the first change of ruling political party since independence. In early 2020, Malaysia faced a political crisis, concurrent with the COVID-19 pandemic, leading to political, health, social, and economic disruptions. The 2022 general election resulted in Malaysia&#x27;s first hung parliament, leading to Anwar Ibrahim&#x27;s appointment as Prime Minister on November 24, 2022.

== Prehistory ==

Stone hand axes from early hominids, probably Homo erectus, have been unearthed in Lenggong. These axes date back 1.83 million years, making them some of the oldest evidence of hominid habitation in Southeast Asia.

The earliest evidence of modern human habitation in Malaysia is a 40,000-year-old skull excavated from the Niah Caves in present-day Sarawak. This skull is also one of the oldest modern human remains found in Southeast Asia. The first foragers visited the West Mouth of the Niah Caves, located 110 kilometers (68 miles) southwest of Miri, 40,000 years ago when Borneo was connected to the mainland of Southeast Asia. Mesolithic and Neolithic burial sites have also been discovered in the area. The region around the Niah Caves has been designated as Niah National Park.
A study of Asian genetics suggests that the original humans in East Asia came from Southeast Asia. The oldest complete skeleton found in Malaysia is the 11,000-year-old Perak Man, unearthed in 1991. The indigenous groups on the peninsula can be divided into three ethnicities: the Negritos, the Senoi, and the Proto-Malays. The first inhabitants of the Malay Peninsula were most likely Negritos. These Mesolithic hunters were probably the ancestors of the Semang, an ethnic Negrito group.

The Senoi appear to be a composite group, with approximately half of their maternal mitochondrial DNA lineages tracing back to the ancestors of the Semang and about half to later ancestral migrations from Indochina. Scholars suggest they are descendants of early Austroasiatic-speaking agriculturalists, who brought both their language and technology to the southern part of the peninsula approximately 4,000 years ago. They eventually united and coalesced with the indigenous population.

The Proto Malays have a more diverse origin and had settled in Malaysia by 1000 BC as a result of Austronesian expansion. Although they show some connections with other inhabitants of Maritime Southeast Asia, some also have ancestry in Indochina around the time of the Last Glacial Maximum, about 20,000 years ago. Areas comprising what is now Malaysia participated in the Maritime Jade Road, a trading network that existed for 3,000 years, between 2000 BC and 1000 AD.

Anthropologists support the notion that the Proto-Malays originated from what is today Yunnan, China. This was followed by an early-Holocene dispersal through the Malay Peninsula into the Malay Archipelago. Around 300 BC, they were pushed inland by the Deutero-Malays, an Iron Age or Bronze Age people descended partly from the Chams of Cambodia and Vietnam. The Deutero-Malays, the first group in the peninsula to use metal tools, were the direct ancestors of today&#x27;s Malaysian Malays and brought with them advanced farming techniques. The Malays remained politically fragmented throughout the Malay Archipelago, although they shared a common culture and social structure.

== Early Hindu-Buddhist kingdoms ==
In the first millennium AD, the Malay became the dominant ethnicity on the peninsula. The small early states that were established were greatly influenced by Indian culture, as was most of Southeast Asia. Indian influence in the region dates back to at least the 3rd century BC. South Indian culture was spread to Southeast Asia by the South Indian Pallava dynasty in the 4th and 5th centuries.

===Trade with India and China===
In ancient Indian literature, the term &quot;Suvarnadvipa&quot; (&quot;Golden Peninsula)&quot; is used in the &quot;Ramayana&quot;; some argue that this is a reference to the Malay Peninsula. The ancient Indian text &quot;Vayu Purana&quot; also mentions a place named &quot;Malayadvipa&quot;; this term may refer to Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula. The Malay Peninsula was shown on Ptolemy&#x27;s map as the &quot;Golden Chersonese&quot;.

Trade relations with China and India were established in the 1st century BC. Shards of Chinese pottery have been found in Borneo dating from the 1st century following the southward expansion of the Han dynasty. In the early centuries of the first millennium, the people of the Malay Peninsula adopted the Indian religions of Hinduism and Buddhism, which had a major effect on the language and culture of those living in Malaysia. The Sanskrit writing system was used as early as the 4th century.

=== Early kingdoms (3rd–7th centuries) ===
There were as many as 30 Malay kingdoms in the 2nd and 3rd centuries, mainly based on the eastern side of the Malay Peninsula. Among the earliest kingdoms known to have been based in the Malay Peninsula was the ancient kingdom of Langkasuka, located in the northern Malay Peninsula and based somewhere on the east coast. It was closely tied to Funan in Cambodia, which also ruled parts of northern Malaysia until the 6th century. In the 5th century, the Kingdom of Pahang was mentioned in the &quot;Book of Song&quot;. Besides this, Chi Tu and Pan Pan were old polities believed to be located in the northeast of the peninsula.

====Gangga Negara====
Gangga Negara was a semi-legendary Hindu kingdom mentioned in the &quot;Malay Annals&quot; that covered present-day Beruas, Dinding and Manjung in the state of Perak, Malaysia with Raja Gangga Shah Johan as one of its kings. According to the legendary &quot;Hikayat Merong Mahawangsa&quot;, Gangga Negara was founded by Merong Mahawangsa&#x27;s son Raja Ganji Sarjuna of Kedah, allegedly a descendant of Alexander the Great or by the Khmer royalty no later than the 2nd century.

==== Old Kedah ====

Ptolemy, a Greek geographer, had written about the Golden Chersonese, which indicated that trade with India and China had existed since the 1st century AD. During this time, coastal city-states that existed had a trade network which encompassed the southern part of the Indochinese Peninsula and the western part of the Malay Archipelago. These coastal cities had ongoing trade as well as tributary relations with China, at the same time being in constant contact with Indian traders. They seem to have shared a common indigenous culture.

Gradually, the rulers of the western part of the archipelago adopted Indian cultural and political models. Three inscriptions found in Palembang (South Sumatra) and on Bangka Island, written in the form of Malay and in alphabets derived from the Pallava script, are proof that the archipelago had adopted Indian models while maintaining their indigenous language and social system. These inscriptions reveal the existence of a &quot;Dapunta Hyang&quot; (lord) of Srivijaya who led an expedition against his enemies and who curses those who does not obey his law.

Being on the maritime trade route between China and South India, the Malay Peninsula was involved in this trade. The Bujang Valley, being strategically located at the northwest entrance of the Strait of Malacca as well as facing the Bay of Bengal, was continuously frequented by Chinese and south Indian traders. Such was proven by the discovery of trade ceramics, sculptures, inscriptions and monuments dated from the 5th to 14th century.

=== Srivijaya (7th–13th century) ===
Between the 7th and the 13th century, much of the Malay Peninsula was under the influence of Srivijaya. The site Prasasti Hujung Langit, which sat at the centre of Srivijaya&#x27;s empire, is thought to be at a river mouth in eastern Sumatra, based near what is now Palembang, Indonesia. In the 7th century, a new port called &quot;Shilifoshi&quot; is mentioned, believed to be a Chinese rendering of Srivijaya. For over six centuries the Maharajahs of Srivijaya ruled a maritime empire that became the main power in the archipelago. The empire was based around trade, with local kings (dhatus or community leaders) that swore allegiance to a lord for mutual profit. In 1025, the Chola dynasty captured Palembang, the king, all his family members and his courtiers had their wealth taken away; by the end of the 12th century Srivijaya had been reduced to a kingdom, with their last ruler, Queen Sekerummong being conquered and overthrown in 1288. Majapahit, a subordinate to Srivijaya, soon dominated the region&#x27;s political scene.

==== Relations with the Chola Empire ====

The relation between Srivijaya and the Chola Empire of south India was friendly during the reign of Raja Raja Chola I but during the reign of Rajendra Chola I the Chola Empire invaded Srivijaya cities (see Chola invasion of Srivijaya). In 1025 and 1026, Gangga Negara was attacked by Rajendra Chola I of the Chola Empire, the Tamil emperor who is now thought to have laid Kota Gelanggi to waste. Kedah (known as &quot;Kadaram&quot; in Tamil) was invaded by the Cholas in 1025. A second invasion was led by Virarajendra Chola of the Chola dynasty who conquered Kedah in the late 11th century. The senior Chola&#x27;s successor, Vira Rajendra Chola, had to put down a Kedah rebellion to overthrow other invaders. The coming of the Chola reduced the majesty of Srivijaya, which had exerted influence over Kedah, Pattani and as far as Ligor. During the reign of Kulothunga Chola I, Chola overlordship was established over the Srivijaya province Kedah in the late 11th century. The expedition of the Chola Emperors had such a great impression on the Malay people of the medieval period that their name was mentioned in the corrupted form as Raja Chulan in the medieval Malay chronicle Sejarah Melaya. Even today, the Chola rule is remembered in Malaysia as many Malaysian princes have names ending with Cholan or Chulan, one such was the Raja of Perak called Raja Chulan.

Pattinapalai, a Tamil poem of the 2nd century AD, describes goods from Kedaram heaped in the broad streets of the Chola capital. The Buddhist kingdom of Ligor took control of Kedah shortly after. Its king Chandrabhanu used it as a base to attack Sri Lanka in the 11th century and ruled the northern parts, an event noted in a stone inscription in Nagapattinum in Tamil Nadu and the Sri Lankan chronicles, &quot;Mahavamsa&quot;.

====Decline and breakup====
At times, the Khmer Empire, the Siamese Kingdom, and the Chola Empire had tried to exert control over the smaller Malay states. The power of Srivijaya declined from the 12th century as the relationship between the capital and its vassals broke down. Wars with the Javanese caused it to request assistance from China, and wars with Indian states are also suspected. In the 11th century, the centre of power shifted to Malayu, a port possibly located further up the Sumatran coast near the Jambi River. The power of the Buddhist Maharajas was further undermined by the spread of Islam. Areas which were converted to Islam early, such as Aceh, broke away from Srivijaya&#x27;s control. By the late 13th century, the Siamese kings of Sukhothai had brought most of Malaya under their rule. In the 14th century, the Hindu Majapahit Empire came into possession of the peninsula.

An excavation by Tom Harrisson in 1949 unearthed a series of Chinese ceramics at Santubong (near Kuching) that date to the Tang and Song dynasties. It is possible that Santubong was an important seaport in Sarawak during the period, but its importance declined during the Yuan dynasty, and the port was deserted during the Ming dynasty.

According to the &quot;Malay Annals&quot;, a new ruler named Sang Sapurba was promoted as the new paramount of the Srivijayan mandala. It was said that after he acceded to Seguntang Hill with his two younger brothers, Sang Sapurba entered into a sacred covenant with Demang Lebar Daun, the native ruler of Palembang. The newly installed sovereign afterwards descended from the hill of Seguntang into the great plain of the Musi River, where he married Wan Sendari, the daughter of the local chief, Demang Lebar Daun. Sang Sapurba was said to have reigned in Minangkabau lands.

In 1324, a Srivijaya prince, Sang Nila Utama founded the Kingdom of Singapura (Temasek). According to tradition, he was related to Sang Sapurba. He maintained control over Temasek for 48 years. He was recognized as ruler over Temasek by an envoy of the Chinese Emperor sometime around 1366. He was succeeded by his son Paduka Sri Pekerma Wira Diraja (1372–1386) and grandson, Paduka Seri Rana Wira Kerma (1386–1399). In 1401, the last ruler, Paduka Sri Maharaja Parameswara, was expelled from Temasek by forces from Majapahit or Ayutthaya. He later headed north and founded the Sultanate of Malacca in 1402. The Sultanate of Malacca succeeded the Srivijaya Empire as a Malay political entity in the archipelago.

== Rise of Muslim states ==

Islam came to the Malay Archipelago through the Arab and Indian traders in the 13th century, ending the age of Hinduism and Buddhism. It arrived in the region gradually and became the religion of the elite before it spread to the commoners. The syncretic form of Islam in Malaysia was influenced by previous religions and was originally not orthodox.

===Malaccan Sultanate===

====Establishment====
The port of Malacca on the west coast of the Malay Peninsula was founded in 1400 by Parameswara, a Srivijayan prince fleeing Temasek (now Singapore). Parameswara sailed to Temasek to escape persecution. There he came under the protection of Temagi, a Malay chief from Patani who was appointed by the king of Siam as regent of Temasek. Within a few days, Parameswara killed Temagi and appointed himself regent. Some five years later he had to leave Temasek, due to threats from Siam. During this period, a Javanese fleet from Majapahit attacked Temasek.

Parameswara headed north to find a new settlement, reaching a fishing village at the mouth of the Bertam River (former name of the Melaka River) where he founded what would become the Malacca Sultanate. Over time this developed into modern-day Malacca Town. According to the &quot;Malay Annals&quot;, here Parameswara saw a mouse deer outwitting a dog resting under a Malacca tree. Taking this as a good omen, he decided to establish a kingdom called Malacca. He built and improved facilities for trade. The Malacca Sultanate is commonly considered the first independent state in the peninsula.
In 1404, the first official Chinese trade envoy led by Admiral Yin Qing arrived in Malacca. Later, Parameswara was escorted by Zheng He and other envoys on his successful visits. Malacca&#x27;s relationships with Ming granted protection to Malacca against attacks from Siam and Majapahit and Malacca officially submitted as a protectorate of Ming China. This encouraged the development of Malacca into a major trade settlement on the trade route between China and India, the Middle East, Africa and Europe. To prevent the Malaccan empire from falling to the Siamese and Majapahit, he forged a relationship with Ming China for protection. Following the establishment of this relationship, the prosperity of the Malacca entrepôt was then recorded by the first Chinese visitor, Ma Huan, who travelled together with Admiral Zheng He. In Malacca during the early 15th century, Ming China actively sought to develop a commercial hub and a base of operation for their treasure voyages into the Indian Ocean. Malacca had been a relatively insignificant region, not even qualifying as a polity prior to the voyages according to both Ma Huan and Fei Xin, and was a vassal region of Siam. In 1405, the Ming court dispatched Admiral Zheng He with a stone tablet enfeoffing the Western Mountain of Malacca as well as an imperial order elevating the status of the port to a country. The Chinese also established a government depot (官廠) as a fortified cantonment for their soldiers. Ma Huan reported that Siam did not dare to invade Malacca thereafter. The rulers of Malacca, such as Parameswara in 1411, would pay tribute to the Chinese emperor in person.

The emperor of Ming China was sending out fleets of ships to expand trade. Admiral Zheng He called at Malacca and brought Parameswara with him on his return to China, a recognition of his position as ruler of Malacca. In exchange for regular tribute, the Chinese emperor offered Melaka protection from the constant threat of a Siamese attack. Because of its strategic location, Malacca was an important stopping point for Zheng He&#x27;s fleet. Due to Chinese involvement, Malacca had grown as a key alternative to other important and established ports. The Chinese and Indians who settled in the Malay Peninsula before and during this period are the ancestors of today&#x27;s Baba-Nyonya and Chitty communities. According to one theory, Parameswara became a Muslim when he married a Princess of Pasai and he took the fashionable Persian title &quot;Shah&quot;, calling himself Iskandar Shah. In 1414, Parameswara&#x27;s son was then officially recognised as the second ruler of Melaka by the Chinese Emperor and styled Raja Sri Rama Vikrama, Raja of Parameswara of Temasek and Malacca and he was known to his Muslim subjects as Sultan Sri Iskandar Zulkarnain Shah (Megat Iskandar Shah). He ruled Malacca from 1414 to 1424. Through the influence of Indian Muslims and, to a lesser extent, Hui people from China, Islam became increasingly common during the 15th century.

==== Rise of Malacca ====

After an initial period paying tribute to the Ayutthaya, the kingdom rapidly assumed the place previously held by Srivijaya, establishing independent relations with China, and exploiting its position dominating the Straits to control the China-India maritime trade, which became increasingly important when the Mongol conquests closed the overland route between China and the west.

Within a few years of its establishment, Malacca officially adopted Islam. Parameswara became a Muslim, and because Malacca was under a Muslim prince, the conversion of Malays to Islam accelerated in the 15th century. The political power of the Malacca Sultanate helped Islam&#x27;s rapid spread through the archipelago. By the start of the 16th century, with the Malacca Sultanate in the Malay Peninsula and parts of Sumatra, the Demak Sultanate in Java, and other kingdoms around the Malay Archipelago increasingly converting to Islam, it had become the dominant religion among Malays, and reached as far as the modern-day Philippines, leaving Bali as an isolated outpost of Hinduism today. The government in Malacca was based on the feudal system.

Malacca&#x27;s reign lasted little more than a century, but during this time became the established centre of Malay culture. Most future Malay states originated from this period. Malacca became a cultural centre, creating the matrix of the modern Malay culture: a blend of indigenous Malay and imported Indian, Chinese and Islamic elements. Malacca&#x27;s fashions in literature, art, music, dance and dress, and the ornate titles of its royal court, came to be seen as the standard for all ethnic Malays. The court of Malacca also gave great prestige to the Malay language, which had originally evolved in Sumatra and been brought to Malacca at the time of its foundation. In time Malay came to be the official language of all the Malaysian states, although local languages survived in many places. After the fall of Malacca, the Sultanate of Brunei became the major centre of Islam.

=== Post-Malaccan sultanates ===

From the 15th century onwards, the Portuguese started seeking a maritime route to Asia. In 1511, Afonso de Albuquerque led an expedition to Malaya which seized Malacca with the intent of using it as a base for activities in Southeast Asia. This was the first colonial claim in what is now Malaysia. The son of the last Sultan of Malacca, Alauddin Riayat Shah II fled to the southern tip of the peninsula, where he founded a state that which became the Sultanate of Johor in 1528. Another son, Muzaffar Shah I established the Perak Sultanate to the north. Portuguese influence was strong, as they aggressively tried to convert the population of Malacca to Catholicism. In 1571, the Spanish captured Manila and established a colony in the Philippines, reducing the Sultanate of Brunei&#x27;s power.

After the fall of Malacca to Portugal, the Johor Sultanate on the southern Malay Peninsula and the Sultanate of Aceh on northern Sumatra moved to fill the power vacuum left behind. The three powers struggled to dominate the Malay Peninsula and the surrounding islands. Meanwhile, the importance of the Strait of Malacca as an east–west shipping route was growing, while the islands of Southeast Asia were themselves prized sources of natural resources (metals, spices, etc.) whose inhabitants were being further drawn into the global economy.

In 1607, the Sultanate of Aceh rose as the most powerful and wealthiest state in the Malay Archipelago. Under Sultan Iskandar Muda&#x27;s reign, the sultanate&#x27;s control was extended over a number of Malay states. During the Battle of Duyon River, Iskandar Muda&#x27;s disastrous campaign against Malacca in 1629, the combined Portuguese and Johor forces managed to destroy all the ships of his formidable fleet and 19,000 troops according to a Portuguese account.

In the early 17th century, the Dutch East India Company (&quot;Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie&quot;, or VOC) was established. Backed by the Dutch, Johor established a loose hegemony over the Malay states, except Perak, which was able to play-off Johor against the Siamese to the north and retain its independence. The Dutch did not interfere in local matters in Malacca, but at the same time diverted most trade to its colonies on Java.

==== Johor Sultanate ====
At its height, the sultanate controlled modern-day Johor, several territories by the Klang and Linggi rivers, Singapore, Bintan, Riau, Lingga, Karimun, Bengkalis, Kampar and Siak in Sumatra. The Portuguese and Johor were frequently in conflict in the 16th century, most notably in the 1587 siege of Johor. During the Triangular war, Aceh launched multiple raids against both Johor and Portuguese forces to tighten its grip over the straits. The rise and expansion of Aceh encouraged the Portuguese and Johor to sign a short-lived truce. During the rule of Iskandar Muda, Aceh attacked Johor in 1613 and again in 1615.

In the early 17th century, the Dutch reached Southeast Asia. At that time the Dutch were at war with the Portuguese and allied themselves to Johor. Two treaties were signed between Admiral Cornelis Matelief de Jonge and Raja Bongsu of Johor in 1606. The combined Johor-Dutch forces ultimately failed to capture Malacca in 1606. Finally in 1641, the Dutch and Johor headed by Bendahara Skudai, defeated the Portuguese in the Battle of Malacca. The Dutch took control of Malacca and agreed not to seek territories or wage war with Johor. By the time the fortress at Malacca surrendered, the town&#x27;s population had already been greatly decimated by famine and disease.

With the fall of Portuguese Malacca in 1641 and the decline of Aceh due to the growing power of the Dutch, Johor started to re-establish itself as a power along the Straits of Malacca during the reign of Sultan Abdul Jalil Shah III (1623–1677). Jambi emerged as a regional economic and political power in Sumatra. Initially there was an attempt of an alliance between Johor and Jambi by way of a promised marriage. However, the alliance broke down and the Johor-Jambi war (1666–1679) ensued. After the sacking of Batu Sawar by Jambi in 1673, the capital of Johor was frequently moved to avoid the threat of attack. The sultan escaped to Pahang and died four years later. His successor, Sultan Ibrahim Shah (1677–1685), then engaged the help of the Bugis in the fight to defeat Jambi. Johor would eventually prevail in 1679, but also ended in a weakened position as the Bugis refused to return to Makassar where they came from. On top of this, the Minangkabaus of Sumatra also started to assert their influence.

In the 1690s the Bugis, who played an important role in defeating Jambi two decades earlier, had a major political influence in Johor. Both the Bugis and the Minangkabau realised how the death of Sultan Mahmud II in 1699 caused a power vacuum and allowed them to exert their power in Johor. The Minangkabau introduced a Minangkabau prince, Raja Kecil from Siak who claimed he was the posthumous son of Mahmud II. With the help of the Orang Laut, Raja Kecil then captured Riau in 1718, the then capital of the Johor Sultanate and installed himself as the new Johor Sultan, Jalil Rahmat Shah, without the knowledge of the Bugis. Raja Sulaiman of Johor dethroned Raja Kechil with help from the Bugis Daeng Parani and reclaimed the throne as Sultan Sulaiman Badrul Alam Shah (1722–1760), but he was a weak ruler and became a puppet of the Bugis. During the reign of Sultan Mahmud Shah III, the mid-to-late 18th century saw the Bugis attempting to expand their influence in the region. This brought them into conflicts with the Dutch, which resulted in a final major battle in 1784 between the two, which ended Bugis and Johor dominance in the region.

==== Perak Sultanate ====
Based on the Perak Royal Genealogy (&quot;Salasilah Raja-Raja Perak&quot;), the Perak Sultanate was formed in the early 16th century on the banks of the Perak River by the eldest son of Malaccan Sultan Mahmud Shah. He ascended to the throne as Muzaffar Shah I (1528–1549), first Sultan of Perak, after surviving the capture of Malacca by the Portuguese in 1511 and living quietly in Siak for a period. He became sultan through the efforts of Tun Saban, a local leader and trader between Perak and Klang. There had been no sultans in Perak when Tun Saban first arrived in the area from Kampar in Sumatra. Most of the area&#x27;s residents were traders from Malacca, Selangor and Sumatra. Perak&#x27;s administration became more organised after the Sultanate was established. With the opening up of Perak in the 16th century, the state became a source of tin ore. It appears that anyone was free to trade in the commodity, although the tin trade did not attract significant attention until the 1610s.
Throughout the early 17th century, the Sultanate of Aceh continually harassed most parts of the Malay Peninsula. Although Perak fell under the authority of Aceh, it remained entirely independent from Siamese control for over 200 years from 1612, in contrast with its neighbour, Kedah, and other northern Malay sultanates.

When the last Perak sultan of direct Malaccan lineage, Sallehuddin Riayat Shah died without an heir in 1635, a state of uncertainty prevailed in Perak. This was exacerbated by a deadly cholera epidemic. Perak chieftains were left with no alternative but to turn to Iskandar Thani of Aceh, who sent his relative, Raja Sulong, to become the new Perak Sultan, Muzaffar Shah II (1636–1653).

Aceh&#x27;s influence on Perak began to wane when the Dutch East India Company (VOC) arrived, in the mid-17th century. When Perak refused to enter into a contract with the VOC as its northern neighbours had done, a blockade of the Perak River halted the tin trade, causing suffering among Aceh&#x27;s merchants. In 1650, Aceh&#x27;s Sultana Taj ul-Alam ordered Perak to sign an agreement with the VOC, on condition that the tin trade would be conducted exclusively with Aceh&#x27;s merchants. By the following year, the VOC had secured a monopoly over the tin trade, setting up a store in Perak. Following the long competition between Aceh and the VOC over Perak&#x27;s tin trade, on 15 December 1653, the two parties jointly signed a treaty with Perak granting the Dutch exclusive rights to tin extracted from mines located in the state.

In 1699, when Johor lost its last sultan of Malaccan lineage, Sultan Mahmud Shah II, Perak now had the sole claim of being the final heir of the old Sultanate of Malacca. However, Perak could not match the prestige and power of either the Malaccan or Johor Sultanates. Perak endured 40 years of civil war in the early 18th century, where rival princes were bolstered by local chiefs, the Bugis and Minang, all fighting for a share of tin revenues. The Bugis and several Perak chiefs were successful in ousting the Perak ruler, Sultan Muzaffar Riayat Shah III in 1743. In 1747, he only held power in north Perak and signed a treaty with the Dutch Commissioner Ary Verbrugge, under which Perak&#x27;s ruler recognised Dutch monopoly over the tin trade and agreed to sell all the tin ore to Dutch traders.

==== Pahang Sultanate ====
The Old Pahang Sultanate centred in modern-day Pekan was established in the 15th century. At the height of its influence, the sultanate controlled the entire Pahang basin. The sultanate had its origins as a vassal to the Malaccan Sultanate. Its first sultan was a Malaccan prince, Muhammad Shah (1455–1475), himself the grandson of Dewa Sura, the last pre-Malaccan ruler of Pahang. Over the years, Pahang grew independent from Malaccan control and at one point even established itself as a rival state to Malacca until the latter&#x27;s demise in 1511. In 1528, when the last Malaccan sultan died, the sultan at the time, Mahmud Shah I (c. 1519–1530) joined forces with the Sultan of Johor, Alauddin Riayat Shah II, and began to expel the Portuguese from the Malay Peninsula. Two attempts were made in 1547 at Muar and in 1551 at Portuguese Malacca. However, in the face of superior Portuguese arms and vessels, the Pahang and Johor forces were forced to retreat on both occasions.
During the reign of Sultan Abdul Kadir (1560–1590), Pahang enjoyed a brief period of cordial relations with the Portuguese in the second half of the 16th century. However, in 1607, following a visit by Admiral Matelief de Jonge of the Dutch Empire, Pahang cooperated with them in an attempt to get rid of the Portuguese. There was an attempt to establish a Johor-Pahang alliance to assist the Dutch. However, a quarrel erupted between Sultan Abdul Ghafur of Pahang (1592–1614) and Alauddin Riayat Shah III of Johor (1597–1615). This resulted in Johor declaring war on Pahang in 1612; with the aid of Sultan Abdul Jalilul Akbar of Brunei, Pahang eventually defeated Johor in 1613.

In 1615, the Acehnese Iskandar Muda invaded Pahang, forcing Alauddin Riayat Shah to retreat into the interior of Pahang. He nevertheless continued to exercise some ruling powers. His reign in exile is considered to have officially ended after the installation of a distant Johorean relative, Raja Bujang (Abdul Jalil Shah III) to the Pahang throne in 1615 with the support of the Portuguese. However, he was eventually deposed in the Acehnese invasion of 1617, but restored to the Pahang throne and also installed as the new Sultan of Johor following the death of his uncle, Sultan Abdullah Ma&#x27;ayat Shah in 1623. This event led to the union of the crown of Pahang and Johor, and the formal establishment of Pahang-ruled Johor.

==== Selangor Sultanate ====
During the 17th century Johor-Jambi war, Sultan Abdul Jalil Shah III (r. 1623–1677) of Johor engaged the help of Bugis mercenaries from Sulawesi to fight against Jambi. After Johor won in 1679, the Bugis decided to stay and asserted their power in the region. Many Bugis began to migrate and settle along the coast of Selangor such as the estuaries of the Selangor and Klang rivers. Some Minangkabaus may have also settled in Selangor by the 17th century, perhaps earlier. The Bugis and the Minangkabaus from Sumatra struggled for control of Johor. Raja Kecil, backed by the Minangkabaus, invaded Selangor but were driven off by the Bugis in 1742. To establish a power base, the Bugis led by Raja Salehuddin (1705–1788) founded the present hereditary Selangor Sultanate with its capital at Kuala Selangor in 1766. Selangor is unique as it is the only state on the Malay Peninsula that was founded by the Bugis.

===Brunei Sultanate===

Before its conversion to Islam, the oldest records of Brunei in Arabic sources defined it as &quot;Sribuza&quot; which was a Bornean Vassal-State to Srivijaya. The Arabic author Ya&#x27;qubi writing in the 9th century recorded that the kingdom of Musa (probably referring to Brunei) was in alliance with the kingdom of Mayd (either Ma-i or Madja-as in the Philippines), against the Tang dynasty.

One of the earliest Chinese records of an independent kingdom in Borneo was the 977 letter to the Song dynasty emperor from the ruler of Boni (Brunei). The Bruneians regained their independence from Srivijaya due to the onset of a Javanese-Sumatran war. In 1225, the Chinese official Zhao Rukuo reported that Boni had 100 warships to protect its trade, and that there was great wealth in the kingdom. In the 14th century, a Chinese annal (&quot;Yuan Dade&quot; &quot;Nanhai zhi&quot;) reported that Boni invaded or administered Sabah, some parts of Sarawak and ruled the formerly independent kingdoms of Butuan, Sulu and Mayd, as well as Malilu and Wenduling in present-day Manila and Mindanao, at northern and southern Philippines, respectively. Later, the Sulu kingdom invaded and occupied ports in Boni-ruled Sabah. They were later evicted with the help of the Majapahit Empire, which Brunei became a vassal to in the late 14th century. Nevertheless, the Sulus stole 2 Sacred Pearls from the Brunei king.

By the 15th century, the empire became a Muslim state, when the king of Brunei converted to Islam, brought Muslim Indians and Arab merchants from other parts of Maritime Southeast Asia, who came to trade and spread Islam. During the rule of Bolkiah (1485–1524) the empire controlled the coastal areas of northwest Borneo and reached the Philippines at Seludong (present-day Manila), the Sulu Archipelago and some parts of Mindanao which Brunei had incorporated via royal intermarriage with the rulers of Sulu, Manila and Maguindanao.

==== 16th–18th century ====

In the 16th century, the Brunei empire&#x27;s influence also extended as far as Kapuas River delta in West Kalimantan. Other sultanates in the area had close relations with the Brunei Monarchy, being in some cases effectively under the hegemony of the Brunei ruling family for periods of time, such as the Malay sultans of Pontianak, Samarinda and Banjarmasin. The Malay Sultanate of Sambas (present-day West Kalimantan), the Sultanate of Sulu and the Muslim Rajahs of precolonial Manila had developed dynastic relations with the royal house of Brunei. The Sultanate of Sarawak (covering present day Kuching, known to the Portuguese cartographers as &quot;Cerava,&quot; and one of the five great seaports on the island of Borneo), though under the influence of Brunei, was self-governed under Sultan Tengah before being fully integrated into the Bruneian Empire upon sultan Tengah&#x27;s death in 1641.

The Bruneian empire began to decline during the arrival of western powers. Spain sent several expeditions from Mexico to invade and colonise Brunei&#x27;s territories in the Philippines. Eventually the Spanish, their Visayan allies and their Latin-American recruits assaulted Brunei itself during the Castilian War. Though there were rapes, sacks and pillaging, the invasion was only temporary as the Spanish retreated. Brunei was unable to regain the territory it lost in the Philippines, yet it still maintained sway in Borneo.

==== 19th century ====
By the early 19th century, Sarawak had become a loosely governed territory under the control of the Brunei Sultanate. Brunei only had authority along the coastal regions of Sarawak where it was held by semi-independent Malay leaders. Meanwhile, the interior of Sarawak suffered from tribal wars fought by Iban, Kayan, and Kenyah peoples, who aggressively fought to expand their territories.

Following the discovery of antimony ore in the Kuching region, Pangeran Indera Mahkota (a representative of the Sultan of Brunei) began to develop the territory between 1824 and 1830. When antimony production increased, the Brunei Sultanate demanded higher taxes from Sarawak, which led to civil unrest and chaos. In 1839, Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddin II (1827–1852), ordered his uncle the Pengiran Muda Hashim to restore order. It was around this time that James Brooke arrived in Sarawak, and Pengiran Muda Hashim requested his assistance in the matter, but Brooke refused. However, he agreed to a further request during his next visit to Sarawak in 1840. On 24 September 1841, Pengiran Muda Hashim agreed to depose Pangeran Indera Mahkota and bestow the title of governor on James Brooke. This appointment was later confirmed by the Sultan of Brunei in 1842.

== Struggles for hegemony ==
The weakness of the small coastal Malay states led to the immigration of the Bugis, escaping from Dutch colonisation of Sulawesi, who established numerous settlements on the peninsula which they used to interfere with Dutch trade. They seized control of Johor following the assassination of the last Sultan of the old Melaka royal line in 1699. Bugis expanded their power in the states of Johor, Kedah, Perak, and Selangor. The Minangkabau from central Sumatra migrated into Malaya, and eventually established their own state in Negeri Sembilan. The fall of Johor left a power vacuum on the Malay Peninsula which was partly filled by the Siamese kings of the Ayutthaya Kingdom, who made the five northern Malay states—Kedah, Kelantan, Patani, Perlis, and Terengganu—their vassals.

The economic importance of Malaya to Europe grew rapidly during the 18th century. The fast-growing tea trade between China and United Kingdom increased the demand for high-quality Malayan tin, which was used to line tea-chests. Malayan pepper also had a high reputation in Europe, while Kelantan and Pahang had gold mines. The growth of tin and gold mining and associated service industries led to the first influx of foreign settlers into the Malay world – initially Arabs and Indians, later Chinese.

===Siamese expansion into Malaya===
After the Fall of Ayutthaya in 1767, the Northern Malay Sultanates were freed from Siamese domination temporarily. In 1786, British trader Francis Light managed to obtain a lease of Penang Island from Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin Halim Shah II of Kedah on behalf of East India Company. Siam re-exerted control over Northern Malay Sultanates and sacked Pattani; Kedah came under Siamese suzerainty. King Rama II of Siam ordered Noi Na Nagara of Ligor to invade Kedah Sultanate in 1821. Under the Burney Treaty of 1826, the exiled Kedah Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin was not restored to his throne. He and his armed supporters then fought in a series of war known as Perang Musuh Bisik for his restoration over twelve years (1830–1842). When the Siamese army invaded and occupied Kedah between 1821 and 1842, local Arab families supported the Sultan&#x27;s efforts to lead resistance. In 1842, Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin finally agreed to accept Siamese terms and was restored to his throne of Kedah. The following year, Syed Hussein Jamalullail was installed by the Siamese as the first Raja of Perlis, after the Sultan of Kedah gave his endorsement for the formation of Perlis, Siam separated Perlis into a separate principality directly vassal to Bangkok.

Around 1760, Long Yunus, an aristocratic warlord of Patani origin succeeded in unifying the territory of present-day Kelantan and was succeeded in 1795 by his son-in-law, Tengku Muhammad by Sultan Mansur of Terengganu. The enthronement of Tengku Muhammad by a noble from Terengganu was opposed by Long Yunus&#x27; sons, thus triggering a war against Terengganu by Long Muhammad, the eldest son of Long Yunus. The pro-Terengganu faction was defeated in 1800 and Long Muhammad ruled Kelantan with the new title of sultan as Sultan Muhammad I.
Terengganu experienced stability under the reign of Sultan Omar Riayat Shah, who was remembered as a devout ruler who promoted trade and stable government. Under Thai rule, Terengganu prospered, and was largely left alone by the authorities in Bangkok. However, in the Burney Treaty of 1826, the treaty acknowledged Siamese claims over several northern Malay states Kedah, Kelantan, Perlis, Terengganu—the future Unfederated Malay States—and Patani. The treaty further guaranteed British possession of Penang and their rights to trade in Kelantan and Terengganu without Siamese interference. However, the five Malay-ethnic states were not represented in the treaty negotiation. In 1909 the parties of the agreement signed a new treaty that superseded the Burney Treaty and transferred four of the five Malay states from Siamese to British control, except for Patani. As Patani was not included in the Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909 and remained under Siamese rule, this led Patani to be excluded from the Federation of Malaya in 1957.

===British influence===

Before the mid-19th-century British interests in the region were predominantly economic, with little interest in territorial control. Already the strongest European power in India, the British were looking towards southeast Asia for new territories. The growth of the China trade in British ships increased the East India Company&#x27;s desire for bases in the region. Various islands were used for this purpose, but the first permanent acquisition was Penang, leased from the Sultan of Kedah in 1786. This was followed soon after by the leasing of a block of territory on the mainland opposite Penang (known as Province Wellesley). In 1795, during the Napoleonic Wars, the British with the consent of the French-occupied Netherlands occupied Dutch Melaka to forestall possible French encroachment.

When Malacca was handed back to the Dutch in 1818, the British governor, Stamford Raffles, looked for an alternative base, and in 1819 he acquired Singapore from the Sultan of Johor. The exchange of the British colony of Bencoolen for Malacca with the Dutch left the British as the sole colonial power on the peninsula. The territories of the British were set up as free ports, attempting to break the monopoly held by the Dutch and French at the time, and making them large bases of trade. They allowed Britain to control all trade through the straits of Malacca. British influence was increased by Malayan fears of Siamese expansionism, to which Britain made a useful counterweight. During the 19th century the Malay Sultans aligned themselves with the British Empire, due to the benefits of associations with the British and their fear of Siamese or Burmese incursions.

In 1824, British control in Malaya (before the name Malaysia) was formalised by the Anglo-Dutch Treaty, which divided the Malay Archipelago between Britain and the Netherlands. The Dutch evacuated Melaka and renounced all interest in Malaya, while the British recognised Dutch rule over the rest of the East Indies. By 1846 the British controlled Penang, Malacca, Singapore, and the island of Labuan, which they established as the crown colony of the Straits Settlements, administered first under the East India Company until 1867, when they were transferred to the Colonial Office in London.

Throughout the 19th century, the British became increasingly more active in the internal politics of the sultanates such as its involvement in the Naning War (1831–1832), the Pahang Civil War (1857–1863), the Larut Wars (1861–1874) and the Klang War (1867–1874).

==Colonial era==
===British in Malaya===

Initially, the British followed a policy of non-intervention in relations between the Malay states. The commercial importance of tin mining in the Malay states to merchants in the Straits Settlements led to infighting between the aristocracy on the peninsula. The destabilisation of these states damaged the commerce in the area. The wealth of Perak&#x27;s tin mines made political stability there a priority for British investors, and Perak was thus the first Malay state to agree to the supervision of a British resident. The Royal Navy was employed to bring about a peaceful resolution to civil disturbances caused by Chinese and Malay gangs employed in a political fight between Ngah Ibrahim and Raja Muda Abdullah. The Pangkor Treaty of 1874 paved the way for the expansion of British influence in Malaya. The British concluded treaties with some Malay states, installing residents who advised the Sultans and soon became the de facto rulers of their states. These advisors held power in everything except to do with Malay religion and customs.

Johor was the sole remaining state to maintain its independence, by modernising and giving British and Chinese investors legal protection. By the turn of the 20th century, the states of Pahang, Selangor, Perak, and Negeri Sembilan, known together as the Federated Malay States, had British advisors. In 1909 the Siamese kingdom was compelled to cede Kedah, Kelantan, Perlis and Terengganu, which already had British advisors, over to the British. Sultan Abu Bakar of Johor and Queen Victoria were personal acquaintances who recognised each other as equals. It was not until 1914 that Sultan Abu Bakar&#x27;s successor, Sultan Ibrahim, accepted a British adviser. The four previously Siamese states and Johor were known as the Unfederated Malay States. The states under the most direct British control developed rapidly, becoming the largest suppliers in the world of first tin, then rubber.

By 1910, the pattern of British rule in the Malay lands was established. The Straits Settlements were a Crown colony, ruled by a governor under the supervision of the Colonial Office in London. Their population was roughly 50% Chinese-Malaysian, but all residents, regardless of race, were British subjects. The first four states to accept British residents, Perak, Selangor, Negeri Sembilan, and Pahang, were termed the Federated Malay States: while technically independent, they were placed under a Resident-General in 1895. The Unfederated Malay States had a slightly larger degree of independence. Johor, as Britain&#x27;s closest ally in Malay affairs, had the privilege of a written constitution, which gave the Sultan the right to appoint his own Cabinet, but he was generally careful to consult the British first.

===British in Borneo===
During the late 19th century the British also gained control of the north coast of Borneo. Development on the peninsula and Borneo were generally separate until the 19th century. The eastern part of this region (now Sabah) was under the nominal control of the Sultan of Sulu, who later became a vassal of the Spanish East Indies. The rest was the territory of the Sultanate of Brunei. In 1840, British adventurer James Brooke helped suppress a revolt, and in return received the title of raja and the right to govern the Sarawak River District in 1841. In 1843, his title was recognised as hereditary, and the &quot;White Rajahs&quot; began ruling Sarawak as a de facto independent state in 1846. The Brookes expanded Sarawak at the expense of Brunei.

In 1881, the British North Borneo Company was granted control of the territory of British North Borneo, appointing a governor and legislature. Its status was similar to that of a British Protectorate, and like Sarawak it expanded at the expense of Brunei. In 1947 Britain transferred control of the Turtle Islands and Mangsee Islands to the Philippine government, which had up until then been administered by the British North Borneo Company. Since the administration of President Diosdado Macapagal the Philippines have laid claim to eastern Sabah on the basis that the territory was part of the defunct Sultanate of Sulu&#x27;s territory. In 1888, what was left of Brunei was made a British protectorate, and in 1891 another Anglo-Dutch treaty formalised the border between British and Dutch Borneo.

=== Race relations during colonial era ===
In the pre-colonial period and in the first few decades after the imposition of formal colonial rule in British Malaya, &#x27;Malay&#x27; was not a racial or even a fixed identity in the modern sense of these terms. The construct of race was imposed by the British on their colonial subjects.

Unlike some colonial powers, the British saw their empire as an economic concern, and its colonies were expected to turn a profit for shareholders in London. Initially, British colonisers were attracted by the Malay Archipelago&#x27;s tin and gold mines. But British planters soon began to experiment with tropical plantation crops—tapioca, gambier, pepper, and coffee. And, in 1877, the rubber plant was introduced from Brazil. Rubber soon became Malaya&#x27;s staple export, stimulated by booming demand from European industry. Rubber was later joined by palm oil as an export good. All these industries required a large labour force, so the British sent people from the longer-established British colony in India, consisting mainly of Tamil-speakers from South India, to work on plantations as indentured labourers. The mines, mills and docks also attracted a flood of immigrant workers from southern China. Soon towns like Singapore, Penang, and Ipoh were majority Chinese, as was Kuala Lumpur, founded as a tin-mining centre in 1857. By 1891, when Malaya&#x27;s first census was taken, Perak and Selangor, the main tin-mining states, had Chinese majorities.

Workers were often treated violently by contractors, and sickness was frequent. Many Chinese labourers&#x27; debts increased through addictions to opium and gambling, which earned the British colonial government significant revenue, while Indian labourers&#x27; debts were increased through addiction to drink. Workers&#x27; debts acquired in this way meant that they were tied to their labour contracts for much longer.

Some Chinese immigrant workers were connected with networks of mutual aid societies (run by &quot;Hui-Guan&quot; 會館, or non-profit organisations). In the 1890s Yap Ah Loy, who held the title of Kapitan China of Kuala Lumpur, was the richest man in Malaya, owning a chain of mines, plantations and shops. Malaya&#x27;s banking and insurance industries were run by the Chinese from the start, and Chinese businesses, usually in partnership with London firms, soon had complete control of the Malayan economy. Chinese bankers also lent money to the Malay sultans, which gave the Chinese political as well as economic leverage. At first the Chinese immigrants were mostly men. At first they married Malay women, producing a community of Sino-Malayans or baba people, but soon they began importing Chinese brides, establishing permanent communities and building schools and temples.

An Indian commercial and professional class emerged during the early 20th century, but the majority of Indians remained poor and uneducated in rural ghettos in the rubber-growing areas.

Traditional Malay society was greatly harmed by the loss of political sovereignty to the British colonisers. The sultans, who were seen as collaborators with both the British and the Chinese, lost some of their traditional prestige, but the majority of rural Malays continued to revere the sultans. A small class of Malay nationalist intellectuals began to emerge during the early 20th century, and there was also a revival of Islam in response to the perceived threat of other imported religions, particularly Christianity. In fact few Malays converted to Christianity, although many Chinese did. The northern regions, which were less influenced by Western ideas, became strongholds of Islamic conservatism.

The British gave elite Malays positions in the police and local military units, and made a majority of those administrative positions open to non-Europeans. While the Chinese mostly built and paid for their own schools and colleges, importing teachers from China, the British aimed to control the education of young Malay elites and establish colonial ideas of race and class hierarchies. The colonial government opened Malay College in 1905 and created the Malay Administrative Service in 1910. (The college was dubbed &quot;Bab ud-Darajat&quot; – the Gateway to High Rank.) A Malay Teachers College followed in 1922, and a Malay Women&#x27;s Training College in 1935. All this reflected the official policy of the colonial administration that Malaya belonged to the Malays, and that the other races were only temporary residents. This view was increasingly out of line with reality, and resulted in the formation of resistance movements against British colonial rule.

The Malay teacher&#x27;s college had lectures and writings that nurtured Malay nationalist sentiments; it is known as the birthplace of Malay nationalism. In 1938, Ibrahim Yaacob, an alumnus of Sultan Idris College, established the Kesatuan Melayu Muda (Young Malays Union or KMM) in Kuala Lumpur. It was the first nationalist political organisation in British Malaya. A specific ideal the KMM held was &quot;Panji Melayu Raya&quot;, which called for the unification of British Malaya and the Dutch East Indies.

In the years before World War II, the colonial government were concerned with finding a balance between a centralised state and maintaining the power of the sultans. In 1935 the position of Resident-General of the Federated States was abolished, and its powers decentralised to the individual states. The colonial government regarded the Chinese as clever but dangerous—and during the 1920s and 1930s, the Chinese Nationalist Party (the Kuomintang) and the Chinese Communist Party built rival clandestine organisations in Malaya, leading to regular disturbances in the Chinese towns.

Although a belligerent as part of the British Empire, Malaya saw little action during World War I, except for the sinking of the Russian cruiser &quot;Zhemchug&quot; by the German cruiser SMS Emden on 28 October 1914 during the Battle of Penang.

===World War II and the state of emergency===

The British in Malaya were completely unprepared for the outbreak the Pacific War in December 1941. During the 1930s, anticipating the rising threat of Japanese naval power, they had built a great naval base at Singapore, but never anticipated an invasion of Malaya from the north. There was virtually no British air capacity in the Far East. The Japanese were thus able to attack from their bases in French Indo-China with impunity, and despite resistance from British, Australian, and Indian forces, they overran Malaya in two months. Singapore, with no landward defences, no air cover, and no water supply, was forced to surrender in February 1942. British North Borneo and Brunei were also occupied.

The Japanese colonial government regarded the Malays from a pan-Asian point of view, and fostered a limited form of Malay nationalism. The Malay nationalist Kesatuan Melayu Muda, advocates of &quot;Melayu Raya&quot;, collaborated with the Japanese, on the understanding that Japan would unite the Dutch East Indies, Malaya and Borneo and grant them independence. The occupiers regarded the Chinese, however, as enemy aliens, and treated them with harshly: during the Sook Ching, up to 80,000 Chinese in Malaya and Singapore were killed. The Chinese, led by the Malayan Communist Party (MCP), became the backbone of the Malayan Peoples&#x27; Anti-Japanese Army (MPAJA). With British assistance, the MPAJA became the most effective resistance force in occupied Asia.

Although the Japanese argued that they supported Malay nationalism, they offended Malay nationalists by allowing their ally Thailand to re-annex the four northern states, Kedah, Perlis, Kelantan, and Terengganu that had been transferred to British Malaya in 1909. The loss of Malaya&#x27;s export markets soon produced mass unemployment which affected all races and made the Japanese increasingly unpopular.

During occupation, ethnic tensions were raised and nationalism grew. On the whole the Malayans were happy to see the British back in 1945, but things could not remain as they were before the war, and a stronger desire for independence grew. Britain was bankrupt and the new Labour government was keen to withdraw its forces from the East. But most Malays were more concerned with defending themselves against the MCP than with demanding independence from the British.

In 1944, the British drew up plans for a Malayan Union, which would turn the Federated and Unfederated Malay States, plus Penang and Malacca, into a single Crown colony, which would move towards independence. The Bornean territories and Singapore were left out as it was thought this would make union more difficult to achieve. There was however strong opposition from the Malays, who opposed the weakening of the Malay rulers and the granting of citizenship to ethnic Chinese and other minorities. The British had decided on legalised equality between all races as they perceived the Chinese and Indians as more loyal to the British during the war than the Malays. The sultans, who had initially supported it, backed down and placed themselves at the head of the resistance.

In 1946, the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) was founded by Malay nationalists led by Dato Onn bin Jaafar, the Chief Minister of Johor. UMNO favoured independence for Malaya, but only if the new state was run exclusively by the Malays. Faced with Malay opposition, the British dropped the plan for equal citizenship. The Malayan Union was thus established in 1946, and was dissolved in 1948 and replaced by the Federation of Malaya, which restored the autonomy of the rulers of the Malay states under British protection.

Meanwhile, the communists were moving towards open insurrection. The MPAJA had been disbanded in December 1945, and the MCP organised as a legal political party, but the MPAJA&#x27;s arms had been stored for future use. The MCP policy was for immediate independence with full equality for all races. The party&#x27;s strength was in the Chinese-dominated trade unions, particularly in Singapore, and in the Chinese schools. In March 1947, reflecting the international Communist movement&#x27;s &quot;turn to left&quot; as the Cold War set in, the MCP leader Lai Teck was purged and replaced by the veteran MPAJA guerrilla leader Chin Peng, who turned the party increasingly to direct action. These rebels, under the leadership of the MCP, launched guerrilla operations designed to force the British out of Malaya. In July, following a string of assassinations of plantation managers, the colonial government struck back, declaring a state of emergency, banning the MCP and arresting hundreds of its militants. The Party retreated to the jungle and formed the Malayan Peoples&#x27; Liberation Army, with about 13,000 mostly ethnic Chinese, men under arms.

The Malayan Emergency was precipitated by the new constitution desired by Britain –under which about 90 percent of ethnic Chinese were deemed non-citizens– and by the eviction of poor peasants to make way for plantations. But although the war was long portrayed in most analyses by British authorities as a struggle against communism in a Cold War context, the MNLA received very little support from either the Soviet or Chinese communists. Rather, the main concern of British governments was to protect their commercial interests in the colony.

The Malayan Emergency lasted from 1948 to 1960 and involved a long anti-insurgency campaign by Commonwealth troops in Malaya. The British strategy, which proved ultimately successful, was to isolate the MCP from its support base by a combination of economic and political concessions to the Chinese and the resettlement of Chinese squatters into &quot;new villages&quot;, in reality, concentration camps, in &quot;white areas&quot; free of MCP influence. From 1949 the MCP campaign lost momentum and the number of recruits fell sharply. Although the MCP succeeded in assassinating the British High Commissioner, Sir Henry Gurney, in October 1951, this turn to terrorist tactics alienated many moderate Chinese from the party. The arrival of Lieutenant General Gerald Templer as British commander in 1952 was the beginning of the end of the Emergency. Templer helped create the modern techniques of counter-insurgency warfare in Malaya and applied them against the MCP guerillas. The war was accompanied by abuses on both sides. The most notorious atrocity was committed in the village of Batang Kali, north of the capital Kuala Lumpur, in December 1948, when the British army massacred 24 Chinese before burning the village to the ground. Heavy bombers went to war, dropping thousands of bombs on insurgent positions. Britain conducted 4,500 air strikes in the first five years of the conflict. Although the insurgency was defeated Commonwealth troops remained with the backdrop of the Cold War against the Soviet Union. Against this backdrop, independence for the Federation within the Commonwealth was granted on 31 August 1957, with Tunku Abdul Rahman as the first prime minister.

==Emergence of Malaysia==
===Struggle for an independent Malaysia===

Chinese reaction against the MCP was shown by the formation of the Malayan Chinese Association (MCA) in 1949 as a vehicle for moderate Chinese political opinion. Its leader Tan Cheng Lock favoured a policy of collaboration with UMNO to win Malayan independence on a policy of equal citizenship, but with sufficient concessions to Malay sensitivities to ease nationalist fears. Tan formed a close collaboration with Tunku Abdul Rahman, the Chief Minister of Kedah and from 1951 successor to Datuk Onn as leader of UMNO. Both leaders were determined to forge an agreement their communities could live with as a basis for a stable independent state. The UMNO-MCA Alliance, which was later joined by the Malayan Indian Congress (MIC), won convincing victories in local and state elections in both Malay and Chinese areas between 1952 and 1955. After Joseph Stalin&#x27;s death in 1953, there was a split in the MCP leadership over the wisdom of continuing the armed struggle. Many MCP militants lost heart and went home, and by the time Templer left Malaya in 1954, the Emergency was over, although Chin Peng led a diehard group that lurked in the inaccessible country along the Thai border for many years. During 1955 and 1956 UMNO, the MCA and the British hammered out a constitutional settlement for a principle of equal citizenship for all races. In exchange, the MCA agreed that Malaya&#x27;s head of state would be drawn from the ranks of the Malay rulers, that Malay would be the official language, and that Malay education and economic development would be promoted and subsidised. In effect, this meant that Malaya would be run by the Malays, but that the Chinese and Indians would have proportionate representation in the Cabinet and the parliament, would run those states where they were the majority, and would have their economic position protected. The difficult issue of who would control the education system was deferred until after independence. This came on 31 August 1957, when Tunku Abdul Rahman became the first prime minister of independent Malaya.

After the Japanese surrender the Brooke family and the British North Borneo Company gave up their control of Sarawak and North Borneo respectively, and these became British Crown colonies. They were much less economically developed than Malaya, and their local political leaders were too weak to demand independence. Singapore, with its large Chinese majority, achieved autonomy in 1955, and in 1959 Lee Kuan Yew became prime minister. The Sultan of Brunei remained as a British client in his oil-rich enclave. Between 1959 and 1962 the British government orchestrated complex negotiations between these local leaders and the Malayan government.

On 24 April 1961, Lee Kuan Yew proposed the idea of forming Malaysia to Tunku Abdul Rahman during a meeting. Deputy Malayan Prime Minister Abdul Razak supported the idea of the new federation and worked to convince Abdul Rahman to back it. On 27 May 1961, Abdul Rahman proposed the idea of forming &quot;Malaysia&quot;, which would consist of Brunei, Malaya, North Borneo, Sarawak, and Singapore, all of which except Malaya were still under British rule. It was stated that this would allow the central government to better control and combat communist activities, especially in Singapore. It was also feared that if Singapore became independent, it would become a base for Chinese chauvinists to threaten Malayan sovereignty. The proposed inclusion of British territories besides Singapore was intended to keep the ethnic composition of the new nation similar to that of Malaya, with the Malay and indigenous populations of the other territories canceling out the Chinese majority in Singapore.

Although Lee Kuan Yew supported the proposal, his opponents from the Singaporean Socialist Front (Barisan Sosialis) resisted. In North Borneo, where there were no political parties, community representatives also stated their opposition. Although the Sultan of Brunei supported the merger, the Parti Rakyat Brunei opposed it as well. At the Commonwealth Prime Ministers&#x27; Conference in 1961, Abdul Rahman explained his proposal further to its opponents. In October, he obtained an agreement from the British government for the plan, provided that feedback be obtained from the communities involved in the merger.

The Cobbold Commission approved a merger with North Borneo and Sarawak; however, it was found that a substantial number of Bruneians opposed merger. North Borneo drew up a list of points, referred to as the 20-point agreement, proposing terms for its inclusion in the new federation. Sarawak prepared a similar memorandum, known as the 18-point agreement. Some of the points in these agreements were incorporated into the eventual constitution, some were instead accepted orally. These memoranda are often cited by those who believe that Sarawak&#x27;s and North Borneo&#x27;s rights have eroded over time. A referendum was conducted in Singapore to gauge opinion, and 70% supported merger with substantial autonomy given to the state government. The Sultanate of Brunei withdrew from the planned merger due to opposition from segments of its population as well as arguments over the payment of oil royalties and the status of the sultan in the planned merger. Additionally, the Parti Rakyat Brunei staged an armed revolt, which, though it was put down, was viewed as potentially destabilising to the new nation.

After reviewing the Cobbold Commission&#x27;s findings, the British government appointed the Landsdowne Commission to draft a constitution for Malaysia. The eventual constitution was essentially the same as the 1957 constitution, albeit with some rewording; for instance, giving recognition to the special position of the natives of the Borneo States. North Borneo, Sarawak and Singapore were also granted some autonomy not available to the states of Malaya. After negotiations in July 1963, it was agreed that Malaysia would come into being on 31 August 1963, consisting of Malaya, North Borneo, Sarawak, and Singapore. The date was to coincide with the independence day of Malaya and the British giving self-rule to Sarawak and North Borneo. However, Indonesia and the Philippines strenuously objected to this development, with Indonesia claiming Malaysia represented a form of &quot;neocolonialism&quot; and the Philippines claiming North Borneo as its territory. The opposition from the Indonesian government led by Sukarno and attempts by the Sarawak United People&#x27;s Party delayed the formation of Malaysia. Due to these factors, an eight-member UN team was formed to re-ascertain whether North Borneo and Sarawak truly wanted to join Malaysia. Malaysia formally came into being on 16 September 1963, consisting of Malaya, North Borneo, Sarawak, and Singapore. In 1963 the total population of Malaysia was about 10 million.

===Challenges of independence===
At the time of independence, Malaya had great economic advantages. It was among the world&#x27;s leading producers of three valuable commodities; rubber, tin, and palm oil, and was also a significant iron ore producer. These exports gave the Malayan government a healthy surplus to invest in industrial development and infrastructure projects. Like other developing nations in the 1950s and 1960s, Malaya (and later Malaysia) placed great stress on state planning, although UMNO was never a socialist party. The First and Second Malayan Plans (1956–1960 and 1961–1965 respectively) stimulated economic growth through state investment in industry and repairing infrastructure. The government was keen to reduce Malaya&#x27;s dependence on commodity exports and was aware that demand for natural rubber was bound to fall as the production and use of synthetic rubber expanded.

Both Indonesia and the Philippines withdrew their ambassadors from Malaya on 15 September 1963, the day before Malaysia&#x27;s formation. In Jakarta the British and Malayan embassies were stoned, and the British consulate in Medan was ransacked with Malaya&#x27;s consul taking refuge in the US consulate. Malaysia withdrew its ambassadors in response, and asked Thailand to represent Malaysia in both countries.

Indonesian President Sukarno, backed by the powerful Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI), regarded Malaysia as a &quot;neocolonialist&quot; plot against his country, and backed a Communist insurgency in Sarawak, mainly involving elements of the local Chinese community. Indonesian irregular forces infiltrated Sarawak, where they were contained by Malaysian and Commonwealth of Nations forces. This period of &quot;Konfrontasi –&quot; an economic, political, and military confrontation – lasted until the downfall of Sukarno in 1966. The Philippines objected to the formation of the federation, claiming North Borneo was part of Sulu, and thus the Philippines. In 1966 the new president, Ferdinand Marcos, dropped the claim, although it has since been revived and is still a point of contention marring Malaysia–Philippines relations.

====Racial strife====

The Great Depression of the 1930s, followed by the outbreak of the Sino-Japanese War, had the effect of ending Chinese emigration to Malaya. At the time of independence in 1957, Malays comprised 55% of the population, Chinese 35% and Indians 10%. This balance was altered by the inclusion of the majority-Chinese Singapore, upsetting many Malays. The federation increased the Chinese proportion to close to 40%. Both UMNO and the MCA were nervous about the possible appeal of Lee&#x27;s People&#x27;s Action Party (PAP) – then seen as a radical socialist party – to voters in Malaya and tried to organise a party in Singapore to challenge Lee&#x27;s position there. Lee in turn threatened to run PAP candidates in Malaya at the 1964 federal elections, despite an earlier agreement that he would not do so (see PAP–UMNO relations). Racial tensions intensified as PAP created an opposition alliance aiming for racial equality. This provoked Tunku Abdul Rahman to demand that Singapore withdraw from Malaysia. Despite last-ditch attempts by Singaporean leaders to keep Singapore as a part of the federation, on 9 August 1965 the Malaysian Parliament voted 126–0 in favour of the expulsion of Singapore.

The most debated issues of independent Malaysia were education and the disparity of economic power among the ethnic communities. The Malays felt unhappy with the wealth of the Chinese community, even after the expulsion of Singapore. Malay political movements emerged based around this. However, since there was no effective opposition party, these issues were contested mainly within the coalition government, which won all but one seat in the first post-independence Malayan Parliament. The two issues were related since the Chinese advantage in education played a large part in maintaining their control of the economy, which the UMNO leaders were determined to end. The MCA leaders were torn between the need to defend their own community&#x27;s interests and the need to maintain good relations with UMNO. This produced a crisis in the MCA in 1959, in which Lim Chong Eu&#x27;s more assertive leadership defied UMNO over the education issue, only to be forced to back down when Tunku Abdul Rahman threatened to break up the coalition.

The Education Act of 1961 put UMNO&#x27;s victory on the education issue into legislative form. Henceforward Malay and English would be the only teaching languages in secondary schools, and state primary schools would teach in Malay only. Although the Chinese and Indian communities could maintain their own Chinese and Tamil-language primary schools, all their students were required to learn Malay, and to study an agreed &quot;Malayan curriculum&quot;. Most importantly, the entrance exam to the University of Malaya (which moved from Singapore to Kuala Lumpur in 1963) would be conducted in Malay, even though most teaching at the university was in English until the 1970s. This excluded many Chinese students. At the same time, Malay schools were heavily subsidised, and Malays were given preferential treatment. This defeat for the MCA greatly weakened its support in the Chinese community.

As in education, UMNO government&#x27;s unspoken agenda in the field of economic development aimed to shift economic power away from the Chinese and towards the Malays. The two Malayan Plans and the First Malaysian Plan (1966–1970) heavily directed resources into developments that would benefit the rural Malay community. Several agencies were set up to enable Malay smallholders to upgrade their production and to increase their incomes. The Federal Land Development Authority (FELDA) helped many Malays to buy or upgrade farms. The state also provided a range of incentives and low-interest loans to help Malays start businesses, and government tendering systematically favoured Malay companies, leading many Chinese-owned businesses to &quot;Malayanise&quot; their management.

====Crisis of 1969 and Communist insurgency====

The collaboration between the MCA and the MIC in these policies weakened their influence over the Chinese and Indian electorates. At the same time, the government&#x27;s affirmative action policies of the 1950s and 1960s created a discontented class of educated but underemployed Malays. This led to the formation of a new party, the Malaysian People&#x27;s Movement (Gerakan), in 1968. Gerakan was intentionally designed as a non-communal party, incorporating Malay trade unionists and intellectuals alongside Chinese and Indian leaders. Meanwhile, the Islamic Party of Malaysia (PAS), an Islamist party, and the Democratic Action Party (DAP), a democratic socialist party, gained growing support at the expense of UMNO and the MCA, respectively.

Following the conclusion of the Malayan Emergency, the predominantly ethnic Chinese Malayan National Liberation Army, the armed wing of the Malayan Communist Party, retreated to the Malaysia-Thailand border. There, they regrouped and retrained for future offensives against the Malaysian government. The insurgency officially began on 17 June 1968, when the MCP ambushed security forces in Kroh–Betong, in northern Peninsular Malaysia. Rather than declaring a &quot;state of emergency&quot; as the British had done earlier, the Malaysian government introduced several policy initiatives in response to the insurgency, including the Security and Development Program (KESBAN), &quot;Rukun Tetangga&quot; (Neighbourhood Watch), and the People&#x27;s Volunteer Corps (RELA Corps).

In the 1969 federal elections, the UMNO-MCA-MIC Alliance secured only 48% of the vote, although it retained a majority in the legislature. The MCA lost most of the Chinese-majority seats to Gerakan and DAP candidates. This outcome led to a Malay backlash, which triggered the riots and inter-communal violence. Approximately 6,000 Chinese homes and businesses were burned, and at least 184 people were killed. Western diplomatic sources at the time estimated the death toll to be closer to 600, with most victims being Chinese. In response, the government declared a state of emergency, and the National Operations Council, led by Deputy Prime Minister Abdul Razak Hussein, assumed power. In September 1970, Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman stepped down and was succeeded by Abdul Razak.

Using the Emergency-era Internal Security Act (ISA), the new government suspended Parliament and political parties, imposed press censorship, and placed severe restrictions on political activity. The ISA granted the government the authority to detain individuals indefinitely without trial. These powers were frequently used to suppress dissent. Additionally, constitutional amendments prohibited criticism of the Malaysian monarchy, the special position of Malays, or the status of Malay as the national language, even within Parliament.

In 1971, Parliament reconvened, and a new coalition government, the Barisan Nasional, was established in 1974 to replace the Alliance party. Abdul Razak remained in office until his death in 1976. On 16 July 1981, Mahathir Mohamad became Prime Minister, serving for 22 years, the longest tenure in Malaysian history. During his administration, Malaysia experienced rapid economic growth and implemented numerous large-scale development projects.

Key policies during this period transformed Malaysia&#x27;s economy and society. The controversial New Economic Policy (NEP), introduced by Prime Minister Tun Abdul Razak, aimed to increase the economic participation of bumiputras relative to other ethnic groups. Malaysia has since maintained a delicate ethno-political balance, combining economic growth with policies that promote equitable participation among all races.

==Modern Malaysia==
In 1970, three-quarters of Malaysians living below the poverty line were ethnic Malays, most of whom were rural workers largely excluded from Malaysia&#x27;s modern economy. The government introduced the New Economic Policy (NEP) in 1971 to address these disparities, with a series of four five-year plans scheduled from 1971 to 1990. The NEP aimed to achieve two main goals: reducing poverty, especially in rural areas, and addressing the economic imbalance by eliminating the association between race and economic prosperity.

This latter goal was interpreted as a strategic shift in economic opportunities from the Chinese community to the Malays, who, at that time, represented only 5% of the professional workforce. To increase Malay participation in the modern economy, the government established several state-owned enterprises and agencies, including Perbadanan Nasional Berhad (PERNAS), Petroliam Nasional Berhad (PETRONAS), and the Heavy Industries Corporation of Malaysia (HICOM). These entities not only directly employed Malay workers but also invested in growing sectors of the economy, creating new technical and administrative roles often allocated to Malays. Consequently, Malay equity in the economy increased from 1.5% in 1969 to 20.3% by 1990.
===Mahathir administration===
Mahathir Mohamad was sworn in as the fourth Prime Minister of Malaysia on 16 July 1981. One of his initial actions was to release 21 detainees held under the Internal Security Act (ISA).

During his early tenure, Mahathir implemented an assertive economic strategy, exemplified by the Guthrie Dawn Raid on 7 September 1981. This strategic economic maneuver, executed by Permodalan Nasional Berhad (PNB), enabled Malaysia to reclaim control of Guthrie Corporation, a British-owned plantation company, by rapidly acquiring its shares on the London Stock Exchange. The operation transferred approximately 200,000 acres of agricultural land into Malaysian ownership, aligning with the New Economic Policy (NEP) objectives of increasing Bumiputera equity. However, the raid strained diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom. In response, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher tightened stock market regulations, while Malaysia introduced the &quot;Buy British Last&quot; policy, prioritizing non-British suppliers in government procurements. Diplomatic reconciliation occurred in 1983 when Thatcher hosted Mahathir at 10 Downing Street, leading to agreements on student subsidies, technical assistance programs, and the resolution of the landing rights issue.

To promote economic development and reduce dependence on Western models, Mahathir introduced the Look East Policy in 1982, encouraging Malaysians to adopt the work ethics and practices of Japan and South Korea. Alongside this policy, the government emphasized industrialization to diversify the economy away from agriculture. The establishment of the Heavy Industries Corporation of Malaysia (HICOM) in 1983 led to the launch of Malaysia&#x27;s first national car, the Proton Saga, in 1985 by Proton, Malaysia&#x27;s automotive company.

The government introduced its privatization policy in the early 1980s to improve efficiency, reduce government expenditure, and encourage private-sector growth. Privatization efforts spanned key sectors, including telecommunications, utilities, and transportation, attracting foreign investment and supporting Malaysia&#x27;s economic growth. This program complemented Mahathir&#x27;s broader focus on industrialization and infrastructure, establishing a foundation for major development projects in later years.

Mahathir sought to redefine the balance of power between the monarchy and Parliament through a constitutional amendment in 1983. This amendment required the Yang di-Pertuan Agong to assent to any bill within 15 days of its passage by Parliament; otherwise, it would automatically become law. Additionally, it proposed transferring the power to declare a state of emergency from the Agong to the prime minister. Initially supported by the Agong at the time, the proposal was later met with hesitation from him and the Sultans, who baulked at its implications for state-level legislation. A public standoff ensued, with Mahathir organizing rallies to gather public support. The crisis concluded with a compromise, retaining the Agong&#x27;s emergency powers but allowing Parliament to override a veto by re-passing the bill.

In Mahathir&#x27;s early years as prime minister, Malaysia saw a resurgence of Islam and conservatism among the Malay population. Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party (PAS), which had previously joined UMNO in government during the 1970s, responded to this shift by adopting a more assertive Islamist stance under the leadership of Yusof Rawa. Mahathir sought to appeal to religious voters by establishing institutions such as the International Islamic University of Malaysia (IIUM) to promote Islamic education within a framework overseen by the government.

As part of his efforts to moderate Islamist influence, Mahathir successfully drew Anwar Ibrahim, leader of the Malaysian Islamic Youth Movement (ABIM), into UMNO. Mahathir&#x27;s government also employed repressive measures against more extreme exponents of Islamism. In 1985, the Memali Incident occurred, resulting in a confrontation between police and followers of Islamist preacher Ibrahim Mahmud, known as Ibrahim Libya, in Kampung Memali, Baling, Kedah. This clash led to 18 deaths, including four police officers. Al-Arqam, a religious sect, was banned in 1994, and its leader, Ashaari Mohammad, was arrested under the Internal Security Act (ISA) due to the movement&#x27;s deviation from Islamic principles and its perceived potential as a political threat. 

Following rising racial tensions and political unrest, Operasi Lalang was launched in 1987. The government detained 119 individuals, including opposition politicians, activists, and intellectuals, under the Internal Security Act (ISA). These detentions, carried out without trial, were criticized by human rights groups.

Mahathir&#x27;s party, the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), soon plunged into crisis in 1987. After Mahathir narrowly defeated Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah in the UMNO presidential election, Razaleigh&#x27;s supporters alleged manipulation in the voting process and filed a lawsuit. In 1988, the High Court declared UMNO to be an unlawful society due to irregularities, specifically the existence of several unregistered branches that violated the Societies Act 1966. This ruling effectively dissolved UMNO, leaving the party without legal status and creating uncertainty in its leadership. In response, Mahathir formed a new party, &quot;UMNO Baru&quot; (New UMNO), which most UMNO members joined. The reconstituted party later adopted the original name, UMNO. The situation escalated into a constitutional crisis when Mahathir&#x27;s administration sought to assert greater control over the judiciary, suspending Salleh Abas, the Lord President of the Supreme Court, along with several senior judges, following Salleh&#x27;s criticism of the government&#x27;s attempts to influence judicial matters.

Mahathir also worked to resolve the long-standing insurgency by the Malayan Communist Party (MCP). Building on Malaysia&#x27;s bilateral relations with China established in 1974, the Malaysian government encouraged Chinese leaders, including Deng Xiaoping, to influence the MCP to lay down their arms. By 1988, the MCP, weakened by diminishing support and the collapse of the Communist bloc, agreed to peace negotiations mediated by Thailand. The talks culminated in the Haadyai Peace Accord, signed on 2 December 1989, which required the MCP to cease militant activities, disband armed units, and pledge loyalty to the Yang di-Pertuan Agong.

The conclusion of the New Economic Policy (NEP) in 1990 led Mahathir to introduce Vision 2020, aiming to transform Malaysia into a fully developed nation by the year 2020. Achieving this objective required an average economic growth rate of seven percent per annum. The New Economic Policy (NEP) was succeeded by the National Development Policy (NDP) in 1991, which expanded certain government programs to include non-Bumiputera ethnic groups. By 1995, the NDP had contributed to poverty reduction, with fewer than nine percent of Malaysians living in poverty, and it had helped to narrow income inequality. The administration also reduced corporate taxes and liberalized financial regulations, attracting foreign investment and boosting economic growth rates to over nine percent annually until 1997.

Mahathir&#x27;s second constitutional amendment in 1993 further curtailed royal privileges by removing the legal immunity of the royal family, allowing them to be prosecuted in a special court. This amendment reinforced the government&#x27;s stance that all citizens, including royalty, should be subject to the rule of law.

Throughout the 1990s, Mahathir prioritized large-scale infrastructure projects. Among them was the development of the Multimedia Super Corridor, aimed at establishing Malaysia as a center for information technology. Other key projects included the creation of Putrajaya as the administrative capital and the establishment of the Formula One Grand Prix in Sepang. Among the more controversial was the Bakun Dam in Sarawak, a hydroelectric project intended to supply electricity across the South China Sea to Peninsular Malaysia. However, its construction was halted during the 1997 Asian financial crisis. The Petronas Twin Towers, completed in 1996, became an iconic symbol of Malaysia&#x27;s rapid modernization. Mahathir envisioned the towers and the surrounding Kuala Lumpur City Centre (KLCC) as a global business hub, transforming Kuala Lumpur&#x27;s skyline.

The 1997 Asian financial crisis significantly impacted Malaysia, with the Malaysian ringgit depreciating, foreign investment declining, and the stock market index dropping by over 75%. Initially following International Monetary Fund (IMF) recommendations, the government implemented spending cuts and raised interest rates, exacerbating economic strain. In 1998, Mahathir shifted policies by increasing government spending and pegging the ringgit to the US dollar, allowing Malaysia to recover faster than some neighboring countries.

The year 1998 also marked the dismissal of Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim by Mahathir, leading to the Reformasi movement, which advocated for political reform and an end to corruption. Anwar&#x27;s subsequent arrest and trial on charges of sodomy attracted widespread attention and criticism from international human rights organizations.

Upon retiring in October 2003, after over 22 years in office, Mahathir was recognized as the world&#x27;s longest-serving elected leader at the time.

=== Abdullah administration ===
Abdullah Ahmad Badawi was sworn in as Malaysia&#x27;s fifth prime minister on 31 October 2003, beginning his term with a pledge to combat corruption by strengthening anti-corruption agencies and expanding public channels for reporting corruption. He promoted Islam Hadhari, an approach to Islam that emphasizes compatibility between Islamic principles and economic and technological development.

Following the 2004 general election, Abdullah led the Barisan Nasional (BN) coalition to a major victory, securing over 90% of parliamentary seats. Later that year, the Indian Ocean tsunami affected parts of Malaysia, particularly Penang and Kedah prompting Abdullah&#x27;s administration to coordinate relief efforts and establish a tsunami warning system to improve disaster preparedness. 

In his administration&#x27;s economic strategy, Abdullah emphasized revitalizing Malaysia&#x27;s agriculture sector to strengthen food security, incorporating modern agrotechnology and implementing a RM4 billion food security plan. Under Abdullah, the country aimed to transition into a value-chain economy by developing its inherent strengths in agriculture without compromising its established manufacturing base. However, his administration faced criticism over managing rising petrol and electricity costs linked to subsidy restructuring, as these changes were seen as potentially undermining Malaysia&#x27;s traditional advantage as an exporter. Additionally, Abdullah&#x27;s government sought to improve access to higher education and bolster Malaysia&#x27;s standing as a regional educational hub. Building on the foundation of the National Higher Education Fund Corporation (PTPTN), established in 1997 under Mahathir&#x27;s administration, Abdullah expanded funding and infrastructure for tertiary education.

Malaysia also hosted the inaugural East Asia Summit in 2005 under Abdullah&#x27;s leadership, aiming to enhance cooperation among Southeast Asian nations and major global powers. During his tenure, Abdullah launched three major economic corridors in Peninsular Malaysia to stimulate regional development: the South Johor Economic Region (now Iskandar Malaysia), the East Coast Economic Region (ECER), and the Northern Corridor Economic Region (NCER). These initiatives aimed to promote infrastructure and industry growth across Peninsular Malaysia, focusing on regions within the designated economic corridors. Extending his development strategy to East Malaysia, Abdullah also launched two major corridors there, which are the Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy (SCORE) and the Sabah Development Corridor (SDC).

Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor became Malaysia&#x27;s first astronaut on 10 October 2007, traveling aboard the Russian Soyuz TMA-11, a milestone in Malaysia&#x27;s space exploration program. That same year, two major anti-government rallies took place. The first Bersih Rally on 10 November in Kuala Lumpur called for electoral reform amid corruption allegations and criticisms of a system favouring Barisan Nasional. Later that month, on 25 November, the HINDRAF rally organised by the Hindu Rights Action Force (HINDRAF) protested perceived ethnic discrimination policies. The government subsequently banned HINDRAF in October 2008, labelling it a security threat.

The global financial crisis that began in late 2007 led to reduced demand for Malaysian exports such as electronics, palm oil, and rubber, causing the country&#x27;s GDP growth to slow significantly and contract in early 2009 before beginning a gradual recovery. To mitigate the impact, Abdullah&#x27;s government introduced two stimulus packages totalling approximately RM67 billion, supporting domestic spending, infrastructure projects, and vulnerable sectors. These measures, alongside Malaysia&#x27;s diversified economy, contributed to a relatively swift recovery.

In the 2008 general election, Barisan Nasional lost its two-thirds majority for the first time since 1969, a result of the political tsunami brought about by the 2008 Malaysian Opposition Wave, which signaled a significant decline in public support. Mounting criticism over unmet anti-corruption promises and perceived ineffective leadership led Abdullah to announce his resignation in October 2008, with his departure finalised in April 2009 when Najib Razak took office as his successor.
===Najib administration===
Najib Razak was sworn in as Malaysia&#x27;s sixth prime minister on 3 April 2009. Early in his tenure, he introduced the 1Malaysia campaign, a national unity initiative aimed at fostering ethnic harmony, service efficiency, and equitable opportunities. The concept expanded into a public service brand covering various social and economic policies aimed at unifying Malaysia&#x27;s multicultural society.

On 15 September 2011, Najib announced plans to repeal the Internal Security Act 1960 (ISA), which had been criticised for allowing indefinite detention without trial. It was replaced by the Security Offences (Special Measures) Act 2012 (SOSMA), which came into effect on 31 July 2012. However, critics argued that SOSMA was misused to silence dissenting voices, with several activists detained under the law.

In early February 2013, an incursion occurred in Lahad Datu when hundreds of militants, some armed, arrived by boats in Lahad Datu District, Sabah, Malaysia, from Simunul Island, Tawi-Tawi, in the southern Philippines. The group was sent by Jamalul Kiram III, a claimant to the throne of the Sultanate of Sulu. In response, Malaysian security forces launched a major operation to repel the militants, resulting in a decisive Malaysian victory that concluded the conflict by late March 2013. Following this, the Eastern Sabah Security Command (ESSCOM) was established to enhance security along Sabah&#x27;s eastern coast.

In the 2013 general election, Najib led the Barisan Nasional (BN) coalition to victory, retaining a majority in Parliament. However, the election was marred by allegations of electoral irregularities, including accusations of gerrymandering and alleged misuse of government resources. This led to widespread public protests, which demanded electoral reform.

On 8 March 2014, Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 disappeared en route from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing, leading to one of the largest and most costly search efforts in aviation history. Four months later, on 17 July 2014, Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was shot down by a surface-to-air missile over Eastern Ukraine while flying over territory controlled by Russian-backed militants, resulting in the deaths of all 298 passengers and crew on board.

On 1 April 2015, Najib&#x27;s administration introduced a controversial 6% Goods and Services Tax (GST) on most goods and services to expand Malaysia&#x27;s tax base. The GST was widely unpopular, with many Malaysians expressing concerns over rising living costs. Later that year, Najib&#x27;s administration was engulfed in scandal when Najib and other officials were implicated in a multibillion-dollar embezzlement and money-laundering scheme involving 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB), a state-owned investment fund allegedly masterminded by Low Taek Jho. This triggered widespread calls and protests from Malaysians, including opposition parties, demanding Najib&#x27;s resignation. These protests culminated in the Malaysian Citizens&#x27; Declaration, a declaration from a coalition of political and civil leaders calling for Najib&#x27;s removal from office.

From 2011 to 2016, the Bersih movement held several large rallies calling for electoral reform, transparency, and accountability in governance. The Najib administration&#x27;s response included arrests of activists and restrictions on media coverage, which garnered both domestic and international scrutiny. Amid growing dissent, Najib removed his then-deputy, Muhyiddin Yassin, suspended several newspapers, and enacted the National Security Council Act 2016, granting unprecedented powers to the prime minister. Additionally, living costs surged due to subsidy cuts, and the Malaysian ringgit experienced a sharp decline.

In 2017, diplomatic tensions flared between Malaysia and North Korea after the assassination of Kim Jong-nam in Malaysia, an incident that sparked a major diplomatic row and brought international media attention.

Najib&#x27;s tenure ended after the 2018 general election, in which Barisan Nasional lost its parliamentary majority for the first time in Malaysia&#x27;s history.
===Second Mahathir administration===

Mahathir Mohamad was sworn in as the seventh Prime Minister after winning the election on 10 May 2018. A number of issues contributed to Najib Razak&#x27;s defeat, including the ongoing 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB) scandal, the 6% Goods and Services Tax, and the rising cost of living.

Mahathir promised to &quot;restore the rule of law&quot; and conduct elaborate and transparent investigations into the 1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal.

Anwar Ibrahim was given a full royal pardon and was released from prison on 16 May 2018. He was designated to take over the reins from Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad as planned and agreed by the coalition before GE14.

The unpopular tax was reduced to 0% on 1 June 2018. The government under Mahathir tabled the first reading Bill to repeal GST in Parliament on 31 July 2018. GST was successfully replaced with Sales Tax and Service Tax starting 1 September 2018.

Mahathir&#x27;s administration promised to review all Belt and Road Initiative projects in Malaysia that were initiated by the previous government. He characterised these as &quot;unequal treaties&quot; and said some were linked to misappropriated funds from the 1MDB scandal. The government suspended work on the East Coast Rail Link and continued it after terms had been renegotiated. Mahathir cancelled approximately $2.8 billion worth of deals with China Petroleum Pipeline Bureau, stating that Malaysia would not be able to repay its obligations to China.

Mahathir was supportive of the 2018–19 Korean peace process and announced that Malaysia would reopen its embassy in North Korea and resume relations.

On 28 September 2018, Mahathir addressed the United Nations General Assembly, stating that his government would promise to ratify the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD). However, after weeks of receiving racially and religiously charged demonstrations against the convention, particularly from Bumiputras, the Pakatan Harapan government chose not to accede to the ICERD on 23 November 2018.

Mahathir announced the Shared Prosperity Vision 2030 in October 2019, which aimed to increase the incomes of all ethnic groups, focus more on the technology sector, and for Malaysia to become a high-income country by 2030.

Malaysia&#x27;s freedom of the press improved slightly under Mahathir&#x27;s tenure, and the country&#x27;s rank rose in the Press Freedom Index.

Political infighting within the Pakatan Harapan coalition, as well as the uncertainty of the date of the transition of power to his designated successor, Anwar Ibrahim, soon culminated in a political crisis known as the Sheraton Move in February 2020.

===Muhyiddin administration===
On 1 March 2020, a week after the country was thrown into a political crisis, Muhyiddin Yassin was appointed as the eighth Prime Minister by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, following the abrupt resignation of Mahathir Mohamad. The fallen government was replaced by the new Perikatan Nasional (PN) coalition government, led by BERSATU leader Muhyiddin.

During his administration, COVID-19 spread throughout the nation. In response, Muhyiddin implemented the Malaysian movement control order (MCO) on 18 March 2020.

On 28 July 2020, the High Court convicted former Prime Minister Najib Razak of abuse of power, money laundering and criminal breach of trust, becoming the first Prime Minister of Malaysia to be convicted of corruption. After failing several appeals, he entered Kajang Prison on August 23, 2022, to serve his sentence.

In mid-January 2021, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong declared a national state of emergency until at least 1 August in response to the COVID-19 crisis and political infighting. Parliament and elections were suspended while the Malaysian government was empowered to introduce laws without approval.

Muhyiddin commenced the country&#x27;s vaccination programme against COVID-19 in late February 2021.

On 19 March 2021, North Korea announced the severance of diplomatic ties with Malaysia, after the Kuala Lumpur High Court rejected North Korean businessman Mun Chol Myong&#x27;s appeal from extradition to the United States.

Muhyiddin officially resigned as prime minister on August 16, 2021, after losing the majority in parliament support due to the country&#x27;s political crisis, as well as calls for his resignation due to economic stagnation and the government&#x27;s failure to prevent COVID-19 infections and deaths. He was afterwards appointed back as caretaker prime minister by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong until a replacement can be selected.

===Ismail Sabri administration===
Ismail Sabri Yaakob was sworn in as the ninth Prime Minister on August 21, 2021. During his inaugural speech as prime minister on 22 August 2021, Ismail Sabri introduced the &quot;Keluarga Malaysia&quot; idea. During his tenure, he lifted the Movement Control Order (MCO) following the expansion of the vaccination programme and oversaw the Twelfth Malaysia Plan.

In late 2022, a constitutional amendment was passed, that prohibits members of parliament from switching political parties. Several UMNO lawmakers called for a snap election before the end of 2022 to resolve ongoing infighting in the party and obtain a stronger mandate. This led to an earlier general election in November 2022, which resulted in a hung parliament, the first federal election to have such a result in the nation&#x27;s history.

=== Anwar administration ===
Anwar Ibrahim, the chairman of Pakatan Harapan (PH), was appointed and sworn in as the 10th Prime Minister on 24 November 2022 by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong as Anwar has obtained support for a grand coalition government.

Anwar launched the Malaysia Madani concept as a national policy on January 19, 2023, in Putrajaya which replaced the &quot;Keluarga Malaysia&quot; concept from the previous administration of Ismail Sabri Yaakob.

On June 18, 2024, Anwar Ibrahim announced Malaysia&#x27;s intention to join BRICS, emphasizing that this decision would not impact domestic politics. Malaysia officially submitted its application in July 2024. Anwar attended the 9th Eastern Economic Forum in Vladivostok, Russia, in September, where Russian President Vladimir Putin invited Malaysia to the upcoming BRICS Summit. On October 24, 2024, Malaysia attended the 16th BRICS Summit to become a BRICS partner country, with Economy Minister Rafizi Ramli representing the country. Malaysia formally attained BRICS partner country status on January 1, 2025, strengthening its economic and trade collaborations with BRICS nations.

==See also==
* The formation of Malaysia
* History of Brunei
* History of the Philippines
* History of Singapore
* History of Southeast Asia
* Japanese occupation of British Borneo
* Japanese occupation of Malaya

==Notes==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Andaya, Barbara Watson, and Leonard Y. Andaya. (2016) &quot;A history of Malaysia&quot; (2nd ed. Macmillan International Higher Education, 2016).
* Baker, Jim. (2020) &quot;Crossroads: a popular history of Malaysia and Singapore&quot; (4th ed. Marshall Cavendish International Asia Pte Ltd, 2020) excerpt
* 
* Goh, Cheng Teik (1994). &quot;Malaysia: Beyond Communal Politics&quot;. Pelanduk Publications. .
* Hack, Karl. &quot;Decolonisation and the Pergau Dam affair.&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (Nov 1994), 44#11 pp. 9–12.
* Hooker, Virginia Matheson. (2003) &quot;A Short History of Malaysia: Linking East and West&quot; (2003) excerpt
* Kheng, Cheah Boon. (1997) &quot;Writing Indigenous History in Malaysia: A Survey on Approaches and Problems&quot;, &quot;Crossroads: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Southeast Asian Studies&quot; 10#2 (1997): 33–81.
* Milner, Anthony. &quot;Invention of Politics in Colonial Malaya&quot; (Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 1996).
* Musa, M. Bakri (1999). &quot;The Malay Dilemma Revisited&quot;. Merantau Publishers. .
* Roff, William R. &quot;Origins of Malay Nationalism&quot; (Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya Press, 1967).
* Shamsul, Amri Baharuddin. (2001) &quot;A history of an identity, an identity of a history: the idea and practice of &#x27;Malayness&#x27; in Malaysia reconsidered.&quot; &quot;Journal of Southeast Asian Studies&quot; 32.3 (2001): 355–366. online
* Ye, Lin-Sheng (2003). &quot;The Chinese Dilemma&quot;. East West Publishing. .

==External links==

* Economic History of Malaysia
* &quot;Malaysia&quot; entry at Library of Congress</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="0" end="8" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="139" end="145" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="150" end="156" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="194" end="211" title="Prehistory" label="prehistoric times"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="378" end="394" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="469" end="482" title="archaic humans" label="archaic human"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="579" end="605" title="Homo sapiens" label="anatomically modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="776" end="784" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="789" end="797" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="803" end="808" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="813" end="818" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="932" end="939" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="946" end="955" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="970" end="975" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="1009" end="1024" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q46652" start="1231" end="1251" title="Sultanate of Malacca" label="Sultanate of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="1260" end="1279" title="Sultanate of Brunei" label="Sultanate of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="1286" end="1296" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110453" start="1406" end="1431" title="Capture of Malacca (1511)" label="capturing Malacca in 1511"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150344" start="1500" end="1505" title="Johor Sultanate" label="Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649311" start="1510" end="1515" title="Perak Sultanate" label="Perak"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1541" end="1557" title=":Category:Sultanates in Malaysia" label="Malay sultanates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337398" start="1618" end="1643" title="Siege of Malacca (1641)" label="capturing Malacca in 1641"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1692" end="1699" title="British Empire" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q224794" start="1774" end="1800" title="Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824" label="Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="1832" end="1846" title="British Malaya" label="British Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="1855" end="1872" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="1887" end="1896" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658466" start="1907" end="1935" title="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909" label="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="2005" end="2013" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="2210" end="2227" title="Malayan campaign" label="Japanese invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2235" end="2247" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="2288" end="2303" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2324" end="2330" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q976099" start="2336" end="2349" title="Malayan Union" label="Malayan Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="2397" end="2417" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Federation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448312" start="2449" end="2472" title="Malayan Communist Party" label="Malayan Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="2543" end="2557" title="Malayan Emergency" label="emergency rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850948" start="2651" end="2663" title="Baling Talks" label="Baling Talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475298" start="2680" end="2700" title="Malayan Declaration of Independence" label="Malayan independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="2796" end="2818" title="Malaysia" label="Federation of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420038" start="2851" end="2860" title="Singapore in Malaysia" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247434" start="2907" end="2935" title="Proclamation of Singapore" label="separate independent country"/>
<link wikidata="Q25077" start="2939" end="2958" title="13 May incident" label="racial riot in 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251721" start="3062" end="3074" title="Rukun Negara" label="Rukun Negara"/>
<link wikidata="Q138211" start="3134" end="3153" title="Malaysian New Economic Policy" label="New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="3316" end="3332" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="3361" end="3376" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="3381" end="3393" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259697" start="3422" end="3449" title="National Development Policy" label="National Development Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="3537" end="3559" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005940" start="3702" end="3714" title="1MDB scandal" label="1MDB scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57675" start="3818" end="3829" title="Najib Razak" label="Najib Razak"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891526" start="3872" end="3893" title="2018 Malaysian general election" label="2018 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q86509170" start="4003" end="4019" title="2020–2022 Malaysian political crisis" label="political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873556" start="4041" end="4058" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q84080655" start="4128" end="4149" title="2022 Malaysian general election" label="2022 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q299574" start="4212" end="4225" title="Anwar Ibrahim" label="Anwar Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="4350" end="4362" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449469" start="4387" end="4395" title="Lenggong" label="Lenggong"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="4481" end="4488" title="hominid" label="hominid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984562" start="4627" end="4637" title="Niah Caves" label="Niah Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="4881" end="4887" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="4937" end="4947" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="4952" end="4961" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984562" start="5070" end="5088" title="Niah National Park" label="Niah National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5259" end="5268" title="Lenggong#Perak Man" label="Perak Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q845985" start="5371" end="5378" title="Negrito" label="Negrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271269" start="5385" end="5390" title="Senoi" label="Senoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229557" start="5400" end="5411" title="Proto-Malay" label="Proto-Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="5492" end="5502" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144062" start="5546" end="5552" title="Semang" label="Semang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271269" start="5584" end="5589" title="Senoi" label="Senoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="5664" end="5681" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="5785" end="5794" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="5843" end="5856" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229557" start="6074" end="6086" title="Proto-Malay" label="Proto Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="6168" end="6180" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="6254" end="6277" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="6339" end="6359" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6443" end="6461" title="Maritime Jade Road" label="Maritime Jade Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="6628" end="6634" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="6729" end="6746" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="6794" end="6808" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Deutero-Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6813" end="6821" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="6825" end="6835" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="6869" end="6874" title="Chams" label="Chams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543292" start="7015" end="7031" title="Malaysian Malays" label="Malaysian Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="7462" end="7492" title="Indianization of Southeast Asia" label="Indian influence in the region"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="7606" end="7621" title="Pallava dynasty" label="Pallava dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941127" start="7731" end="7743" title="Suvarnadvipa" label="Suvarnadvipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="7802" end="7810" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q151611" start="7908" end="7919" title="Vayu Purana" label="Vayu Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112053" start="7960" end="7971" title="Malayadvipa" label="Malayadvipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="8068" end="8075" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241342" start="8083" end="8086" title="Ptolemy&amp;#x27;s world map" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579267" start="8100" end="8117" title="Golden Chersonese" label="Golden Chersonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="8248" end="8254" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932349" start="8297" end="8335" title="southward expansion of the Han dynasty" label="southward expansion of the Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="8451" end="8459" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8464" end="8472" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="8560" end="8568" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320075" start="8896" end="8906" title="Langkasuka" label="Langkasuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="9010" end="9015" title="Kingdom of Funan" label="Funan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455836" start="9120" end="9137" title="Old Pahang Kingdom" label="Kingdom of Pahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143142" start="9165" end="9177" title="Book of Song" label="Book of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095124" start="9199" end="9205" title="Chi Tu" label="Chi Tu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988069" start="9210" end="9217" title="Pan Pan (kingdom)" label="Pan Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255285" start="9317" end="9330" title="Gangga Negara" label="Gangga Negara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254550" start="9389" end="9401" title="Malay Annals" label="Malay Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895941" start="9433" end="9439" title="Beruas" label="Beruas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302576" start="9441" end="9448" title="Dinding" label="Dinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302576" start="9453" end="9460" title="Manjung" label="Manjung"/>
<link wikidata="Q188953" start="9477" end="9482" title="Perak" label="Perak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760494" start="9575" end="9600" title="Hikayat Merong Mahawangsa" label="Hikayat Merong Mahawangsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12697723" start="9637" end="9654" title="Merong Mahawangsa" label="Merong Mahawangsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="9721" end="9740" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="9751" end="9756" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="9818" end="9825" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579267" start="9869" end="9886" title="Golden Chersonese" label="Golden Chersonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="10493" end="10502" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188428" start="10526" end="10539" title="Bangka Island" label="Bangka Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="10604" end="10611" title="Pallava" label="Pallava"/>
<link wikidata="Q12480888" start="10791" end="10804" title="Dapunta Hyang Sri Jayanasa" label="Dapunta Hyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="10821" end="10830" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="10974" end="10985" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181128" start="11039" end="11052" title="Bujang Valley" label="Bujang Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="11115" end="11132" title="Strait of Malacca" label="Strait of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="11155" end="11168" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="11450" end="11465" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="11493" end="11502" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="11611" end="11622" title="River delta" label="river mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="11634" end="11641" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="11666" end="11675" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="11677" end="11686" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="11801" end="11810" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163330" start="11839" end="11848" title="Maharajah" label="Maharajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="12080" end="12093" title="Chola dynasty" label="Chola dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="12347" end="12356" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="12519" end="12531" title="Chola Empire" label="Chola Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128757" start="12580" end="12597" title="Raja Raja Chola I" label="Raja Raja Chola I"/>
<link wikidata="Q211483" start="12622" end="12638" title="Rajendra Chola I" label="Rajendra Chola I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565269" start="12656" end="12680" title="South-East Asia campaign of Rajendra Chola I" label="invaded Srivijaya cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957926" start="12686" end="12713" title="Chola invasion of Srivijaya" label="Chola invasion of Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="12788" end="12800" title="Chola Empire" label="Chola Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681435" start="12806" end="12811" title="Ancient Tamil country" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433796" start="12852" end="12865" title="Kota Gelanggi" label="Kota Gelanggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="12941" end="12947" title="Chola dynasty" label="Cholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933646" start="12986" end="13004" title="Virarajendra Chola" label="Virarajendra Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="13012" end="13025" title="Chola dynasty" label="Chola dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="13238" end="13247" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="13282" end="13287" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478838" start="13289" end="13296" title="Patani (historical region)" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012424" start="13311" end="13316" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat" label="Ligor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119008" start="13338" end="13356" title="Kulothunga Chola I" label="Kulothunga Chola I"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="13421" end="13426" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="13475" end="13480" title="Chola" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="13525" end="13537" title="Malay people" label="Malay people"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="13720" end="13728" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188953" start="13821" end="13826" title="Perak" label="Perak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285425" start="13834" end="13845" title="Raja Chulan" label="Raja Chulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14472476" start="13848" end="13860" title="Paṭṭiṉappālai" label="Pattinapalai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326812" start="13919" end="13926" title="Early history of Kedah" label="Kedaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483643" start="13990" end="14006" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat kingdom" label="kingdom of Ligor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570421" start="14053" end="14065" title="Chandrabhanu" label="Chandrabhanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="14094" end="14103" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="14211" end="14221" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782817" start="14259" end="14268" title="Mahavamsa" label="Mahavamsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="14319" end="14331" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="14362" end="14374" title="Chola Empire" label="Chola Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112053" start="14722" end="14728" title="Melayu Kingdom" label="Malayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q810720" start="14793" end="14804" title="Batang Hari River" label="Jambi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580263" start="14872" end="14887" title="The spread of Islam in Indonesia" label="spread of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823" start="14940" end="14944" title="Aceh" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="15035" end="15044" title="Sukhothai kingdom" label="Sukhothai"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="15121" end="15137" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923477" start="15259" end="15268" title="Mount Santubong" label="Santubong"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="15275" end="15282" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="15301" end="15305" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="15310" end="15314" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="15450" end="15462" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="15501" end="15513" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254550" start="15533" end="15557" title="Sejarah Melayu" label="&amp;quot;Malay Annals&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q224649" start="15577" end="15589" title="Sang Sapurba" label="Sang Sapurba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986958" start="15688" end="15702" title="Bukit Seguntang" label="Seguntang Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q39247" start="15939" end="15949" title="Musi River (Indonesia)" label="Musi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863165" start="16074" end="16091" title="Minangkabau Highlands" label="Minangkabau lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521282" start="16123" end="16138" title="Sang Nila Utama" label="Sang Nila Utama"/>
<link wikidata="Q27842" start="16151" end="16171" title="Kingdom of Singapura" label="Kingdom of Singapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363540" start="16556" end="16567" title="Parameswara (sultan)" label="Parameswara"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="16623" end="16632" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q46652" start="16672" end="16692" title="Sultanate of Malacca" label="Sultanate of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="16836" end="16841" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="16854" end="16871" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="17081" end="17090" title="syncretism" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="17248" end="17255" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363540" start="17320" end="17331" title="Parameswara (sultan)" label="Parameswara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918669" start="17361" end="17368" title="Temasek" label="Temasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="17544" end="17548" title="Ayutthaya kingdom" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q46652" start="17974" end="17991" title="Malacca Sultanate" label="Malacca Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q61089" start="18034" end="18046" title="Malacca Town" label="Malacca Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254550" start="18071" end="18083" title="Malay Annals" label="Malay Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8535351" start="18114" end="18124" title="mouse deer" label="mouse deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q310050" start="18158" end="18170" title="Malacca tree" label="Malacca tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="18241" end="18248" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="18413" end="18456" title="Ming treasure voyages" label="Chinese trade envoy led by Admiral Yin Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="18512" end="18520" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="18598" end="18602" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="18654" end="18658" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="18663" end="18672" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="18711" end="18723" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="18727" end="18737" title="Ming China" label="Ming China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="18849" end="18854" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q702918" start="19160" end="19167" title="Ma Huan" label="Ma Huan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="19205" end="19213" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="19346" end="19384" title="Ming treasure voyages" label="treasure voyages into the Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q702918" start="19509" end="19516" title="Ma Huan" label="Ma Huan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498165" start="19521" end="19528" title="Fei Xin" label="Fei Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="19557" end="19561" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="19606" end="19614" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="20450" end="20458" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q124047417" start="20705" end="20716" title="Baba-Nyonya" label="Baba-Nyonya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102525" start="20721" end="20727" title="Chitty" label="Chitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259660" start="21194" end="21213" title="Megat Iskandar Shah of Malacca" label="Megat Iskandar Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="21317" end="21327" title="Hui people" label="Hui people"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="21472" end="21481" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="21737" end="21743" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="22198" end="22213" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="22227" end="22234" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q49322" start="22240" end="22255" title="Demak Sultanate" label="Demak Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="22259" end="22263" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="22455" end="22459" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="22486" end="22494" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="22545" end="22558" title="feudal system" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134237" start="22999" end="23010" title="royal court" label="royal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="23120" end="23134" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="23264" end="23281" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="23392" end="23411" title="Bruneian Sultanate (1368–1888)" label="Sultanate of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="23578" end="23599" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708851" start="23819" end="23842" title="Alauddin Riayat Shah II of Johor" label="Alauddin Riayat Shah II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150344" start="23933" end="23951" title="Sultanate of Johor" label="Sultanate of Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12709876" start="23974" end="23989" title="Muzaffar Shah I of Perak" label="Muzaffar Shah I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="24179" end="24185" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061057" start="24378" end="24395" title="Aceh Sultanate" label="Sultanate of Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="24581" end="24598" title="Strait of Malacca" label="Strait of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="24908" end="24925" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q375774" start="24940" end="24953" title="Iskandar Muda" label="Iskandar Muda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872189" start="25052" end="25073" title="Battle of Duyon River" label="Battle of Duyon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="25324" end="25348" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658454" start="25488" end="25500" title="Malay states" label="Malay states"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="25728" end="25732" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q10097" start="25882" end="25888" title="Bintan" label="Bintan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175" start="25890" end="25894" title="Riau" label="Riau"/>
<link wikidata="Q10099" start="25896" end="25902" title="Lingga Islands" label="Lingga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222068" start="25904" end="25911" title="Great Karimun" label="Karimun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598137" start="25913" end="25922" title="Bengkalis" label="Bengkalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613" start="25924" end="25930" title="Kampar Regency" label="Kampar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777" start="25935" end="25939" title="Siak Regency" label="Siak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="25943" end="25950" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932099" start="25982" end="26004" title="Malay-Portuguese conflicts" label="frequently in conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633157" start="26046" end="26065" title="Siege of Johor (1587)" label="1587 siege of Johor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26078" end="26092" title="Johor Sultanate#Triangular war" label="Triangular war"/>
<link wikidata="Q375774" start="26317" end="26330" title="Iskandar Muda" label="Iskandar Muda"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="26411" end="26416" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="26485" end="26495" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411436" start="26569" end="26595" title="Cornelis Matelief de Jonge" label="Cornelis Matelief de Jonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510222" start="26683" end="26706" title="Siege of Malacca (1606)" label="capture Malacca in 1606"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337398" start="26804" end="26821" title="Battle of Malacca (1641)" label="Battle of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665443" start="27262" end="27282" title="Abdul Jalil Shah III" label="Abdul Jalil Shah III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051" start="27296" end="27301" title="Jambi" label="Jambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q24943673" start="27744" end="27756" title="Ibrahim Shah of Johor" label="Ibrahim Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002570" start="27799" end="27804" title="Bugis" label="Bugis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634" start="27947" end="27955" title="Makassar" label="Makassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130350" start="27998" end="28010" title="Minangkabau people" label="Minangkabaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12709871" start="28266" end="28275" title="Mahmud II of Johor" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11169169" start="28403" end="28413" title="Raja Kecil" label="Raja Kecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777" start="28419" end="28423" title="Siak Regency" label="Siak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208263" start="28760" end="28772" title="Daeng Parani" label="Daeng Parani"/>
<link wikidata="Q24205816" start="28808" end="28833" title="Sulaiman Badrul Alam Shah of Johor" label="Sulaiman Badrul Alam Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q24205797" start="28932" end="28947" title="Mahmud Shah III of Johor" label="Mahmud Shah III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895649" start="29390" end="29401" title="Perak River" label="Perak River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244637" start="29439" end="29450" title="Mahmud Shah of Malacca" label="Mahmud Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12709876" start="29481" end="29496" title="Muzaffar Shah I of Perak" label="Muzaffar Shah I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110453" start="29553" end="29571" title="Capture of Malacca (1511)" label="capture of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="29579" end="29589" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777" start="29620" end="29624" title="Siak Regency" label="Siak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613" start="29822" end="29828" title="Kampar Regency" label="Kampar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061057" start="30275" end="30292" title="Aceh Sultanate" label="Sultanate of Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4264509" start="30824" end="30838" title="Iskandar Thani" label="Iskandar Thani"/>
<link wikidata="Q12709875" start="30916" end="30932" title="Muzaffar Shah II of Perak" label="Muzaffar Shah II"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="31001" end="31025" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676752" start="31288" end="31299" title="Taj ul-Alam" label="Taj ul-Alam"/>
<link wikidata="Q24205797" start="31856" end="31870" title="Mahmud Shah III of Johor" label="Mahmud Shah II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32321" end="32345" title="Muzaffar Riayat Shah III" label="Muzaffar Riayat Shah III"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592233" start="32622" end="32642" title="Pahang Sultanate" label="Old Pahang Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235637" start="32665" end="32670" title="Pekan" label="Pekan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716771" start="32899" end="32912" title="Muhammad Shah of Pahang" label="Muhammad Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958329" start="32950" end="32959" title="Dewa Sura" label="Dewa Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715945" start="33240" end="33253" title="Mahmud Shah I of Pahang" label="Mahmud Shah I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708851" start="33309" end="33332" title="Alauddin Riayat Shah II of Johor" label="Alauddin Riayat Shah II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832744" start="33428" end="33432" title="Muar (town)" label="Muar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988343" start="33448" end="33466" title="Portuguese Malacca" label="Portuguese Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311727" start="33627" end="33638" title="Abdul Kadir Alauddin Shah of Pahang" label="Abdul Kadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411436" start="33802" end="33827" title="Cornelis Matelief de Jonge" label="Admiral Matelief de Jonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="33835" end="33847" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311705" start="34042" end="34054" title="Abdul Ghafur Muhiuddin Shah of Pahang" label="Abdul Ghafur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708844" start="34081" end="34105" title="Alauddin Riayat Shah III of Johor" label="Alauddin Riayat Shah III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680375" start="34207" end="34226" title="Abdul Jalilul Akbar" label="Abdul Jalilul Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="34230" end="34236" title="Bruneian Sultanate (1368–1888)" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q375774" start="34303" end="34316" title="Iskandar Muda" label="Iskandar Muda"/>
<link wikidata="Q20313170" start="34341" end="34361" title="Alauddin Riayat Shah of Pahang" label="Alauddin Riayat Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665443" start="34573" end="34584" title="Abdul Jalil Shah III of Johor" label="Raja Bujang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666025" start="34863" end="34889" title="Abdullah Ma&amp;#x27;ayat Shah of Johor" label="Abdullah Ma&amp;#x27;ayat Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665443" start="35091" end="35111" title="Abdul Jalil Shah III" label="Abdul Jalil Shah III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002570" start="35156" end="35161" title="Bugis" label="Bugis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="35179" end="35187" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q619086" start="35412" end="35424" title="Klang River" label="Klang rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130350" start="35431" end="35443" title="Minangkabau people" label="Minangkabaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130350" start="35534" end="35546" title="Minangkabau people" label="Minangkabaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="35552" end="35559" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11169169" start="35592" end="35602" title="Raja Kecil" label="Raja Kecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285481" start="35740" end="35750" title="Salehuddin of Selangor" label="Salehuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636765" start="35794" end="35812" title="Selangor Sultanate" label="Selangor Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267302" start="35833" end="35847" title="Kuala Selangor" label="Kuala Selangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="36128" end="36137" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q293689" start="36157" end="36169" title="Ya&amp;#x27;qubi" label="Ya&amp;#x27;qubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401176" start="36311" end="36315" title="Ma-i" label="Ma-i"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406420" start="36319" end="36327" title="Madja-as" label="Madja-as"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="36361" end="36373" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="36474" end="36486" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q698817" start="36660" end="36670" title="Zhao Rukuo" label="Zhao Rukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="36904" end="36909" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401303" start="36980" end="36986" title="Rajahnate of Butuan" label="Butuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q422065" start="36988" end="36992" title="Sultanate of Sulu" label="Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401176" start="36997" end="37001" title="Ma-i" label="Mayd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401247" start="37014" end="37020" title="Kingdom of Maynila" label="Malilu"/>
<link wikidata="Q248572" start="37025" end="37034" title="Sultanate of Maguindanao" label="Wenduling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401247" start="37050" end="37056" title="Rajahnate of Maynila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q248572" start="37061" end="37069" title="Sultanate of Maguindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="37074" end="37082" title="Luzon" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="37087" end="37095" title="Mindanao" label="southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="37426" end="37432" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="37546" end="37569" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31800" start="37626" end="37633" title="Bolkiah" label="Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401247" start="37737" end="37745" title="Seludong" label="Seludong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="37759" end="37765" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061195" start="37772" end="37788" title="Sulu Archipelago" label="Sulu Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="37807" end="37815" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833470" start="37889" end="37917" title="Rajah Matanda" label="Sulu, Manila and Maguindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q841359" start="38029" end="38041" title="Kapuas River" label="Kapuas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048747" start="38272" end="38281" title="Pontianak Sultanate" label="Pontianak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38283" end="38292" title="Kutai#Kutai Kartanegara" label="Samarinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660566" start="38297" end="38308" title="Sultanate of Banjar" label="Banjarmasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109927" start="38320" end="38339" title="Sultanate of Sambas" label="Sultanate of Sambas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916" start="38353" end="38368" title="West Kalimantan" label="West Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q422065" start="38375" end="38392" title="Sultanate of Sulu" label="Sultanate of Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="38430" end="38436" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q47012851" start="38506" end="38526" title="Sultanate of Sarawak" label="Sultanate of Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="38549" end="38556" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="38582" end="38595" title="Cartography" label="cartographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936109" start="38742" end="38755" title="Sultan Tengah" label="Sultan Tengah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="38964" end="38970" title="Viceroyalty of New Spain" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290600" start="39070" end="39077" title="Visayans" label="Visayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345344" start="39095" end="39118" title="Latin American Asian" label="Latin-American recruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q31880" start="39154" end="39167" title="Castilian War" label="Castilian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q973254" start="39712" end="39716" title="Iban people" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q926384" start="39718" end="39723" title="Kayan people (Borneo)" label="Kayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180540" start="39729" end="39742" title="Kenyah people" label="Kenyah people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="39826" end="39834" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39862" end="39885" title="Pangeran Indera Mahkota" label="Pangeran Indera Mahkota"/>
<link wikidata="Q40107" start="40129" end="40150" title="Omar Ali Saifuddin II" label="Omar Ali Saifuddin II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="40186" end="40206" title=":it:Pengiran Muda Hashim" label="Pengiran Muda Hashim"/>
<link wikidata="Q441276" start="40254" end="40266" title="James Brooke" label="James Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40514" end="40537" title="Pangeran Indera Mahkota" label="Pangeran Indera Mahkota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002570" start="40765" end="40770" title="Bugis" label="Bugis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="40808" end="40816" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183032" start="41077" end="41082" title="Johor" label="Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188953" start="41091" end="41096" title="Perak" label="Perak"/>
<link wikidata="Q189710" start="41102" end="41110" title="Selangor" label="Selangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130350" start="41116" end="41127" title="Minangkabau people" label="Minangkabau"/>
<link wikidata="Q213893" start="41217" end="41232" title="Negeri Sembilan" label="Negeri Sembilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414461" start="41259" end="41271" title="power vacuum" label="power vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="41347" end="41364" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="41406" end="41411" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q584435" start="41423" end="41429" title="Pattani Kingdom" label="Patani"/>
<link wikidata="Q189701" start="41443" end="41453" title="Terengganu" label="Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191346" start="41770" end="41776" title="Pahang" label="Pahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="41815" end="41826" title="gold mining" label="gold mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="41842" end="41860" title="Service industry" label="service industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q31307" start="42019" end="42036" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1765–1767)" label="Fall of Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481747" start="42148" end="42161" title="Francis Light" label="Francis Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="42191" end="42197" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636614" start="42217" end="42245" title="Ahmad Tajuddin Halim Shah II of Kedah" label="Ahmad Tajuddin Halim Shah II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="42268" end="42286" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610451" start="42429" end="42442" title="Noi Na Nagara" label="Noi Na Nagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483643" start="42446" end="42451" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom" label="Ligor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016779" start="42497" end="42510" title="Burney Treaty" label="Burney Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="42738" end="42745" title="Thailand" label="Siamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055872" start="42751" end="42777" title="Siamese invasion of Kedah" label="invaded and occupied Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43008" end="43032" title="Syed Hussein Jamalullail" label="Syed Hussein Jamalullail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205523" start="43075" end="43089" title="House of Jamalullail (Perlis)" label="Raja of Perlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213467" start="43159" end="43165" title="Perlis" label="Perlis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43260" end="43270" title="Long Yunus" label="Long Yunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478838" start="43299" end="43305" title="Patani (historical region)" label="Patani"/>
<link wikidata="Q185944" start="43364" end="43372" title="Kelantan" label="Kelantan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43437" end="43450" title="Sultan Mansur of Terengganu" label="Sultan Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43611" end="43624" title="Long Muhammad" label="Long Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q189701" start="43788" end="43798" title="Terengganu" label="Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841946" start="43847" end="43863" title="Omar Riayat Shah of Terengganu" label="Omar Riayat Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="44032" end="44039" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973084" start="44201" end="44225" title="Unfederated Malay States" label="Unfederated Malay States"/>
<link wikidata="Q584435" start="44230" end="44236" title="Pattani Kingdom" label="Patani"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="44290" end="44296" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658466" start="44510" end="44522" title="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909" label="a new treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658466" start="44689" end="44717" title="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909" label="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="44993" end="45026" title="Company rule in India" label="strongest European power in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="45158" end="45176" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="45300" end="45306" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317579" start="45324" end="45339" title="Sultan of Kedah" label="Sultan of Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861984" start="45459" end="45477" title="Province Wellesley" label="Province Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="45500" end="45515" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q130327" start="45720" end="45736" title="Stamford Raffles" label="Stamford Raffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969562" start="45868" end="45877" title="Bencoolen Presidency" label="Bencoolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031250" start="46272" end="46284" title="expansionism" label="expansionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="46402" end="46416" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q224794" start="46605" end="46623" title="Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824" label="Anglo-Dutch Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="46824" end="46835" title="Dutch East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420545" start="46914" end="46920" title="Crown Colony of Labuan" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="46952" end="46964" title="British overseas territories" label="crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q376178" start="46972" end="46991" title="Straits Settlements" label="Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="47022" end="47040" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="47087" end="47102" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936451" start="47262" end="47272" title="Naning War" label="Naning War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19708170" start="47290" end="47306" title="Pahang Civil War" label="Pahang Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491901" start="47324" end="47334" title="Larut Wars" label="Larut Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209365" start="47355" end="47364" title="Klang War" label="Klang War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="47550" end="47553" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="47949" end="47959" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021855" start="48104" end="48116" title="Ngah Ibrahim" label="Ngah Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967582" start="48145" end="48167" title="Pangkor Treaty of 1874" label="Pangkor Treaty of 1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q572927" start="48298" end="48307" title="Resident (title)" label="residents"/>
<link wikidata="Q191346" start="48658" end="48664" title="Pahang" label="Pahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188953" start="48676" end="48681" title="Perak" label="Perak"/>
<link wikidata="Q213893" start="48687" end="48702" title="Negeri Sembilan" label="Negeri Sembilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400154" start="48726" end="48748" title="Federated Malay States" label="Federated Malay States"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="48822" end="48827" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q213467" start="48839" end="48845" title="Perlis" label="Perlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189701" start="48850" end="48860" title="Terengganu" label="Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637695" start="48919" end="48944" title="Sultan Abu Bakar of Johor" label="Sultan Abu Bakar of Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="48949" end="48963" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992331" start="49091" end="49105" title="Sultan Ibrahim of Johor" label="Sultan Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973084" start="49198" end="49222" title="Unfederated Malay States" label="Unfederated Malay States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="49468" end="49480" title="Crown colony" label="Crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="49531" end="49546" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="50294" end="50300" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="50427" end="50432" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q422065" start="50481" end="50485" title="Sultanate of Sulu" label="Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="50520" end="50539" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Spanish East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="50588" end="50594" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q441276" start="50624" end="50636" title="James Brooke" label="James Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189867" start="50827" end="50839" title="White Rajahs" label="White Rajahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585255" start="50977" end="51005" title="British North Borneo Company" label="British North Borneo Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147441" start="51046" end="51066" title="British North Borneo" label="British North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155396" start="51263" end="51277" title="Turtle Islands, Tawi-Tawi" label="Turtle Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829455" start="51282" end="51297" title="Mangsee Islands" label="Mangsee Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q111220073" start="51305" end="51326" title="History of the Philippines (1946–1965)" label="Philippine government"/>
<link wikidata="Q312539" start="51445" end="51463" title="Diosdado Macapagal" label="Diosdado Macapagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="52339" end="52342" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="52347" end="52351" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q873761" start="52436" end="52443" title="tapioca" label="tapioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989596" start="52445" end="52452" title="uncaria" label="gambier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="52466" end="52472" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="52661" end="52669" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440398" start="52727" end="52739" title="Labor force" label="labour force"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="52773" end="52819" title="British Raj" label="the longer-established British colony in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="52842" end="52847" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="52862" end="52873" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q271619" start="53054" end="53058" title="Ipoh" label="Ipoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="53089" end="53101" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445536" start="53753" end="53773" title="Benefit society" label="mutual aid societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q714236" start="53850" end="53860" title="Yap Ah Loy" label="Yap Ah Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124047417" start="54440" end="54444" title="Peranakan" label="baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247914" start="54594" end="54612" title="professional class" label="professional class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380578" start="54712" end="54724" title="rural ghetto" label="rural ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="55300" end="55325" title="Christianization" label="converted to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="55530" end="55543" title="military unit" label="military unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12690296" start="55886" end="55899" title="Malay College Kuala Kangsar" label="Malay College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146766" start="56042" end="56066" title="Universiti Pendidikan Sultan Idris" label="A Malay Teachers College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326684" start="56510" end="56527" title="Early Malay nationalism" label="Malay nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543948" start="56601" end="56615" title="Ibrahim Yaacob" label="Ibrahim Yaacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394888" start="56669" end="56689" title="Kesatuan Melayu Muda" label="Kesatuan Melayu Muda"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="56930" end="56947" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="56970" end="56982" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499276" start="57275" end="57319" title="Yellow Peril" label="regarded the Chinese as clever but dangerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="57387" end="57397" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="57407" end="57430" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="57621" end="57632" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q940253" start="57664" end="57700" title="Russian cruiser Zhemchug" label="Russian cruiser &amp;quot;Zhemchug&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q329540" start="57723" end="57732" title="SMS Emden" label="SMS Emden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661859" start="57763" end="57779" title="Battle of Penang" label="Battle of Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="57899" end="57910" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="58134" end="58154" title="Royal Air Force" label="British air capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="58162" end="58170" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="58230" end="58247" title="French Indo-China" label="French Indo-China"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="58336" end="58350" title="Japanese invasion of Malaya" label="overran Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="58425" end="58437" title="water supply" label="water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q908162" start="58594" end="58603" title="Pan-Asianism" label="pan-Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543309" start="58732" end="58743" title="Melayu Raya" label="Melayu Raya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341127" start="58945" end="58956" title="enemy alien" label="enemy alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q716144" start="59001" end="59011" title="Sook Ching" label="Sook Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448312" start="59095" end="59118" title="Malayan Communist Party" label="Malayan Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q658422" start="59153" end="59193" title="Malayan Peoples&amp;#x27; Anti-Japanese Army" label="Malayan Peoples&amp;#x27; Anti-Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="59424" end="59432" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="59983" end="59989" title="British Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q976099" start="60219" end="60232" title="Malayan Union" label="Malayan Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="60551" end="60557" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200528" start="60640" end="60654" title="Malaysian Chinese" label="ethnic Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668154" start="60968" end="61003" title="United Malays National Organisation" label="United Malays National Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058538" start="61052" end="61071" title="Onn Jaafar" label="Dato Onn bin Jaafar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="61377" end="61397" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Federation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="62014" end="62022" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473673" start="62046" end="62054" title="Lai Teck" label="Lai Teck"/>
<link wikidata="Q714041" start="62117" end="62126" title="Chin Peng" label="Chin Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q506259" start="62165" end="62178" title="direct action" label="direct action"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="62421" end="62439" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862904" start="62547" end="62584" title="Malayan Peoples&amp;#x27; Liberation Army" label="Malayan Peoples&amp;#x27; Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="62648" end="62665" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="63286" end="63298" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158595" start="63453" end="63474" title="concession (politics)" label="political concessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360037" start="63543" end="63554" title="new village" label="new village"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="63575" end="63594" title="concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345608" start="63784" end="63801" title="High Commissioner" label="High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918377" start="63807" end="63819" title="Henry Gurney" label="Henry Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531866" start="63951" end="63965" title="Gerald Templer" label="Gerald Templer"/>
<link wikidata="Q760037" start="64089" end="64107" title="counter-insurgency" label="counter-insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868587" start="64367" end="64387" title="Batang Kali massacre" label="massacred 24 Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="64677" end="64685" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="64698" end="64710" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173278" start="64735" end="64747" title="Independence Day (Malaysia)" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q296317" start="64827" end="64845" title="Tunku Abdul Rahman" label="Tunku Abdul Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886920" start="65013" end="65040" title="Malaysian Chinese Association" label="Malayan Chinese Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q713909" start="65119" end="65133" title="Tan Cheng Lock" label="Tan Cheng Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q296317" start="65361" end="65379" title="Tunku Abdul Rahman" label="Tunku Abdul Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="65403" end="65408" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q958983" start="65646" end="65669" title="Malaysian Indian Congress" label="Malayan Indian Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="65792" end="65805" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714041" start="66041" end="66050" title="Chin Peng" label="Chin Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="66326" end="66353" title="King of Malaysia" label="Malaya&amp;#x27;s head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159925" start="66391" end="66403" title="Malay rulers" label="Malay rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="66410" end="66415" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="66477" end="66497" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="67025" end="67043" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japanese surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974502" start="67048" end="67061" title="Brooke family" label="Brooke family"/>
<link wikidata="Q131248" start="67415" end="67427" title="Lee Kuan Yew" label="Lee Kuan Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451936" start="67455" end="67471" title="Sultan of Brunei" label="Sultan of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="67552" end="67570" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q264516" start="67801" end="67812" title="Abdul Razak Hussein" label="Abdul Razak"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="68005" end="68011" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="68013" end="68019" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933920" start="68021" end="68033" title="Crown Colony of North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589708" start="68035" end="68042" title="Crown Colony of Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373718" start="68048" end="68057" title="Colony of Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q104849747" start="68627" end="68656" title="Chinese in Singapore" label="Chinese majority in Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518" start="68757" end="68773" title="Barisan Sosialis" label="Barisan Sosialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721260" start="68953" end="68972" title="Brunei People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Parti Rakyat Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153833" start="69000" end="69045" title="Commonwealth Prime Ministers&amp;#x27; Conference" label="Commonwealth Prime Ministers&amp;#x27; Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104639" start="69281" end="69299" title="Cobbold Commission" label="Cobbold Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q44293" start="69484" end="69502" title="20-point agreement" label="20-point agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056903" start="69613" end="69631" title="18-point agreement" label="18-point agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="69886" end="69896" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="70041" end="70047" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299246" start="70286" end="70298" title="Brunei revolt" label="armed revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="71144" end="71153" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="71162" end="71173" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q190586" start="71277" end="71291" title="neocolonialism" label="neocolonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="71411" end="71418" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100205" start="71439" end="71473" title="Sarawak United People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Sarawak United People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="72022" end="72030" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="72214" end="72232" title="Developing country" label="developing nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="72707" end="72723" title="synthetic rubber" label="synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972" start="72960" end="72965" title="Medan" label="Medan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="73170" end="73177" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q157744" start="73202" end="73230" title="Communist Party of Indonesia" label="Communist Party of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="73510" end="73533" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361929" start="73563" end="73574" title="Konfrontasi" label="Konfrontasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887665" start="73649" end="73680" title="Transition to the New Order" label="the downfall of Sukarno in 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="73836" end="73852" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359221" start="73951" end="73981" title="Malaysia–Philippines relations" label="Malaysia–Philippines relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="74011" end="74027" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="74074" end="74091" title="Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945)" label="Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q371395" start="74494" end="74520" title="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165452" start="74817" end="74835" title="PAP–UMNO relations" label="PAP–UMNO relations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75183" end="75205" title="Singapore in Malaysia#Separation" label="expulsion of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="75597" end="75617" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q713971" start="76071" end="76083" title="Lim Chong Eu" label="Lim Chong Eu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="76569" end="76574" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142924" start="76748" end="76768" title="University of Malaya" label="University of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q112020" start="77591" end="77625" title="Federal Land Development Authority" label="Federal Land Development Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="78148" end="78166" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048772" start="78312" end="78344" title="Part Gerakan Rakyat Malaysia" label="Malaysian People&amp;#x27;s Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547025" start="78532" end="78557" title="Malaysian Islamic Party" label="Islamic Party of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185837" start="78592" end="78615" title="Democratic Action Party" label="Democratic Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200528" start="78796" end="78810" title="Malaysian Chinese" label="ethnic Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862904" start="78811" end="78843" title="Malayan National Liberation Army" label="Malayan National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448312" start="78867" end="78890" title="Malayan Communist Party" label="Malayan Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088964" start="78909" end="78933" title="Malaysia–Thailand border" label="Malaysia-Thailand border"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438778" start="79117" end="79121" title="Kroh" label="Kroh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="79142" end="79161" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Peninsular Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="79193" end="79211" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750770" start="79460" end="79489" title="Malaysia Volunteers Corps Department" label="People&amp;#x27;s Volunteer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742048" start="79512" end="79534" title="1969 Malaysian general election" label="1969 federal elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q25077" start="79781" end="79814" title="13 May incident" label="riots and inter-communal violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209029" start="80100" end="80127" title="National Operations Council" label="National Operations Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q264516" start="80158" end="80177" title="Abdul Razak Hussein" label="Abdul Razak Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566616" start="80319" end="80340" title="Internal Security Act 1960" label="Internal Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="80419" end="80435" title="Censorship" label="press censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q808210" start="80903" end="80919" title="Barisan Nasional" label="Barisan Nasional"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="81049" end="81065" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q138211" start="81381" end="81400" title="Malaysian New Economic Policy" label="New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q264516" start="81437" end="81452" title="Tun Abdul Razak" label="Tun Abdul Razak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004875" start="81502" end="81511" title="bumiputra" label="bumiputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q138211" start="81931" end="81950" title="Malaysian New Economic Policy" label="New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14933453" start="82586" end="82612" title="Perbadanan Nasional" label="Perbadanan Nasional Berhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q221692" start="82623" end="82648" title="Petronas" label="Petroliam Nasional Berhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563685" start="82669" end="82709" title="HICOM Automotive Manufacturers (Malaysia)" label="Heavy Industries Corporation of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="83021" end="83037" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="83065" end="83091" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Prime Minister of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566616" start="83179" end="83200" title="Internal Security Act (Malaysia)" label="Internal Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q131388567" start="83306" end="83323" title="Dawn Raid (Malaysia)" label="Guthrie Dawn Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206786" start="83391" end="83417" title="Permodalan Nasional Berhad" label="Permodalan Nasional Berhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q372689" start="83464" end="83483" title="Guthrie (company)" label="Guthrie Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="83560" end="83581" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q138211" start="83702" end="83721" title="Malaysian New Economic Policy" label="New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742099" start="83799" end="83819" title="Malaysia–United Kingdom relations" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="83829" end="83843" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="83881" end="83898" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="84141" end="84158" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="84381" end="84397" title="Look East policy (Malaysia)" label="Look East Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="84472" end="84477" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="84482" end="84493" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="84544" end="84561" title="Industrialisation" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252065" start="84753" end="84764" title="Proton Saga (first generation)" label="Proton Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q827306" start="84777" end="84783" title="Proton Holdings" label="Proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="84852" end="84865" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621005" start="85036" end="85054" title="Telecommunications in Malaysia" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="85056" end="85065" title="Public utility" label="utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005348" start="85071" end="85085" title="Transport in Malaysia" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658454" start="85397" end="85405" title="Monarchies of Malaysia" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="85410" end="85420" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="85493" end="85514" title="King of Malaysia" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="86239" end="86244" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q117598666" start="86249" end="86261" title="Conservatism in Malaysia" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547025" start="86290" end="86317" title="Malaysian Islamic Party" label="Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="86443" end="86451" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204538" start="86483" end="86493" title="Yusof Rawa" label="Yusof Rawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524992" start="86582" end="86626" title="International Islamic University Malaysia" label="International Islamic University of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q299574" start="86793" end="86806" title="Anwar Ibrahim" label="Anwar Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q476499" start="86822" end="86854" title="Malaysian Islamic Youth Movement" label="Malaysian Islamic Youth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814184" start="86992" end="87007" title="Memali Incident" label="Memali Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884712" start="87156" end="87162" title="Baling District" label="Baling"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="87164" end="87169" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q309868" start="87232" end="87240" title="Al-Arqam" label="Al-Arqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q968612" start="87296" end="87312" title="Ashaari Muhammad" label="Ashaari Mohammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566616" start="87337" end="87358" title="Internal Security Act 1960" label="Internal Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015909" start="87534" end="87548" title="Operation Lalang" label="Operasi Lalang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566616" start="87686" end="87707" title="Internal Security Act (Malaysia)" label="Internal Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668154" start="87828" end="87863" title="United Malays National Organisation" label="United Malays National Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699810" start="87939" end="87962" title="Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah" label="Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304654" start="88255" end="88273" title="Societies Act 1966" label="Societies Act 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584527" start="88600" end="88621" title="1988 Malaysian constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404974" start="88722" end="88733" title="Salleh Abas" label="Salleh Abas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679876" start="88739" end="88753" title="Lord President of the Supreme Court" label="Lord President"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440171" start="88761" end="88774" title="Federal Court of Malaysia" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446062" start="88946" end="88970" title="Communist insurgency in Malaysia (1968–1989)" label="long-standing insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448312" start="88978" end="89001" title="Malayan Communist Party" label="Malayan Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100245" start="89021" end="89056" title="China–Malaysia relations" label="Malaysia&amp;#x27;s bilateral relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="89062" end="89067" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="89152" end="89165" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="89270" end="89300" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="collapse of the Communist bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="89343" end="89351" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q20452334" start="89381" end="89401" title="Peace Agreement of Hat Yai (1989)" label="Haadyai Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="89530" end="89551" title="King of Malaysia" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568587" start="89636" end="89647" title="Wawasan 2020" label="Vision 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259697" start="89871" end="89898" title="National Development Policy" label="National Development Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588908" start="90380" end="90412" title="1993 amendments to the Constitution of Malaysia" label="constitutional amendment in 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q683898" start="90801" end="90826" title="MSC Malaysia" label="Multimedia Super Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="90875" end="90897" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q182378" start="90943" end="90952" title="Putrajaya" label="Putrajaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8082" start="91012" end="91034" title="Malaysian Grand Prix" label="Formula One Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q20460195" start="91038" end="91044" title="Sepang (town)" label="Sepang"/>
<link wikidata="Q804548" start="91083" end="91092" title="Bakun Dam" label="Bakun Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="91096" end="91103" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="91171" end="91186" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="91292" end="91312" title="Petronas Towers" label="Petronas Twin Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049670" start="91448" end="91472" title="Kuala Lumpur City Centre" label="Kuala Lumpur City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="91553" end="91580" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="1997 Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="91754" end="91781" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q299574" start="92149" end="92162" title="Anwar Ibrahim" label="Anwar Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055053" start="92191" end="92209" title="Reformasi (Malaysia)" label="Reformasi movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524068" start="92309" end="92335" title="Anwar Ibrahim sodomy trials" label="trial on charges of sodomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q272588" start="92612" end="92633" title="Abdullah Ahmad Badawi" label="Abdullah Ahmad Badawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="92650" end="92686" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Malaysia&amp;#x27;s fifth prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081697" start="92871" end="92884" title="Islam Hadhari" label="Islam Hadhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q564316" start="93023" end="93044" title="2004 Malaysian general election" label="2004 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="93178" end="93198" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="Indian Ocean tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347231" start="93199" end="93225" title="Effect of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake on Malaysia" label="affected parts of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117403" start="93483" end="93517" title="Agriculture in Malaysia" label="Malaysia&amp;#x27;s agriculture sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="93532" end="93545" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057127" start="93568" end="93582" title="Agricultural technology" label="agrotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114990" start="94112" end="94138" title="Education in Malaysia" label="access to higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166974" start="94241" end="94283" title="Perbadanan Tabung Pendidikan Tinggi Nasional" label="National Higher Education Fund Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="94319" end="94349" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir&amp;#x27;s administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452939" start="94446" end="94472" title="First East Asia Summit" label="inaugural East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="94551" end="94566" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="94671" end="94690" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Peninsular Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403482" start="94763" end="94780" title="Iskandar Malaysia" label="Iskandar Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328112" start="94787" end="94813" title="East Coast Economic Region" label="East Coast Economic Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q20466205" start="94830" end="94863" title="Northern Corridor Economic Region" label="Northern Corridor Economic Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901211" start="95070" end="95083" title="East Malaysia" label="East Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423418" start="95149" end="95185" title="Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy" label="Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395821" start="95202" end="95228" title="Sabah Development Corridor" label="Sabah Development Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q313957" start="95237" end="95260" title="Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor" label="Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor"/>
<link wikidata="Q562173" start="95349" end="95361" title="Soyuz TMA-11" label="Soyuz TMA-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q295707" start="95394" end="95419" title="National Space Agency (Malaysia)" label="space exploration program"/>
<link wikidata="Q995898" start="95493" end="95505" title="2007 Bersih rally" label="Bersih Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356385" start="95548" end="95564" title="electoral reform" label="electoral reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608576" start="95686" end="95699" title="2007 HINDRAF rally" label="HINDRAF rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q385776" start="95717" end="95742" title="HINDRAF" label="Hindu Rights Action Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="95902" end="95925" title="Great Recession" label="global financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q564736" start="96477" end="96498" title="2008 Malaysian general election" label="2008 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q122663043" start="96593" end="96610" title="Political tsunami (Malaysian politics)" label="political tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q12686861" start="96632" end="96662" title="2008 Malaysian Opposition Wave" label="2008 Malaysian Opposition Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q57675" start="96918" end="96929" title="Najib Razak" label="Najib Razak"/>
<link wikidata="Q57675" start="96987" end="96998" title="Najib Razak" label="Najib Razak"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="97015" end="97051" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Malaysia&amp;#x27;s sixth prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521339" start="97108" end="97117" title="1Malaysia" label="1Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566616" start="97451" end="97477" title="Internal Security Act 1960" label="Internal Security Act 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444976" start="97583" end="97628" title="Security Offences (Special Measures) Act 2012" label="Security Offences (Special Measures) Act 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846093" start="97830" end="97862" title="2013 Lahad Datu standoff" label="incursion occurred in Lahad Datu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229938" start="97923" end="97942" title="Lahad Datu District" label="Lahad Datu District"/>
<link wikidata="Q155318" start="97966" end="97980" title="Simunul" label="Simunul Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13893" start="97982" end="97991" title="Tawi-Tawi" label="Tawi-Tawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="98009" end="98020" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707616" start="98044" end="98061" title="Jamalul Kiram III" label="Jamalul Kiram III"/>
<link wikidata="Q422065" start="98095" end="98112" title="Sultanate of Sulu" label="Sultanate of Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219106" start="98314" end="98344" title="Eastern Sabah Security Command" label="Eastern Sabah Security Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742054" start="98432" end="98453" title="2013 Malaysian general election" label="2013 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="98651" end="98665" title="gerrymandering" label="gerrymandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908324" start="98801" end="98829" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370"/>
<link wikidata="Q17374096" start="98999" end="99026" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 17" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="99046" end="99068" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q181386" start="99074" end="99089" title="Eastern Ukraine" label="Eastern Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029471" start="99132" end="99156" title="Russian separatist forces in Donbas" label="Russian-backed militants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583598" start="99282" end="99321" title="Goods and Services Tax (Malaysia)" label="controversial 6% Goods and Services Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005940" start="99549" end="99556" title="1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal" label="scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="99629" end="99641" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="99646" end="99662" title="Money laundering" label="money-laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595888" start="99680" end="99708" title="1Malaysia Development Berhad" label="1Malaysia Development Berhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12696236" start="99773" end="99785" title="Jho Low" label="Low Taek Jho"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022526" start="99948" end="99984" title="Malaysian Citizens&amp;#x27; Declaration" label="Malaysian Citizens&amp;#x27; Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q827252" start="100118" end="100124" title="Bersih" label="Bersih"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060949" start="100456" end="100472" title="Muhyiddin Yassin" label="Muhyiddin Yassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908214" start="100520" end="100554" title="National Security Council Act 2016" label="National Security Council Act 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q163712" start="100672" end="100689" title="Malaysian ringgit" label="Malaysian ringgit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15949058" start="100729" end="100748" title="Malaysia–North Korea relations" label="diplomatic tensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="100777" end="100788" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q28836436" start="100799" end="100828" title="assassination of Kim Jong-nam" label="assassination of Kim Jong-nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891526" start="100970" end="100991" title="2018 Malaysian general election" label="2018 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="101136" end="101152" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="101181" end="101195" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891526" start="101214" end="101222" title="2018 Malaysian general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57675" start="101273" end="101284" title="Najib Razak" label="Najib Razak"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005940" start="101322" end="101365" title="1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal" label="1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB) scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="101469" end="101480" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005940" start="101549" end="101585" title="1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal" label="1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q299574" start="101588" end="101601" title="Anwar Ibrahim" label="Anwar Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240694" start="101619" end="101631" title="royal pardon" label="royal pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="101738" end="101754" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="101937" end="101947" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="102108" end="102132" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896324" start="102368" end="102388" title="MRL East Coast Rail Link" label="East Coast Rail Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245635" start="102507" end="102538" title="China Petroleum Pipeline Engineering" label="China Petroleum Pipeline Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746325" start="102647" end="102675" title="2018–19 Korean peace process" label="2018–19 Korean peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="102812" end="102843" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="102901" end="102982" title="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" label="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004875" start="103116" end="103126" title="Bumiputera (Malaysia)" label="Bumiputras"/>
<link wikidata="Q70037235" start="103237" end="103266" title="Shared Prosperity Vision 2030" label="Shared Prosperity Vision 2030"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="103408" end="103419" title="high income" label="high-income"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805904" start="103454" end="103474" title="Freedom of the press in Malaysia" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="103563" end="103582" title="Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q86509170" start="103775" end="103791" title="2020–2022 Malaysian political crisis" label="political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q86509170" start="103929" end="103945" title="2020–2022 Malaysian political crisis" label="political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060949" start="103947" end="103963" title="Muhyiddin Yassin" label="Muhyiddin Yassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="103992" end="104006" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="104014" end="104035" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q86890510" start="104137" end="104155" title="Perikatan Nasional" label="Perikatan Nasional"/>
<link wikidata="Q26871088" start="104190" end="104197" title="Malaysian United Indigenous Party" label="BERSATU"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873556" start="104244" end="104252" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q87773537" start="104322" end="104354" title="Malaysian movement control order" label="Malaysian movement control order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755248" start="104401" end="104411" title="High court (Malaysia)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q57675" start="104444" end="104455" title="Najib Razak" label="Najib Razak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975478" start="104459" end="104473" title="abuse of power" label="abuse of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="104475" end="104491" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503409" start="104496" end="104520" title="Law of Malaysia" label="criminal breach of trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q25483816" start="104641" end="104654" title="Kajang Prison" label="Kajang Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q15467111" start="104724" end="104745" title="Abdullah of Pahang" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q107492041" start="104757" end="104784" title="2021 Malaysian state of emergency" label="national state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q105690890" start="105012" end="105069" title="COVID-19 vaccination in Malaysia" label="the country&amp;#x27;s vaccination programme against COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="105112" end="105123" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15949058" start="105138" end="105180" title="Malaysia–North Korea relations" label="severance of diplomatic ties with Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106856908" start="105523" end="105542" title="Economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia" label="economic stagnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084858" start="105782" end="105801" title="Ismail Sabri Yaakob" label="Ismail Sabri Yaakob"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="105828" end="105842" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q109802732" start="105962" end="105979" title="Keluarga Malaysia" label="Keluarga Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q87773537" start="106025" end="106047" title="Malaysian movement control order" label="Movement Control Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q105690890" start="106085" end="106106" title="COVID-19 vaccination in Malaysia" label="vaccination programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704474" start="106123" end="106144" title="Twelfth Malaysia Plan" label="Twelfth Malaysia Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127267" start="106242" end="106269" title="Party switching" label="switching political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="106307" end="106320" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q84080655" start="106441" end="106457" title="2022 Malaysian general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="106496" end="106511" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q299574" start="106622" end="106635" title="Anwar Ibrahim" label="Anwar Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="106714" end="106728" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q15467111" start="106756" end="106777" title="Abdullah of Pahang" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="106814" end="106829" title="grand coalition#Malaysia" label="grand coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q117312260" start="106862" end="106877" title="Malaysia Madani" label="Malaysia Madani"/>
<link wikidata="Q109802732" start="106966" end="106983" title="Keluarga Malaysia" label="Keluarga Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243630" start="107132" end="107137" title="BRICS" label="BRICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q27511152" start="107289" end="107311" title="Eastern Economic Forum" label="Eastern Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="107315" end="107326" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="107328" end="107334" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="107374" end="107388" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130313128" start="107479" end="107496" title="16th BRICS summit" label="16th BRICS Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q55096078" start="107537" end="107553" title="Minister of Economy (Malaysia)" label="Economy Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q12701614" start="107554" end="107566" title="Rafizi Ramli" label="Rafizi Ramli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741681" start="107757" end="107782" title="The formation of Malaysia" label="The formation of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948465" start="107785" end="107802" title="History of Brunei" label="History of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q830399" start="107805" end="107831" title="History of the Philippines" label="History of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969320" start="107834" end="107854" title="History of Singapore" label="History of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227514" start="107857" end="107882" title="History of Southeast Asia" label="History of Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243087" start="107885" end="107922" title="Japanese occupation of British Borneo" label="Japanese occupation of British Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q713768" start="107925" end="107954" title="Japanese occupation of Malaya" label="Japanese occupation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="109641" end="109660" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13808" wikidata="Q2696109" url="?curid=13808" title="History of Israel">
<text>The history of Israel covers an area of the Southern Levant also known as Canaan, Palestine or the Holy Land, which is the geographical location of the modern states of Israel and Palestine. From a prehistory as part of the critical Levantine corridor, which witnessed waves of early humans out of Africa, to the emergence of Natufian culture c. 10th millennium BCE, the region entered the Bronze Age c. 2,000 BCE with the development of Canaanite civilization, before being vassalized by Egypt in the Late Bronze Age. In the Iron Age, the kingdoms of Israel and Judah were established, entities that were central to the origins of the Jewish and Samaritan peoples as well as the Abrahamic faith tradition. This has given rise to Judaism, Samaritanism, Christianity, Islam, Druzism, Baha&#x27;ism, and a variety of other religious movements. Throughout the course of human history, the Land of Israel has seen many conflicts and come under the sway or control of various polities and, as a result, it has historically hosted a wide variety of ethnic groups.

In the following centuries, the Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian and Macedonian empires conquered the region. The Ptolemies and the Seleucids vied for control over the region during the Hellenistic period. However, with the establishment of the Hasmonean dynasty, the local Jewish population maintained independence for a century before being incorporated into the Roman Republic. As a result of the Jewish-Roman Wars in the 1st and 2nd centuries CE, many Jews were killed, displaced or sold into slavery. Following the advent of Christianity, which was adopted by the Greco-Roman world under the influence of the Roman Empire, the region&#x27;s demographics shifted towards newfound Christians, who replaced Jews as the majority of the population by the 4th century. However, shortly after Islam was consolidated across the Arabian Peninsula under Muhammad in the 7th century, Byzantine Christian rule over the Land of Israel was superseded in the Muslim conquest of the Levant by the Rashidun Caliphate, to later be ruled by the Umayyad, Abbasid, and Fatimid caliphates, before being conquered by the Seljuks in the 1070s. Throughout the 12th and much of the 13th century, the Land of Israel became the centre for intermittent religious wars between European Christian and Muslim armies as part of the Crusades, with the Kingdom of Jerusalem being almost entirely overrun by Saladin&#x27;s Ayyubids late in the 12th century, although the Crusaders managed to first expand from their remaining outposts, and then hang on to their constantly decreasing territories for another century. In the 13th century, the Land of Israel became subject to Mongol conquest, though this was stopped by the Mamluk Sultanate, under whose rule it remained until the 16th century. The Mamluks were eventually defeated by the Ottoman Empire, and the region became an Ottoman province until the early 20th century.

The late 19th century saw the rise of a Jewish nationalist movement in Europe known as Zionism, as part of which &quot;aliyah&quot; (Jewish immigration to the Land of Israel from the diaspora) increased. During World War I, the Sinai and Palestine campaign of the Allies led to the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire. Britain was granted control of the region by League of Nations mandate, in what became known as Mandatory Palestine. The British government had publicly committed itself to the creation of a Jewish homeland in the 1917 Balfour declaration. Palestinian Arabs opposed this design, asserting their rights over the former Ottoman territories and seeking to prevent Jewish immigration. As a result, Arab–Jewish tensions grew in the succeeding decades of British administration. In late 1947, the United Nations voted for the partition of Mandate Palestine and the creation of a Jewish and an Arab state on its territory; the Jews accepted the plan, while the Arabs rejected it. A civil war ensued, won by the Jews.

In May 1948, the Israeli Declaration of Independence sparked the 1948 War in which Israel repelled the invading armies of the neighbouring states. It resulted in the 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight and subsequently led to waves of Jewish emigration from other parts of the Middle East. Today, approximately 43 percent of the global Jewish population resides in Israel. In 1979, the Egypt–Israel peace treaty was signed, based on the Camp David Accords. In 1993, Israel signed the Oslo I Accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization, which was followed by the establishment of the Palestinian National Authority. In 1994, the Israel–Jordan peace treaty was signed. Despite efforts to finalize the peace agreement, the conflict continues to play a major role in Israeli and international political, social, and economic life.

==Prehistory==

The oldest evidence of early humans in the territory of modern Israel, dating to 1.5 million years ago, was found in Ubeidiya near the Sea of Galilee. Flint tool artefacts have been discovered at Yiron, the oldest stone tools found anywhere outside Africa. Other groups include 1.4 million years old Acheulean industry, the Bizat Ruhama group and Gesher Bnot Yaakov.

In the Mount Carmel area at el-Tabun, and Es Skhul, Neanderthal and early modern human remains were found, showing the longest stratigraphic record in the region, spanning 600,000 years of human activity, from the Lower Paleolithic to the present day, representing roughly a million years of human evolution. Other notable Paleolithic sites include caves Qesem and Manot. The oldest fossils of anatomically modern humans found outside Africa are the Skhul and Qafzeh hominids, who lived in northern Israel 120,000 years ago. Around 10th millennium BCE, the Natufian culture existed in the area.

===Periodisation===
Here is one of the more common periodisations.
* Stone Age (pre-4500 BCE): hunter-gatherer societies, slowly evolving into farming and herding societies
** Palaeolithic
*** Epipalaeolithic
**** Early
**** Middle
**** Late. See Natufian culture (15,000-11,500 BP)
** Neolithic
*** Pre-Pottery Neolithic (PPN)
**** Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA)
**** Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB)
**** Pre-Pottery Neolithic C (PPNC)
*** Late Neolithic
**** Pottery Neolithic A (PNA)
***** Yarmukian culture
***** Lodian (Jericho IX) culture
**** Pottery Neolithic B (PNB)
***** Wadi Rabah culture
***** Timnian culture in southern Negev (and Sinai); pastoralist, persists through to the Bronze Age
* Chalcolithic (4500–3500 BCE): early metal-working and farming; see Timna Valley

==Bronze Age Canaan==
The Canaanites are archaeologically attested in the Middle Bronze Age (2100–1550 BCE). There were probably independent or semi-independent city-states. Cities were often surrounded by massive earthworks, resulting in the archaeological mounds, or &#x27;tells&#x27; common in the region today. In the late Middle Bronze Age, the Nile Delta in Egypt was settled by Canaanites who maintained close connections with Canaan. During that period, the Hyksos, dynasties of Canaanite/Asiatic origin, ruled much of Lower Egypt before being overthrown in the 16th century BCE.

During the Late Bronze Age (1550–1200 BCE), there were Canaanite vassal states paying tribute to the New Kingdom of Egypt, which governed from Gaza. In 1457 BCE, Egyptian forces under the command of Pharaoh Thutmose III defeated a rebellious coalition of Canaanite vassal states led by Kadesh&#x27;s king at the Battle of Megiddo.

In the Late Bronze Age there was a period of civilizational collapse in the Middle East, Canaan fell into chaos, and Egyptian control ended. There is evidence that urban centers such as Hazor, Beit She&#x27;an, Megiddo, Ekron, Isdud and Ascalon were damaged or destroyed. Two groups appear at this time, and are associated with the transition to the Iron Age (they used iron weapons/tools which were better than earlier bronze): the Sea Peoples, particularly the Philistines, who migrated from the Aegean world and settled on the southern coast, and the Israelites, whose settlements dotted the highlands.

Some 2nd millennium inscriptions about the semi-nomadic Habiru people are believed to be connected to the Hebrews, who were generally synonymous with the Biblical Israelites. Many scholars regard this connection to be plausible since the two ethnonyms have similar etymologies, although others argue that Habiru refers to a social class found in every Near Eastern society, including Hebrew societies.

==Ancient Israel and Judah: Iron Age to Babylonian period==
===Early Israelites (Iron Age I)===
The earliest recorded evidence of a people by the name of Israel (as &quot;&quot;) occurs in the Egyptian Merneptah Stele, erected for Pharaoh Merneptah (son of Ramesses II) c. 1209 BCE, which states &quot;Israel is laid waste and his seed is not.&quot; Archeological evidence indicates that during the early Iron Age I, hundreds of small villages were established on the highlands of Canaan on both sides of the Jordan River, primarily in Samaria, north of Jerusalem. These villages had populations of up to 400, were largely self-sufficient and lived from herding, grain cultivation, and growing vines and olives with some economic interchange. The pottery was plain and undecorated. Writing was known and available for recording, even in small sites. William G. Dever sees this &quot;Israel&quot; in the central highlands as a cultural and probably political entity, more an ethnic group rather than an organized state.

Modern scholars believe that the Israelites and their culture branched out of the Canaanite peoples and their cultures through the development of a distinct monolatristic—and later monotheistic—religion centred on a national god Yahweh. According to McNutt, &quot;It is probably safe to assume that sometime during Iron Age I a population began to identify itself as &#x27;Israelite&#x27;&quot;, differentiating itself from the Canaanites through such markers as the prohibition of intermarriage, an emphasis on family history and genealogy, and religion.

Philistine cooking tools and the prevalence of pork in their diets, and locally made Mycenaean pottery—which later evolved into bichrome Philistine pottery—all support their foreign origin. Their cities were large and elaborate, which—together with the findings—point out to a complex, hierarchical society.

Israel Finkelstein believes that the oldest Abraham traditions originated in the Iron Age, which focus on the themes of land and offspring and possibly, his altars in Hebron. Abraham&#x27;s Mesopotamian heritage is not discussed.

===Israel and Judah (Iron Age II)===
In the 10th century BCE, the Israelite kingdoms of Judah and Israel emerged. The Hebrew Bible states that these were preceded by a single kingdom ruled by Saul, David and Solomon, who is said to have built the First Temple. Archaeologists have debated whether the united monarchy ever existed, with those in favor of such a polity existing further divided between maximalists who support the Biblical accounts, and minimalists who argue that any such polity was likely smaller than suggested.

Historians and archaeologists agree that the northern Kingdom of Israel existed by 900 BCE and the Kingdom of Judah existed by 850 BCE. The Kingdom of Israel was the more prosperous of the two kingdoms and soon developed into a regional power; during the days of the Omride dynasty, it controlled Samaria, Galilee, the upper Jordan Valley, the Sharon and large parts of the Transjordan. Samaria, the capital, was home to one of the largest Iron Age structures in the Levant. The Kingdom of Israel&#x27;s capital moved between Shechem, Penuel and Tirzah before Omri settled it in Samaria, and the royal succession was often settled by a military coup d&#x27;état. The Kingdom of Judah was smaller but more stable; the Davidic dynasty ruled the kingdom for the four centuries of its existence, with the capital always in Jerusalem, controlling the Judaean Mountains, most of the Shephelah and the Beersheba valley in the northern Negev.

In 854 BCE, according to Assyrian records (the Kurkh Monoliths), an alliance between Ahab of Israel and Ben Hadad II of Aram-Damascus managed to repulse the incursions of the Assyrians, with a victory at the Battle of Qarqar. This is not reported in the Bible which describes conflict between Ahab and Ben Hadad. Another important discovery of the period is the Mesha Stele, a Moabite stele found in Dhiban when Emir Sattam Al-Fayez led Henry Tristram to it as they toured the lands of the vassals of the Bani Sakher. The stele is now in the Louvre. In the stele, Mesha, king of Moab, tells how Chemosh, the god of Moab, had been angry with his people and had allowed them to be subjugated to the Kingdom of Israel, but at length, Chemosh returned and assisted Mesha to throw off the yoke of Israel and restore the lands of Moab. It refers to Omri, king of Israel, to the god Yahweh, and may contain another early reference to the House of David. Jehu, son of Omri, is referenced by the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III.

====Assyrian invasions====
Tiglath-Pileser III of Assyria invaded Israel in around 732 BCE. The Kingdom of Israel fell to the Assyrians following a long siege of the capital Samaria around 720 BCE. The records of Sargon II of Assyria indicate that he captured Samaria and deported 27,290 inhabitants to Mesopotamia. It is likely that Shalmaneser captured the city since both the Babylonian Chronicles and the Hebrew Bible viewed the fall of Israel as the signature event of his reign. The Assyrian deportations became the basis for the Jewish idea of the Ten Lost Tribes. Foreign groups were settled by the Assyrians in the territories of the fallen kingdom. The Samaritans claim to be descended from Israelites of ancient Samaria who were not expelled by the Assyrians.

It is believed that refugees from the destruction of Israel moved to Judah, massively expanding Jerusalem and leading to construction of the Siloam Tunnel during the rule of King Hezekiah (ruled 715–686 BCE). The tunnel could provide water during a siege and its construction is described in the Bible. The Siloam inscription, a plaque written in Hebrew left by the construction team, was discovered in the tunnel in 1880s, and is today held by the Istanbul Archaeology Museum.

During Hezekiah&#x27;s rule, Sennacherib, the son of Sargon, attempted but failed to capture Judah. Assyrian records say that Sennacherib levelled 46 walled cities and besieged Jerusalem, leaving after receiving extensive tribute. Sennacherib erected the Lachish reliefs in Nineveh to commemorate a second victory at Lachish.

The writings of four different &quot;prophets&quot; are believed to date from this period: Hosea and Amos in Israel and Micah and Isaiah of Judah. These men were mostly social critics who warned of the Assyrian threat and acted as religious spokesmen. They exercised some form of free speech and may have played a significant social and political role in Israel and Judah. They urged rulers and the general populace to adhere to god-conscious ethical ideals, seeing the Assyrian invasions as a divine punishment of the collective resulting from ethical failures.

Under King Josiah (ruler from 641 to 619 BCE), the Book of Deuteronomy was either rediscovered or written. The Book of Joshua and the accounts of the kingship of David and Solomon in the Book of Kings are believed to have the same author. The books are known as Deuteronomist and considered to be a key step in the emergence of monotheism in Judah. They emerged at a time that Assyria was weakened by the emergence of Babylon and may be a committing to text of pre-writing verbal traditions.

===Babylonian period (587–538 BCE)===
====First revolt, 597 defeat====
During the late 7th century BCE, Judah became a vassal state of the Neo-Babylonian Empire. In 601 BCE, Jehoiakim of Judah allied with Babylon&#x27;s principal rival, Egypt, despite the strong remonstrances of the prophet Jeremiah. As a punishment, the Babylonians besieged Jerusalem in 597 BCE, and the city surrendered. The defeat was recorded by the Babylonians. Nebuchadnezzar pillaged Jerusalem and deported king Jechoiachin (Jeconiah), along with other prominent citizens, to Babylon; Zedekiah, his uncle, was installed as king.

A few years later, Zedekiah launched another revolt against Babylon, and an army was sent to conquer Jerusalem.

====Second revolt, 587/86 defeat====
In 587 or 586 BCE, King Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon conquered Jerusalem, destroyed the First Temple and razed the city. The Kingdom of Judah was abolished, and many of its citizens were exiled to Babylon. The former territory of Judah became a Babylonian province called Yehud with its center in Mizpah, north of the destroyed Jerusalem.

====Babylonian diaspora after 587/86 BCE====
Tablets that describe King Jehoiachin&#x27;s rations were found in the ruins of Babylon. He was eventually released by the Babylonians. According to both the Bible and the Talmud, the Davidic dynasty continued as head of Babylonian Jewry, called the &quot;Rosh Galut&quot; (exilarch or head of exile). Arab and Jewish sources show that the &quot;Rosh Galut&quot; continued to exist for another 1,500 years in what is now Iraq, ending in the eleventh century.

==Second Temple period==
===Persian period (538–332 BCE)===

In 538 BCE, Cyrus the Great of the Achaemenid Empire conquered Babylon and took over its empire. Cyrus issued a proclamation granting religious freedom to all peoples subjugated by the Babylonians (see the Cyrus Cylinder). According to the Bible, Jewish exiles in Babylon, including 50,000 Judeans led by Zerubabel, returned to Judah to rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem. The Second Temple was subsequently completed c. 515 BCE. A second group of 5,000, led by Ezra and Nehemiah, returned to Judah in 456 BCE. The first was empowered by the Persian king to enforce religious rules, the second had the status of governor and a royal mission to restore the walls of the city. The country remained a province of the Achaemenid empire called Yehud until 332 BCE.

The final text of the Torah (the first five books of the Bible) is thought to have been written during the Persian period (probably 450–350 BCE). The text was formed by editing and unifying earlier texts. The returning Israelites adopted an Aramaic script (also known as the Ashuri alphabet), which they brought back from Babylon; this is the current Hebrew script. The Hebrew calendar closely resembles the Babylonian calendar and probably dates from this period.

The Bible describes tension between the returnees, the elite of the First Temple period, and those who had remained in Judah. It is possible that the returnees, supported by the Persian monarchy, became large landholders at the expense of the people who had remained to work the land in Judah, whose opposition to the Second Temple would have reflected a fear that exclusion from the cult would deprive them of land rights. Judah had become in practice a theocracy, ruled by hereditary High Priests and a Persian-appointed governor, frequently Jewish, charged with keeping order and seeing that tribute was paid.

A Judean military garrison was placed by the Persians on Elephantine Island near Aswan in Egypt. In the early 20th century, 175 papyrus documents recording activity in this community were discovered, including the &quot;Passover Papyrus&quot;, a letter instructing the garrison on how to correctly conduct the Passover feast.

===Hellenistic period (333–64 BCE)===

In 332 BCE, Alexander the Great of Macedon conquered the region as part of his campaign against the Persian Empire. After his death in 322 BCE, his generals divided the empire and Judea became a frontier region between the Seleucid Empire and Ptolemaic Kingdom in Egypt. Following a century of Ptolemaic rule, Judea was conquered by the Seleucid Empire in 200 BCE at the battle of Panium. Hellenistic rulers generally respected Jewish culture and protected Jewish institutions. Judea was ruled by the hereditary office of the High Priest of Israel as a Hellenistic vassal. Nevertheless, the region underwent a process of Hellenization, which heightened tensions between Greeks, Hellenized Jews, and observant Jews. These tensions escalated into clashes involving a power struggle for the position of high priest and the character of the holy city of Jerusalem.

When Antiochus IV Epiphanes consecrated the temple, forbade Jewish practices, and forcibly imposed Hellenistic norms on the Jews, several centuries of religious tolerance under Hellenistic control came to an end. In 167 BCE, the Maccabean revolt erupted after Mattathias, a Jewish priest of the Hasmonean lineage, killed a Hellenized Jew and a Seleucid official who participated in sacrifice to the Greek gods in Modi&#x27;in. His son Judas Maccabeus defeated the Seleucids in several battles, and in 164 BCE, he captured Jerusalem and restored temple worship, an event commemorated by the Jewish festival of Hannukah.

After Judas&#x27; death, his brothers Jonathan Apphus and Simon Thassi were able to establish and consolidate a vassal Hasmonean state in Judea, capitalizing on the Seleucid Empire&#x27;s decline as a result of internal instability and wars with the Parthians, and by forging ties with the rising Roman Republic. Hasmonean leader John Hyrcanus was able to gain independence, doubling Judea&#x27;s territories. He took control of Idumaea, where he converted the Edomites to Judaism, and invaded Scythopolis and Samaria, where he demolished the Samaritan Temple. Hyrcanus was also the first Hasmonean leader to mint coins. Under his sons, kings Aristobulus I and Alexander Jannaeus, Hasmonean Judea became a kingdom, and its territories continued to expand, now also covering the coastal plain, Galilee and parts of the Transjordan. Some scholars argue that the Hasmonean dynasty also institutionalized the final Jewish biblical canon.

Under Hasmonean rule, the Pharisees, Sadducees and the mystic Essenes emerged as the principal Jewish social movements. The Pharisee sage Simeon ben Shetach is credited with establishing the first schools based around meeting houses. This was a key step in the emergence of Rabbinical Judaism. After Jannaeus&#x27; widow, queen Salome Alexandra, died in 67 BCE, her sons Hyrcanus II and Aristobulus II engaged in a civil war over succession. The conflicting parties requested Pompey&#x27;s assistance on their behalf, which paved the way for a Roman takeover of the kingdom.

===Early Roman period (64 BCE–2nd century CE)===
In 64 BCE the Roman general Pompey conquered Syria and intervened in the Hasmonean civil war in Jerusalem, restoring Hyrcanus II as High Priest and making Judea a Roman vassal kingdom. During the siege of Alexandria in 47 BCE, the lives of Julius Caesar and his protégé Cleopatra were saved by 3,000 Jewish troops sent by Hyrcanus II and commanded by Antipater, whose descendants Caesar made kings of Judea. From 37 BCE to 6 CE, the Herodian dynasty, Jewish-Roman client kings of Edomite origin, descended from Antipater, ruled Judea. Herod the Great considerably enlarged the temple (see Herod&#x27;s Temple), making it one of the largest religious structures in the world. At this time, Jews formed as much as 10% of the population of the entire Roman Empire, with large communities in North Africa and Arabia.

Augustus made Judea a Roman province in 6 CE, deposing the last Jewish king, Herod Archelaus, and appointing a Roman governor. There was a small revolt against Roman taxation led by Judas of Galilee and over the next decades tensions grew between the Greco-Roman and Judean population centered on attempts to place effigies of emperor Caligula in synagogues and in the Jewish temple. In 64 CE, the Temple High Priest Joshua ben Gamla introduced a religious requirement for Jewish boys to learn to read from the age of six. Over the next few hundred years this requirement became steadily more ingrained in Jewish tradition. The latter part of the Second Temple period was marked by social unrest and religious turmoil, and messianic expectations filled the atmosphere.

===Jewish–Roman wars===
The Jewish–Roman wars were a series of large-scale revolts by Jewish subjects against the Roman Empire between 66 and 135 CE. The term primarily applies to the First Jewish–Roman War (66–73 CE) and the Bar Kokhba revolt (132–136 CE), nationalist rebellions striving to restore an independent Judean state. Some sources also include the Diaspora Revolt (115–117 CE), an ethno-religious conflict fought across the Eastern Mediterranean and including the Kitos War in Judaea.

The Jewish–Roman wars had a devastating impact on the Jewish people, transforming them from a major population in the Eastern Mediterranean into a dispersed and persecuted minority. The First Jewish-Roman War culminated in the destruction of Jerusalem and other towns and villages in Judaea, resulting in significant loss of life and a considerable segment of the population being uprooted or displaced. Those who remained were stripped of any form of political autonomy. Subsequently, the brutal suppression of the Bar Kokhba revolt resulted in even more severe consequences. Judea witnessed a significant depopulation, as many Jews were killed, expelled, or sold into slavery. Jews were banned from residing in the vicinity of Jerusalem, which the Romans rebuilt into the pagan colony of Aelia Capitolina, and the province of Judaea was renamed Syria Palaestina. Collectively, these events enhanced the role of Jewish diaspora, relocating the Jewish demographic and cultural center to Galilee and eventually to Babylonia, with smaller communities across the Mediterranean, the Middle East, and beyond.

The Jewish–Roman wars also had a major impact on Judaism, after the central worship site of Second Temple Judaism, the Second Temple in Jerusalem, was destroyed by Titus&#x27;s troops in 70 CE. The destruction of the Temple led to a transformation in Jewish religious practices, emphasizing prayer, Torah study, and communal gatherings in synagogues. This pivotal shift laid the foundation for the emergence of Rabbinic Judaism, which has been the dominant form of Judaism since late antiquity, after the codification of the Babylonian Talmud.

==Late Roman and Byzantine periods==

===Late Roman period (136–390)===
As a result of the disastrous effects of the Bar Kokhba revolt, Jewish presence in the region significantly dwindled. Over the next centuries, more Jews left to communities in the Diaspora, especially the large, speedily growing Jewish communities in Babylonia and Arabia. Others remained in the Land of Israel, where the spiritual and demographic center shifted from the depopulated Judea to Galilee. Jewish presence also continued in the southern Hebron Hills, in Ein Gedi, and on the coastal plain. The Mishnah and the Jerusalem Talmud, huge compendiums of Rabbinical discussions, were compiled during the 2nd to 4th centuries CE in Tiberias and Jerusalem.

Following the revolt, Judea&#x27;s countryside was penetrated by pagan populations, including migrants from the nearby provinces of Syria, Phoenicia, and Arabia, whereas Aelia Capitolina, its immediate vicinity, and administrative centers were now inhabited by Roman veterans and settlers from the western parts of the empire.

The Romans permitted a hereditary Rabbinical Patriarch from the House of Hillel, called the &quot;Nasi&quot;, to represent the Jews in dealings with the Romans. One prominent figure was Judah ha-Nasi, credited with compiling the final version of the Mishnah, a vast collection of Jewish oral traditions. He also emphasized the importance of education in Judaism, leading to requirements that illiterate Jews be treated as outcasts. This might have contributed to some illiterate Jews converting to Christianity. Jewish seminaries, such as those at Shefaram and Bet Shearim, continued to produce scholars. The best of these became members of the Sanhedrin, which was located first at Sepphoris and later at Tiberias. In the Galillee, many synagogues have been found dating from this period, and the burial site of the Sanhedrin leaders was discovered in Beit She&#x27;arim. In the 3rd century, the Roman Empire faced an economic crisis and imposed heavy taxation to fund wars of imperial succession. This situation prompted additional Jewish migration from Syria Palaestina to the Sasanian Empire, known for its more tolerant environment; there, a flourishing Jewish community with important Talmudic academies thrived in Babylonia, engaging in a notable rivalry with the Talmudic academies of Palaestina.

Early in the 4th century, the Emperor Constantine made Constantinople the capital of the East Roman Empire and made Christianity an accepted religion. His mother Helena made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem (326–328) and led the construction of the Church of the Nativity (birthplace of Jesus in Bethlehem), the Church of the Holy Sepulchre (burial site of Jesus in Jerusalem) and other key churches that still exist. The name Jerusalem was restored to Aelia Capitolina and became a Christian city. Jews were still banned from living in Jerusalem, but were allowed to visit and worship at the site of the ruined temple. Over the course of the next century Christians worked to eradicate &quot;paganism&quot;, leading to the destruction of classical Roman traditions and eradication of their temples. In 351–2, another Jewish revolt in the Galilee erupted against a corrupt Roman governor.

===Byzantine period (390–634)===

The Roman Empire split in 390 CE and the region became part of the Eastern Roman Empire, known as the Byzantine Empire. Under Byzantine rule, much of the region and its non-Jewish population were won over by Christianity, which eventually became the dominant religion in the region. The presence of holy sites drew Christian pilgrims, some of whom chose to settle, contributing to the rise of a Christian majority. Christian authorities encouraged this pilgrimage movement and appropriated lands, constructing magnificent churches at locations linked to biblical narratives. Additionally, monks established monasteries near pagan settlements, encouraging the conversion of local pagans.

During the Byzantine period, the Jewish presence in the region declined, and it is believed that Jews lost their majority status in Palestine in the fourth century. While Judaism remained the sole non-Christian religion tolerated, restrictions on Jews gradually increased, prohibiting the construction of new places of worship, holding public office, or owning Christian slaves. In 425, after the death of the last &quot;Nasi&quot;, Gamliel VI, the &quot;Nasi&quot; office and the Sanhedrin were officially abolished, and the standing of yeshivot weakened. The leadership void was gradually filled by the Jewish center in Babylonia, which would assume a leading role in the Jewish world for generations after the Byzantine period.

During the 5th and 6th centuries CE, the region witnessed a series of Samaritan revolts against Byzantine rule. Their suppression resulted in the decline of Samaritan presence and influence, and further consolidated Christian domination. Though it is acknowledged that some Jews and Samaritans converted to Christianity during the Byzantine period, the reliable historical records are limited, and they pertain to individual conversions rather than entire communities.

In 611, Khosrow II, ruler of Sassanid Persia, invaded the Byzantine Empire. He was helped by Jewish fighters recruited by Benjamin of Tiberias and captured Jerusalem in 614. The &quot;True Cross&quot; was captured by the Persians. The Jewish Himyarite Kingdom in Yemen may also have provided support. Nehemiah ben Hushiel was made governor of Jerusalem. Christian historians of the period claimed the Jews massacred Christians in the city, but there is no archeological evidence of destruction, leading modern historians to question their accounts. In 628, Kavad II (son of Kosrow) returned Palestine and the True Cross to the Byzantines and signed a peace treaty with them. Following the Byzantine re-entry, Heraclius massacred the Jewish population of Galilee and Jerusalem, while renewing the ban on Jews entering the latter.

==Early Muslim period==
The Levant was conquered by an Arab army under the command of ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb in 635, and became the province of Bilad al-Sham of the Rashidun Caliphate. Two military districts—Jund Filastin and Jund al-Urdunn—were established in Palestine. A new city called Ramlah was built as the Muslim capital of Jund Filastin, while Tiberias served as the capital of Jund al-Urdunn. The Byzantine ban on Jews living in Jerusalem came to an end.

In 661, Mu&#x27;awiya I was crowned Caliph in Jerusalem, becoming the first of the (Damascus-based) Umayyad dynasty. In 691, Umayyad Caliph Abd al-Malik (685–705) constructed the Dome of the Rock shrine on the Temple Mount, where the two Jewish temples had been located. A second building, the Al-Aqsa Mosque, was also erected on the Temple Mount in 705. Both buildings were rebuilt in the 10th century following a series of earthquakes.

In 750, Arab discrimination against non-Arab Muslims led to the Abbasid Revolution and the Umayyads were replaced by the Abbasid Caliphs who built a new city, Baghdad, to be their capital. This period is known as the Islamic Golden Age, the Arab Empire was the largest in the world and Baghdad the largest and richest city. Both Arabs and minorities prospered across the region and much scientific progress was made. There were however setbacks: During the 8th century, the Caliph Umar II introduced a law requiring Jews and Christians to wear identifying clothing. Jews were required to wear yellow stars round their neck and on their hats, Christians had to wear Blue. Clothing regulations arose during repressive periods of Arab rule and were more designed to humiliate then persecute non-Muslims. A poll tax was imposed on all non-Muslims by Islamic rulers and failure to pay could result in imprisonment or worse.

In 982, Caliph Al-Aziz Billah of the Cairo-based Fatimid dynasty conquered the region. The Fatimids were followers of Isma&#x27;ilism, a branch of Shia Islam and claimed descent from Fatima, Mohammed&#x27;s daughter. Around the year 1010, the Church of Holy Sepulchre (believed to be Jesus burial site), was destroyed by Fatimid Caliph al-Hakim, who relented ten years later and paid for it to be rebuilt. In 1020 al-Hakim claimed divine status and the newly formed Druze religion gave him the status of a messiah.

===Demographic changes===
Although the Arab conquest was relatively peaceful and did not cause widespread destruction, it did alter the country&#x27;s demographics significantly. Over the ensuing several centuries, the region experienced a drastic decline in its population, from an estimated 1 million during Roman and Byzantine times to some 300,000 by the early Ottoman period. This demographic collapse was accompanied by a slow process of Islamization, that resulted from the flight of non-Muslim populations, immigration of Muslims, and local conversion. The majority of the remaining populace belonged to the lowest classes. While the Arab conquerors themselves left the area after the conquest and moved on to other places, the settlement of Arab tribes in the area both before and after the conquest also contributed to the Islamization. As a result, the Muslim population steadily grew and the area became gradually dominated by Muslims on a political and social level.

During the early Islamic period, many Christians and Samaritans, belonging to the Byzantine upper class, migrated from the coastal cities to northern Syria and Cyprus, which were still under Byzantine control, while others fled to the central highlands and the Transjordan. As a result, the coastal towns, formerly important economic centers connected with the rest of the Byzantine world, were emptied of most of their residents. Some of these cities—namely Ashkelon, Acre, Arsuf, and Gaza—now fortified border towns, were resettled by Muslim populations, who developed them into significant Muslim centers. The region of Samaria also underwent a process of Islamization as a result of waves of conversion among the Samaritan population and the influx of Muslims into the area. The predominantly Jacobite Monophysitic Christian population had been hostile to Byzantium orthodoxy, and at times for that reason welcomed Muslim rule. There is no strong evidence for forced conversion, or for possibility that the jizya tax significantly affected such changes.

The demographic situation in Palestine was further altered by urban decline under the Abbasids, and it is thought that the 749 earthquake hastened this process by causing an increase in the number of Jews, Christians, and Samaritans who emigrated to diaspora communities while also leaving behind others who remained in the devastated cities and poor villages until they converted to Islam. Historical records and archeological evidence suggest that many Samaritans converted under Abbasid and Tulunid rule, after suffering through severe difficulties such droughts, earthquakes, religious persecution, heavy taxes and anarchy. The same region also saw the settlement of Arabs. Over the period, the Samaritan population drastically decreased, with the rural Samaritan population converting to Islam, and small urban communities remaining in Nablus and Caesarea, as well as in Cairo, Damascus, Aleppo and Sarepta. Nevertheless, the Muslim population remained a minority in a predominantly Christian area, and it is likely that this status persisted until the Crusader period.

==Crusades and Mongols==
In 1095, Pope Urban II called upon Christians to wage a holy war and recapture Jerusalem from Muslim rule. Responding to this call, Christians launched the First Crusade in the same year, a military campaign aimed at retaking the Holy Land, ultimately resulting in the successful siege and conquest of Jerusalem in 1099. In the same year, the Crusaders conquered Beit She&#x27;an and Tiberias, and in the following decade, they captured coastal cities with the support of Italian city-state fleets, establishing these coastal ports as crucial strongholds for Crusader rule in the region.

Following the First Crusade, several Crusader states were established in the Levant, with the Kingdom of Jerusalem (&quot;Regnum Hierosolymitanum&quot;) assuming a preeminent position and enjoying special status among them. The population consisted predominantly of Muslims, Christians, Jews, and Samaritans, while the Crusaders remained a minority and relied on the local population who worked the soil. The region saw the construction of numerous robust castles and fortresses, yet efforts to establish permanent European villages proved unsuccessful.

Around 1180, Raynald of Châtillon, ruler of Transjordan, caused increasing conflict with the Ayyubid Sultan Saladin (Salah-al-Din), leading to the defeat of the Crusaders in the 1187 Battle of Hattin (above Tiberias). Saladin was able to peacefully take Jerusalem and conquered most of the former Kingdom of Jerusalem. Saladin&#x27;s court physician was Maimonides, a refugee from Almohad (Muslim) persecution in Córdoba, Spain, where all non-Muslim religions had been banned.

The Christian world&#x27;s response to the loss of Jerusalem came in the Third Crusade of 1190. After lengthy battles and negotiations, Richard the Lionheart and Saladin concluded the Treaty of Jaffa in 1192 whereby Christians were granted free passage to make pilgrimages to the holy sites, while Jerusalem remained under Muslim rule. In 1229, Jerusalem peacefully reverted into Christian control as part of a treaty between Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II and Ayyubid sultan al-Kamil that ended the Sixth Crusade. In 1244, Jerusalem was sacked by the Khwarezmian Tatars who decimated the city&#x27;s Christian population, drove out the Jews and razed the city. The Khwarezmians were driven out by the Ayyubids in 1247.

==Mamluk period==

Between 1258 and 1291, the area was the frontier between Mongol invaders (occasional Crusader allies) and the Mamluks of Egypt. The conflict impoverished the country and severely reduced the population.
In Egypt a caste of warrior slaves, known as the Mamluks, gradually took control of the kingdom. The Mamluks were mostly of Turkish origin, and were bought as children and then trained in warfare. They were highly prized warriors, who gave rulers independence of the native aristocracy. In Egypt they took control of the kingdom following a failed invasion by the Crusaders (Seventh Crusade). The first Mamluk Sultan, Qutuz of Egypt, defeated the Mongols in the Battle of Ain Jalut (&quot;Goliath&#x27;s spring&quot; near Ein Harod), ending the Mongol advances. He was assassinated by one of his Generals, Baibars, who went on to eliminate most of the Crusader outposts. The Mamluks ruled Palestine until 1516, regarding it as part of Syria. In Hebron, Jews were banned from worshipping at the Cave of the Patriarchs (the second-holiest site in Judaism); they were only allowed to enter 7 steps inside the site and the ban remained in place until Israel assumed control of the West Bank in the Six Days War. The Egyptian Mamluk sultan Al-Ashraf Khalil conquered the last outpost of Crusader rule in 1291.

The Mamluks, continuing the policy of the Ayyubids, made the strategic decision to destroy the coastal area and to bring desolation to many of its cities, from Tyre in the north to Gaza in the south. Ports were destroyed and various materials were dumped to make them inoperable. The goal was to prevent attacks from the sea, given the fear of the return of the Crusaders. This had a long-term effect on those areas, which remained sparsely populated for centuries. The activity in that time concentrated more inland.

With the 1492 expulsion of Jews from Spain and 1497 persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal, many Jews moved eastward, with some deciding to settle in the Mamluk Palestine. As a consequence, the local Jewish community underwent significant rejuvenation. The influx of Sephardic Jews began under Mamluk rule in the 15th century, and continued throughout the 16th century and especially after the Ottoman conquest. As city-dwellers, the majority of Sephardic Jews preferred to settle in urban areas, mainly in Safed but also in Jerusalem, while the Musta&#x27;arbi community comprised the majority of the villagers&#x27; Jews.

==Ottoman period==

Under the Mamluks, the area was a province of Bilad a-Sham (Syria). It was conquered by Turkish Sultan Selim I in 1516–17, becoming a part of the province of Ottoman Syria for the next four centuries, first as the Damascus Eyalet and later as the Syria Vilayet (following the Tanzimat reorganization of 1864).

===Old Yishuv===

With the more favorable conditions that followed the Ottoman conquest, the immigration of Jews fleeing Catholic Europe, which had already begun under Mamluk rule, continued, and soon an influx of exiled Sephardic Jews came to dominate the Jewish community in the area.

In 1558, Selim II (1566–1574), successor to Suleiman, whose wife Nurbanu Sultan was Jewish, gave control of Tiberias to Doña Gracia Mendes Nasi, one of the richest women in Europe and an escapee from the Inquisition. She encouraged Jewish refugees to settle in the area and established a Hebrew printing press. Safed became a centre for study of the Kabbalah. Doña Nasi&#x27;s nephew, Joseph Nasi, was made governor of Tiberias and he encouraged Jewish settlement from Italy.

In 1660, a Druze power struggle led to the destruction of Safed and Tiberias. In the late 18th century a local Arab &quot;sheikh&quot; Zahir al-Umar created a &quot;de facto&quot; independent Emirate in the Galilee. Ottoman attempts to subdue the Sheikh failed, but after Zahir&#x27;s death the Ottomans restored their rule in the area.

In 1799, Napoleon briefly occupied the country and planned a proclamation inviting Jews to create a state. The proclamation was shelved following his defeat at Acre. In 1831, Muhammad Ali of Egypt, an Ottoman ruler who left the Empire and tried to modernize Egypt, conquered Ottoman Syria and imposed conscription, leading to the Arab revolt.
In 1838, there was another Druze revolt. In 1839 Moses Montefiore met with Muhammed Pasha in Egypt and signed an agreement to establish 100–200 Jewish villages in the Damascus Eyalet of Ottoman Syria, but in 1840 the Egyptians withdrew before the deal was implemented, returning the area to Ottoman governorship. In 1844, Jews constituted the largest population group in Jerusalem. By 1896 Jews constituted an absolute majority in Jerusalem, but the overall population in Palestine was 88% Muslim and 9% Christian.

===Birth of Zionism===

Between 1882 and 1903, approximately 35,000 Jews moved to Palestine, known as the First Aliyah. In the Russian Empire, Jews faced growing persecution and legal restrictions. Half the world&#x27;s Jews lived in the Russian Empire, where they were restricted to living in the Pale of Settlement. Severe pogroms in the early 1880s and legal repression led to 2 million Jews emigrating from the Russian Empire. 1.5 million went to the United States. Popular destinations were also Germany, France, England, Holland, Argentina and Palestine.

Russian Jews established the Bilu and Hovevei Zion (&quot;Lovers of Zion&quot;) movements with the aim of settling in Palestine. In 1878, Russian Jewish emigrants established the village of Petah Tikva (&quot;The Beginning of Hope&quot;), followed by Rishon LeZion (&quot;First to Zion&quot;) in 1882. The existing Ashkenazi-Jewish communities were concentrated in the Four Holy Cities, extremely poor and relied on donations (halukka) from groups abroad, while the new settlements were small farming communities, but still relied on funding by the French Baron, Edmond James de Rothschild, who sought to establish profitable enterprises. Many early migrants could not find work and left, but despite the problems, more settlements arose and the community grew. After the Ottoman conquest of Yemen in 1881, a large number of Yemenite Jews also emigrated to Palestine, often driven by Messianism.

In 1896 Theodor Herzl published &quot;Der Judenstaat&quot; (&quot;The Jewish State&quot;), in which he asserted that the solution to growing antisemitism in Europe (the so-called &quot;Jewish Question&quot;) was to establish a Jewish state. In 1897, the World Zionist Organization was founded and the First Zionist Congress proclaimed its aim &quot;to establish a home for the Jewish people in Palestine secured under public law.&quot; The Congress chose Hatikvah (&quot;The Hope&quot;) as its anthem.

Between 1904 and 1914, around 40,000 Jews settled in the area now known as Israel (the Second Aliyah). In 1908 the World Zionist Organization set up the Palestine Bureau (also known as the &quot;Eretz Israel Office&quot;) in Jaffa and began to adopt a systematic Jewish settlement policy. In 1909 residents of Jaffa bought land outside the city walls and built the first entirely Hebrew-speaking town, Ahuzat Bayit (later renamed Tel Aviv).

In 1915-1916 Talaat Pasha of the Young Turks forced around a million Armenian Christians from their homes in Eastern Turkey, marching them south through Syria, in what is now known as the Armenian genocide. The number of dead is thought to be around 700,000. Hundreds of thousands were forcibly converted to Islam. A community of survivors settled in Jerusalem, one of whom developed the now iconic Armenian pottery.

===World War I===
During World War I, most Jews supported the Germans because they were fighting the Russians who were regarded as the Jews&#x27; main enemy. In Britain, the government sought Jewish support for the war effort for a variety of reasons including an antisemitic perception of &quot;Jewish power&quot; in the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s Young Turks movement which was based in Thessaloniki, the most Jewish city in Europe (40% of the 160,000 population were Jewish). The British also hoped to secure American Jewish support for US intervention on Britain&#x27;s behalf.

There was already sympathy for the aims of Zionism in the British government, including the Prime Minister Lloyd George. Over 14,000 Jews were expelled by the Ottoman military commander from the Jaffa area in 1914–1915, due to suspicions they were subjects of Russia, an enemy, or Zionists wishing to detach Palestine from the Ottoman Empire, and when the entire population, including Muslims, of both Jaffa and Tel Aviv was subject to an expulsion order in April 1917, the affected Jews could not return until the British conquest ended in 1918, which drove the Turks out of Southern Syria. A year prior, in 1917, the British foreign minister, Arthur Balfour, sent a public letter to the British Lord Rothschild, a leading member of his party and leader of the Jewish community. The letter subsequently became known as the Balfour Declaration. It stated that the British Government &quot;view[ed] with favour the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people&quot;. The declaration provided the British government with a pretext for claiming and governing the country. New Middle Eastern boundaries were decided by an agreement between British and French bureaucrats.

A Jewish Legion composed largely of Zionist volunteers organized by Ze&#x27;ev Jabotinsky and Joseph Trumpeldor participated in the British invasion. It also participated in the failed Gallipoli Campaign. The Nili Zionist spy network provided the British with details of Ottoman plans and troop concentrations.

The Ottoman Empire chose to ally itself with Germany when the first war began. Arab leaders dreamed of freeing themselves from Ottoman rule and establishing self-government or forming an independent Arab state. Therefore, Britain contacted Hussein bin Ali of the Kingdom of Hejaz and proposed cooperation. Together they organized the Arab revolt that Britain supplied with very large quantities of rifles and ammunition. In cooperation between British artillery and Arab infantry, the city of Aqaba on the Red Sea was conquered. The Arab army then continued north while Britain attacked the ottomans from the sea. In 1917-1918, Jerusalem and Damascus were conquered from the ottomans. Britain then broke off cooperation with the Arab army. It turned out that Britain had already entered into the secret Sykes–Picot Agreement that meant that only Britain and France would be allowed to administer the land conquered from the Ottoman Empire. 

After pushing out the Ottomans, Palestine came under martial law. The British, French and Arab Occupied Enemy Territory Administration governed the area shortly before the armistice with the Ottomans until the promulgation of the mandate in 1920.

==Mandatory Palestine==
===First years===

The British Mandate (in effect, British rule) of Palestine, including the Balfour Declaration, was confirmed by the League of Nations in 1922 and came into effect in 1923. The territory of Transjordan was also covered by the Mandate but under separate rules that excluded it from the Balfour Declaration. Britain signed a treaty with the United States (which did not join the League of Nations) in which the United States endorsed the terms of the Mandate, which was approved unanimously by both the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives.

The Balfour declaration was published on the 2nd of November 1917 and the Bolsheviks seized control of Russia a week later. This led to civil war in the Russian Empire. Between 1918 and 1921, a series of pogroms led to the death of at least 100,000 Jews (mainly in what is now Ukraine), and the displacement as refugees of a further 600,000. This led to further migration to Palestine. Between 1919 and 1923, some 40,000 Jews arrived in Palestine in what is known as the Third Aliyah. Many of the Jewish immigrants of this period were Socialist Zionists and supported the Bolsheviks. The migrants became known as pioneers (&quot;halutzim&quot;), experienced or trained in agriculture who established self-sustaining communes called kibbutzim. Malarial marshes in the Jezreel Valley and Hefer Plain were drained and converted to agricultural use. Land was bought by the Jewish National Fund, a Zionist charity that collected money abroad for that purpose.
After the French victory over the Arab Kingdom of Syria ended hopes of Arab independence, there were clashes between Arabs and Jews in Jerusalem during the 1920 Nebi Musa riots and in Jaffa the following year, leading to the establishment of the Haganah underground Jewish militia.
A Jewish Agency was created which issued the entry permits granted by the British and distributed funds donated by Jews abroad. Between 1924 and 1929, over 80,000 Jews arrived in the Fourth Aliyah, fleeing antisemitism and heavy tax burdens imposed on trade in Poland and Hungary, inspired by Zionism and motivated by the closure of United States borders by the Immigration Act of 1924 which severely limited immigration from Eastern and Southern Europe.

Pinhas Rutenberg, a former Commissar of St Petersburg in Russia&#x27;s pre-Bolshevik Kerensky Government, built the first electricity generators in Palestine. In 1925 the Jewish Agency established the Hebrew University in Jerusalem and the Technion (technological university) in Haifa. British authorities introduced the Palestine pound (worth 1000 &quot;mils&quot;) in 1927, replacing the Egyptian pound as the unit of currency in the Mandate.

From 1928, the democratically elected Va&#x27;ad Leumi (Jewish National Council or JNC) became the main administrative institution of the Palestine Jewish community (Yishuv) and included non-Zionist Jews. As the Yishuv grew, the JNC adopted more government-type functions, such as education, health care, and security. With British permission, the Va&#x27;ad Leumi raised its own taxes and ran independent services for the Jewish population.

In 1929 tensions grew over the Kotel (Wailing Wall), the holiest spot in the world for modern Judaism, which was then a narrow alleyway where the British banned Jews from using chairs or curtains: Many of the worshippers were elderly and needed seats; they also wanted to separate women from men. The Mufti of Jerusalem said it was Muslim property and deliberately had cattle driven through the alley. He alleged that the Jews were seeking control of the Temple Mount. This provided the spark for the August 1929 Palestine riots. The main victims were the (non-Zionist) ancient Jewish community at Hebron, who were massacred. The riots led to right-wing Zionists establishing their own militia in 1931, the Irgun Tzvai Leumi (National Military Organization, known in Hebrew by its acronym &quot;Etzel&quot;), which was committed to a more aggressive policy towards the Arab population.

During the interwar period, the perception grew that there was an irreconciliable tension between the two Mandatory functions, of providing for a Jewish homeland in Palestine, and the goal of preparing the country for self-determination. The British rejected the principle of majority rule or any other measure that would give the Arab population, who formed the majority of the population, control over Palestinian territory.

===Increase in Jewish immigration===

Between 1929 and 1938, 250,000 Jews arrived in Palestine (Fifth Aliyah). In 1933, the Jewish Agency and the Nazis negotiated the Ha&#x27;avara Agreement (transfer agreement), under which 50,000 German Jews would be transferred to Palestine. The Jews&#x27; possessions were confiscated and in return the Nazis allowed the Ha&#x27;avara organization to purchase 14 million pounds worth of German goods for export to Palestine and use it to compensate the immigrants. Although many Jews wanted to leave Nazi Germany, the Nazis prevented Jews from taking any money and restricted them to two suitcases so few could pay the British entry tax and many were afraid to leave. The agreement was controversial and the Labour Zionist leader who negotiated the agreement, Haim Arlosoroff, was assassinated in Tel Aviv in 1933. The assassination was used by the British to create tension between the Zionist left and the Zionist right. Arlosoroff had been the boyfriend of Magda Ritschel some years before she married Joseph Goebbels. There has been speculation that he was assassinated by the Nazis to hide the connection but there is no evidence for it.

Between 1933 and 1936, 174,000 arrived despite the large sums the British demanded for immigration permits: Jews had to prove they had 1,000 pounds for families with capital (), 500 pounds if they had a profession and 250 pounds if they were skilled labourers.

===Arab revolt and the White Paper===
Jewish immigration and Nazi propaganda contributed to the large-scale 1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine, a largely nationalist uprising directed at ending British rule. The head of the Jewish Agency, Ben-Gurion, responded to the Arab Revolt with a policy of &quot;Havlagah&quot;—self-restraint and a refusal to be provoked by Arab attacks in order to prevent polarization. The Etzel group broke off from the Haganah in opposition to this policy.

The British responded to the revolt with the Peel Commission (1936–37), a public inquiry that recommended that an exclusively Jewish territory be created in the Galilee and western coast (including the population transfer of 225,000 Arabs); the rest becoming an exclusively Arab area. The two main Jewish leaders, Chaim Weizmann and David Ben-Gurion, had convinced the Zionist Congress to approve equivocally the Peel recommendations as a basis for more negotiation. The plan was rejected outright by the Palestinian Arab leadership and they renewed the revolt, which caused the British to appease the Arabs, and to abandon the plan as unworkable.

Testifying before the Peel Commission, Weizmann said &quot;There are in Europe 6,000,000 people ... for whom the world is divided into places where they cannot live and places where they cannot enter.&quot; In 1938, the US called an international conference to address the question of the vast numbers of Jews trying to escape Europe. Britain made its attendance contingent on Palestine being kept out of the discussion. No Jewish representatives were invited. The Nazis proposed their own solution: that the Jews of Europe be shipped to Madagascar (the Madagascar Plan). The agreement proved fruitless, and the Jews were stuck in Europe.

With millions of Jews trying to leave Europe and every country in the world closed to Jewish migration, the British decided to close Palestine. The White Paper of 1939, recommended that an independent Palestine, governed jointly by Arabs and Jews, be established within 10 years. The White Paper agreed to allow 75,000 Jewish immigrants into Palestine over the period 1940–44, after which migration would require Arab approval. Both the Arab and Jewish leadership rejected the White Paper. In March 1940 the British High Commissioner for Palestine issued an edict banning Jews from purchasing land in 95% of Palestine. Jews now resorted to illegal immigration: (Aliyah Bet or &quot;Ha&#x27;apalah&quot;), often organized by the Mossad Le&#x27;aliyah Bet and the Irgun. With no outside help and no countries ready to admit them, very few Jews managed to escape Europe between 1939 and 1945. Those caught by the British were mostly imprisoned in Mauritius.

===World War II and the Holocaust===

During the Second World War, the Jewish Agency worked to establish a Jewish army that would fight alongside the British forces. Churchill supported the plan but British Military and government opposition led to its rejection. The British demanded that the number of Jewish recruits match the number of Arab recruits.

In June 1940, Italy declared war on the British Commonwealth and sided with Germany. Within a month, Italian planes bombed Tel Aviv and Haifa, inflicting multiple casualties. In May 1941, the Palmach was established to defend the Yishuv against the planned Axis invasion through North Africa. The British refusal to provide arms to the Jews, even when Rommel&#x27;s forces were advancing through Egypt in June 1942 (intent on occupying Palestine), and the 1939 White Paper led to the emergence of a Zionist leadership in Palestine that believed conflict with Britain was inevitable. Despite this, the Jewish Agency called on Palestine&#x27;s Jewish youth to volunteer for the British Army (both men and women). 30,000 Palestinian Jews and 12,000 Palestinian Arabs enlisted in the British armed forces during the war. In June 1944 the British agreed to create a Jewish Brigade that would fight in Italy.

Approximately 1.5 million Jews around the world served in every branch of the allied armies, mainly in the Soviet and US armies. 200,000 Jews died serving in the Soviet army alone.

A small group (about 200 activists), dedicated to resisting the British administration in Palestine, broke away from the Etzel (which advocated support for Britain during the war) and formed the &quot;Lehi&quot; (Stern Gang), led by Avraham Stern. In 1942, the USSR released the Revisionist Zionist leader Menachem Begin from the Gulag and he went to Palestine, taking command of the Etzel organization with a policy of increased conflict against the British. At about the same time Yitzhak Shamir escaped from the camp in Eritrea where the British were holding Lehi activists without trial, taking command of the Lehi (Stern Gang).

Jews in the Middle East were also affected by the war. Most of North Africa came under Nazi control and many Jews were used as slaves. The 1941 pro-Axis coup in Iraq was accompanied by massacres of Jews. The Jewish Agency put together plans for a last stand in the event of Rommel invading Palestine (the Nazis planned to exterminate Palestine&#x27;s Jews).

Between 1939 and 1945, the Nazis, aided by local forces, led systematic efforts to kill every person of Jewish extraction in Europe (The Holocaust), causing the deaths of approximately 6 million Jews. A quarter of those killed were children. The Polish and German Jewish communities, which played an important role in defining the pre-1945 Jewish world, mostly ceased to exist. In the United States and Palestine, Jews of European origin became disconnected from their families and roots. As the Holocaust mainly affected Ashkenazi Jews, Sepharadi and Mizrahi Jews, who had been a minority, became a much more significant factor in the Jewish world. Those Jews who survived in central Europe, were displaced persons (refugees); an Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry, established to examine the Palestine issue, surveyed their ambitions and found that over 95% wanted to migrate to Palestine.

In the Zionist movement the moderate Pro-British (and British citizen) Weizmann, whose son died flying in the RAF, was undermined by Britain&#x27;s anti-Zionist policies. Leadership of the movement passed to the Jewish Agency in Palestine, now led by the anti-British Socialist-Zionist party (Mapai) led by David Ben-Gurion.

===Illegal Jewish immigration and insurgency===
The British Empire was severely weakened by the war. In the Middle East, the war had made Britain conscious of its dependence on Arab oil. British firms controlled Iraqi oil and Britain ruled Kuwait, Bahrain and the Emirates. Shortly after VE Day, the Labour Party won the general election in Britain. Although Labour Party conferences had for years called for the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine, the Labour government now decided to maintain the 1939 White Paper policies.
Illegal migration (Aliyah Bet) became the main form of Jewish entry into Palestine. Across Europe Bricha (&quot;flight&quot;), an organization of former partisans and ghetto fighters, smuggled Holocaust survivors from Eastern Europe to Mediterranean ports, where small boats tried to breach the British blockade of Palestine. Meanwhile, Jews from Arab countries began moving into Palestine overland. Despite British efforts to curb immigration, during the 14 years of the Aliyah Bet, over 110,000 Jews entered Palestine. By the end of World War II, the Jewish population of Palestine had increased to 33% of the total population.

In an effort to win independence, Zionists now waged a guerrilla war against the British. The main underground Jewish militia, the Haganah, formed an alliance called the Jewish Resistance Movement with the Etzel and Stern Gang to fight the British. In June 1946, following instances of Jewish sabotage, such as in the Night of the Bridges, the British launched Operation Agatha, arresting 2,700 Jews, including the leadership of the Jewish Agency, whose headquarters were raided. Those arrested were held without trial.

On 4 July 1946 a massive pogrom in Poland led to a wave of Holocaust survivors fleeing Europe for Palestine. Three weeks later, Irgun bombed the British Military Headquarters of the King David Hotel in Jerusalem, killing 91 people. In the days following the bombing, Tel Aviv was placed under curfew and over 120,000 Jews, nearly 20% of the Jewish population of Palestine, were questioned by the police. In the US, Congress criticized British handling of the situation and considered delaying loans that were vital to British post-war recovery. The alliance between Haganah and Etzel was dissolved after the King David bombings.

Between 1945 and 1948, 100,000–120,000 Jews left Poland. Their departure was largely organized by Zionist activists in Poland under the umbrella of the semi-clandestine organization &quot;Berihah&quot; (&quot;Flight&quot;). &quot;Berihah&quot; was also responsible for the organized emigration of Jews from Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia, totalling 250,000 (including Poland) Holocaust survivors. The British imprisoned the Jews trying to enter Palestine in the Atlit detainee camp and Cyprus internment camps. Those held were mainly Holocaust survivors, including large numbers of children and orphans. In response to Cypriot fears that the Jews would never leave (since they lacked a state or documentation) and because the 75,000 quota established by the 1939 White Paper had never been filled, the British allowed the refugees to enter Palestine at a rate of 750 per month.

By 1947 the Labour Government in Britain was ready to refer the Palestine problem to the newly created United Nations.

===United Nations Partition Plan===
On 2 April 1947, the United Kingdom requested that the question of Palestine be handled by the General Assembly. The General Assembly created a committee, United Nations Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP), to report on &quot;the question of Palestine&quot;. In July 1947 the UNSCOP visited Palestine and met with Jewish and Zionist delegations. The Arab Higher Committee boycotted the meetings. During the visit the British Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin ordered that passengers from an Aliyah Bet ship, SS &quot;Exodus&quot; &quot;1947&quot;, to be sent back to Europe. The Holocaust surviving migrants on the ship were forcibly removed by British troops at Hamburg, Germany.

The principal non-Zionist Orthodox Jewish (or Haredi) party, Agudat Israel, recommended to UNSCOP that a Jewish state be set up after reaching a religious status quo agreement with Ben-Gurion regarding the future Jewish state. The agreement granted an exemption from military service to a quota of yeshiva (religious seminary) students and to all Orthodox women, made the Sabbath the national weekend, guaranteed kosher food in government institutions and allowed Orthodox Jews to maintain a separate education system.

The majority report of UNSCOP proposed &quot;an independent Arab State, an independent Jewish State, and the City of Jerusalem&quot;, the last to be under &quot;an International Trusteeship System&quot;. On 29 November 1947, in Resolution 181 (II), the General Assembly adopted the majority report of UNSCOP, but with slight modifications. The Plan also called for the British to allow &quot;substantial&quot; Jewish migration by 1 February 1948.

Neither Britain nor the UN Security Council took any action to implement the recommendation made by the resolution and Britain continued detaining Jews attempting to enter Palestine. Concerned that partition would severely damage Anglo-Arab relations, Britain denied UN representatives access to Palestine during the period between the adoption of Resolution 181 (II) and the termination of the British Mandate. The British withdrawal was finally completed in May 1948. However, Britain continued to hold (formerly illegal) Jewish immigrants of &quot;fighting age&quot; and their families on Cyprus until March 1949.

===Civil War===
The General Assembly&#x27;s vote caused joy in the Jewish community and anger in the Arab community. Violence broke out between the sides, escalating into civil war. From January 1948, operations became increasingly militarized, with the intervention of a number of Arab Liberation Army regiments inside Palestine, each active in a variety of distinct sectors around the different coastal towns. They consolidated their presence in Galilee and Samaria. Abd al-Qadir al-Husayni came from Egypt with several hundred men of the Army of the Holy War. Having recruited a few thousand volunteers, he organized the blockade of the 100,000 Jewish residents of Jerusalem. The Yishuv tried to supply the city using convoys of up to 100 armoured vehicles, but largely failed. By March, almost all Haganah&#x27;s armoured vehicles had been destroyed, the blockade was in full operation, and hundreds of Haganah members who had tried to bring supplies into the city were killed.

Up to 100,000 Arabs, from the urban upper and middle classes in Haifa, Jaffa and Jerusalem, or Jewish-dominated areas, evacuated abroad or to Arab centres eastwards. This situation caused the US to withdraw their support for the Partition plan, thus encouraging the Arab League to believe that the Palestinian Arabs, reinforced by the Arab Liberation Army, could put an end to the plan for partition. The British, on the other hand, decided on 7 February 1948 to support the annexation of the Arab part of Palestine by Transjordan. The Jordanian army was commanded by the British.
David Ben-Gurion reorganized the Haganah and made conscription obligatory. Every Jewish man and woman in the country had to receive military training. Thanks to funds raised by Golda Meir from sympathisers in the United States, and Stalin&#x27;s decision to support the Zionist cause, the Jewish representatives of Palestine were able to purchase important arms in Eastern Europe.

Ben-Gurion gave Yigael Yadin the responsibility to plan for the announced intervention of the Arab states. The result of his analysis was Plan Dalet, in which Haganah passed from the defensive to the offensive. The plan sought to establish Jewish territorial continuity by conquering mixed zones. Tiberias, Haifa, Safed, Beisan, Jaffa and Acre fell, resulting in the flight of more than 250,000 Palestinian Arabs. The situation was one of the catalysts for the intervention of neighbouring Arab states.

On 14 May 1948, on the day the last British forces left from Haifa, the Jewish People&#x27;s Council gathered at the Tel Aviv Museum and proclaimed the establishment of a Jewish state in Eretz Israel, to be known as the State of Israel.
==State of Israel==

===Arab–Israeli War===
Immediately following the declaration of the new state, both superpower leaders, US President Harry S. Truman and Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, recognized the new state.

The Arab League members Egypt, Transjordan, Syria, Lebanon and Iraq refused to accept the UN partition plan and proclaimed the right of self-determination for the Arabs across the whole of Palestine. The Arab states marched their forces into what had, until the previous day, been the British Mandate for Palestine, starting the first Arab–Israeli War. After an initial loss of territory by the Jewish state, the tide turned in the Israelis&#x27; favour and they pushed the Arab armies back beyond the borders of the proposed Arab state.

On 29 May 1948, the British initiated United Nations Security Council Resolution 50 declaring an arms embargo on the region. Czechoslovakia violated the resolution, supplying the Jewish state with critical military hardware to match the (mainly British) heavy equipment and planes already owned by the invading Arab states. On 11 June, a month-long UN truce was put into effect.

Following independence, the Haganah became the Israel Defense Forces (IDF). The Palmach, Etzel and Lehi were required to cease independent operations and join the IDF. During the ceasefire, Etzel attempted to bring in a private arms shipment aboard a ship called &quot;Altalena&quot;. When they refused to hand the arms to the government, Ben-Gurion ordered that the ship be sunk. Several Etzel members were killed in the fighting.

Large numbers of Jewish immigrants, many of them World War II veterans and Holocaust survivors, now began arriving in the new state of Israel, and many joined the IDF.

After an initial loss of territory by the Jewish state and its occupation by the Arab armies, from July the tide gradually turned in the Israelis&#x27; favour and they pushed the Arab armies out and conquered some of the territory that had been included in the proposed Arab state. At the end of November, tenuous local ceasefires were arranged between the Israelis, Syrians and Lebanese. On 1 December King Abdullah announced the union of Transjordan with Arab Palestine west of the Jordan; only Britain and Pakistan recognized the annexation.

====Armistice Agreements====
Israel signed armistices with Egypt (24 February), Lebanon (23 March), Jordan (3 April) and Syria (20 July). No actual peace agreements were signed. With permanent ceasefire coming into effect, Israel&#x27;s new borders, later known as the Green Line, were established. These borders were not recognized by the Arab states as international boundaries. Israel was in control of the Galilee, Jezreel Valley, West Jerusalem, the coastal plain and the Negev. The Syrians remained in control of a strip of territory along the Sea of Galilee originally allocated to the Jewish state, the Lebanese occupied a tiny area at Rosh Hanikra, and the Egyptians retained the Gaza strip and still had some forces surrounded inside Israeli territory. Jordanian forces remained in the West Bank, where the British had stationed them before the war. Jordan annexed the areas it occupied while Egypt kept Gaza as an occupied zone.
Following the ceasefire declaration, Britain released over 2,000 Jewish detainees it was still holding in Cyprus and recognized the state of Israel. On 11 May 1949, Israel was admitted as a member of the United Nations. Out of an Israeli population of 650,000, some 6,000 men and women were killed in the fighting, including 4,000 soldiers in the IDF (approximately 1% of the Jewish population). According to United Nations figures, 726,000 Palestinians had fled or were expelled by the Israelis between 1947 and 1949.

===1948–1955: Ben-Gurion I; Sharett===
A 120-seat parliament, the Knesset, met first in Tel Aviv then moved to Jerusalem after the 1949 ceasefire. In January 1949, Israel held its first elections. The Socialist-Zionist parties Mapai and Mapam won the most seats (46 and 19 respectively). Mapai&#x27;s leader, David Ben-Gurion, was appointed Prime Minister, he formed a coalition which did not include Mapam who were Stalinist and loyal to the USSR (another Stalinist party, non-Zionist Maki won 4 seats). This was a significant decision, as it signaled that Israel would not be in the Soviet bloc. The Knesset elected Chaim Weizmann as the first (largely ceremonial) President of Israel. Hebrew and Arabic were made the official languages of the new state. All governments have been coalitions—no party has ever won a majority in the Knesset. From 1948 until 1977 all governments were led by Mapai and the Alignment, predecessors of the Labour Party. In those years Labour Zionists, initially led by David Ben-Gurion, dominated Israeli politics and the economy was run on primarily socialist lines.

Within three years (1948 to 1951), immigration doubled the Jewish population of Israel and left an indelible imprint on Israeli society. Overall, 700,000 Jews settled in Israel during this period. Some 300,000 arrived from Asian and North African nations as part of the Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries. Among them, the largest group (over 100,000) was from Iraq. The rest of the immigrants were from Europe, including more than 270,000 who came from Eastern Europe, mainly Romania and Poland (over 100,000 each). Nearly all the Jewish immigrants could be described as refugees, however only 136,000 who immigrated to Israel from Central Europe, had international certification because they belonged to the 250,000 Jews registered by the allies as displaced after World War II and living in displaced persons camps in Germany, Austria and Italy.

In 1950 the Knesset passed the Law of Return, which granted to all Jews and those of Jewish ancestry (Jewish grandparent), and their spouses, the right to settle in Israel and gain citizenship. That year, 50,000 Yemenite Jews (99%) were secretly flown to Israel in Operation Magic Carpet. In 1951 Iraqi Jews were granted temporary permission to leave the country and 120,000 (over 90%) opted to move to Israel as part of Operation Ezra and Nehemiah. Jews also fled from Lebanon, Syria and Egypt. By the late sixties, about 500,000 Jews had left Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia. Over the course of twenty years, some 850,000 Jews from Arab countries (99%) relocated to Israel (680,000), France and the Americas. The land and property left behind by the Jews (much of it in Arab city centres) is still a matter of some dispute. Today there are about 9,000 Jews living in Arab states, of whom 75% live in Morocco and 15% in Tunisia. Vast assets, approximately $150 billion worth of goods and property (before inflation) were left behind in these countries.
Between 1948 and 1958, the population of Israel rose from 800,000 to two million. During this period, food, clothes and furniture had to be rationed in what became known as the Austerity Period (&quot;Tkufat haTsena&quot;). Immigrants were mostly refugees with no money or possessions and many were housed in temporary camps known as ma&#x27;abarot. By 1952, over 200,000 immigrants were living in tents or prefabricated shacks built by the government. Israel received financial aid from private donations from outside the country (mainly the United States). The pressure on the new state&#x27;s finances led Ben-Gurion to sign a controversial reparations agreement with West Germany. During the Knesset debate some 5,000 demonstrators gathered and riot police had to cordon the building. Israel received several billion marks and in return agreed to open diplomatic relations with Germany.

In 1949, education was made free and compulsory for all citizens until the age of 14. The state now funded the party-affiliated Zionist education system and a new body created by the Haredi Agudat Israel party. A separate body was created to provide education for the remaining Palestinian-Arab population. The major political parties now competed for immigrants to join their education systems. The government banned the existing educational bodies from the transit camps and tried to mandate a unitary secular socialist education under the control of &quot;camp managers&quot; who also had to provide work, food and housing for the immigrants. There were attempts to force orthodox Yemenite children to adopt a secular life style by teachers, including many instances of Yemenite children having their side-curls cut by teachers. The Yemenite Children Affair led to the first Israeli public inquiry (the Fromkin Inquiry), the collapse of the coalition, and an election in 1951.

In its early years Israel sought to maintain a non-aligned position between the super-powers. However, in 1952, an antisemitic public trial was staged in Moscow in which a group of Jewish doctors were accused of trying to poison Stalin (the Doctors&#x27; plot), followed by a similar trial in Czechoslovakia (Slánský trial). This, and the failure of Israel to be included in the Bandung Conference of 1955 (of non-aligned states), effectively ended Israel&#x27;s pursuit of non-alignment.

On 19 May 1950, in contravention of international law, Egypt announced that the Suez Canal was closed to Israeli ships and commerce. In 1952 a military coup in Egypt brought Abdel Nasser to power. The United States pursued close relations with the new Arab states, particularly the Nasser-led Egyptian Free Officers Movement and Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia. Israel&#x27;s solution to diplomatic isolation was to establish good relations with newly independent states in Africa and with France, which was engaged in the Algerian War.

In the January 1955 elections Mapai won 40 seats and the Labour Party 10, Moshe Sharett became prime minister of Israel at the head of a left-wing coalition. Between 1953 and 1956, there were intermittent clashes along all of Israel&#x27;s borders as Arab terrorism and breaches of the ceasefire resulting in Israeli counter-raids. Palestinian fedayeen attacks, often organized and sponsored by the Egyptians, were made from (Egyptian) occupied Gaza. Fedayeen attacks led to a growing cycle of violence as Israel launched reprisal attacks against Gaza. In 1954 the Uzi submachine gun first entered use by the Israel Defense Forces. In 1955 the Egyptian government began recruiting former Nazi rocket scientists for a missile program.

Sharett&#x27;s government was brought down by the Lavon Affair, a crude plan to disrupt US–Egyptian relations, involving Israeli agents planting bombs at American sites in Egypt. The plan failed when eleven agents were arrested. Defense Minister Lavon was blamed despite his denial of responsibility. The Lavon affair led to Sharett&#x27;s resignation and Ben-Gurion returned to the post of prime minister.

===1955–1963: Ben-Gurion II===
In 1955 Egypt concluded a massive arms deal with Czechoslovakia, upsetting the balance of power in the Middle East. In 1956, the increasingly pro-Soviet President Nasser of Egypt, announced the nationalization of the (French and British owned) Suez Canal, which was Egypt&#x27;s main source of foreign currency. Egypt also blockaded the Gulf of Aqaba preventing Israeli access to the Red Sea. Israel made a secret agreement with the French at Sèvres to co-ordinate military operations against Egypt. Britain and France had already begun secret preparations for military action. It has been alleged that the French also agreed to build a nuclear plant for the Israelis and that by 1968 this was able to produce nuclear weapons. Britain and France arranged for Israel to give them a pretext for seizing the Suez Canal. Israel was to attack Egypt, and Britain and France would then call on both sides to withdraw. When, as expected, the Egyptians refused, Anglo-French forces would invade to take control of the Canal.
Israeli forces, commanded by General Moshe Dayan, launched Operation Kadesh against Egypt on 29 October 1956. On 30 October Britain and France made their pre-arranged call for both sides to stop fighting and withdraw from the Canal area, and for them to be allowed to take up positions at key points on the Canal. Egypt refused and the allies commenced air strikes on 31 October aimed at neutralizing the Egyptian air force. By 5 November the Israelis had overrun the Sinai. The Anglo-French invasion began that day. There was uproar in the UN, with the United States and USSR for once in agreement in denouncing the actions of Israel, Britain and France. A demand for a ceasefire was reluctantly accepted on 7 November.

At Egypt&#x27;s request, the UN sent an Emergency Force (UNEF), consisting of 6,000 peacekeeping troops from 10 nations to supervise the ceasefire. This was the first ever UN peacekeeping operation. From 15 November the UN troops marked out a zone across the Sinai to separate the Israeli and Egyptian forces. Upon receiving US guarantees of Israeli access to the Suez Canal, freedom of access out of the Gulf of Aqaba and Egyptian action to stop Palestinian raids from Gaza, the Israelis withdrew to the Negev. In practice the Suez Canal remained closed to Israeli shipping. The conflict marked the end of West-European dominance in the Middle East. Nasser emerged as the victor in the conflict, having won the political battle.

In 1956, two modern-orthodox (and religious-zionist) parties, Mizrachi and Hapoel HaMizrachi, joined to form the National Religious Party. The party was a component of every Israeli coalition until 1992, usually running the Ministry of Education. Mapai was once again victorious in the 1959 elections, increasing its number of seats to 47, Labour had 7. Ben-Gurion remained Prime Minister.
Rudolph Kastner, a minor political functionary, was accused of collaborating with the Nazis and sued his accuser. Kastner lost the trial and was assassinated two years later. In 1958 the Supreme Court exonerated him. In May 1960 Adolf Eichmann, one of the chief administrators of the Nazi Holocaust, was located in Argentina by the Mossad, later kidnapping him and bringing him to Israel. In 1961 he was put on trial, and after several months found guilty and sentenced to death. He was hanged in 1962 and is the only person ever sentenced to death by an Israeli court. Testimonies by Holocaust survivors at the trial and the extensive publicity that surrounded it has led the trial to be considered a turning point in public awareness of the Holocaust.

In 1961 a Herut no-confidence motion over the resurfaced Lavon affair led to Ben-Gurion&#x27;s resignation. Ben-Gurion declared that he would only accept office if Lavon was fired from the position of the head of Histadrut, Israel&#x27;s labour union organization. His demands were accepted and Mapai won the 1961 election (42 seats keeping Ben-Gurion as PM) with a slight reduction in its share of the seats. Menachem Begin&#x27;s Herut party and the Liberals came next with 17 seats each. In 1962 the Mossad began assassinating German rocket scientists working in Egypt in Operation Damocles after one of them reported the missile program was designed to carry chemical warheads. This action was condemned by Ben-Gurion and led to the Mossad director, Isser Harel, resignation. In 1963 Ben-Gurion quit again over the Lavon affair. His attempts to make his party Mapai support him over the issue failed. Levi Eshkol became leader of Mapai and the new prime minister.

===1963–1969: Eshkol===
In 1963 Yigael Yadin began excavating Masada. In 1964, Egypt, Jordan and Syria developed a unified military command. Israel completed work on a national water carrier, a huge engineering project designed to transfer Israel&#x27;s allocation of the Jordan river&#x27;s waters towards the south of the country in realization of Ben-Gurion&#x27;s dream of mass Jewish settlement of the Negev desert. The Arabs responded by trying to divert the headwaters of the Jordan, leading to growing conflict between Israel and Syria.

Ben-Gurion quit Mapai to form the new party Rafi, he was joined by Shimon Peres and Moshe Dayan. Begin&#x27;s Herut party joined with the Liberals to form Gahal. Mapai and Labour united for the 1965 elections, winning 45 seats and maintaining Levi Eshkol as Prime Minister. Ben-Gurion&#x27;s Rafi party received 10 seats, Gahal got 26 seats becoming the second largest party.

Until 1966, Israel&#x27;s principal arms supplier was France, however in 1966, following the withdrawal from Algeria, Charles de Gaulle announced France would cease supplying Israel with arms (and refused to refund money paid for 50 warplanes). On 5 February 1966, the United States announced that it was taking over the former French and West German obligations, to maintain military &quot;stabilization&quot; in the Middle East. Included in the military hardware would be over 200 M48 tanks. In May of that year the US also agreed to provide A-4 Skyhawk tactical aircraft to Israel. In 1966 security restrictions placed on Arab-Israelis were eased and efforts made to integrate them into Israeli life.

In 1966, black-and-white TV broadcasts began. On 15 May 1967, the first public performance of Naomi Shemer&#x27;s classic song &quot;Jerusalem of Gold&quot; took place and over the next few weeks it dominated the Israeli airwaves. Two days later Syria, Egypt and Jordan amassed troops along the Israeli borders, and Egypt closed the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping. Nasser demanded that the UNEF leave Sinai, threatening escalation to a full war. Egyptian radio broadcasts talked of a coming genocide. On 26 May Nasser declared, &quot;The battle will be a general one and our basic objective will be to destroy Israel&quot;. Israel considered the Straits of Tiran closure a Casus belli. Egypt, Syria, Jordan and Iraq signed defence pacts and Iraqi troops began deploying to Jordan, Syria and Egypt. Algeria also announced that it would send troops to Egypt. Between 1963 and 1967 Egyptian troops had tested chemical weapons on Yemenite civilians as part of an Egyptian intervention in support of rebels.

On the morning before Dayan was sworn in, 5 June 1967, the Israeli air force launched Operation Focus, a series of pre-emptive attacks in which it pre-emptively attacked the Egyptian air force, kicking off the Six-Day War, and then, later the same day, struck the air forces of Jordan and Syria. By 11 June the Arab forces were routed and all parties had accepted the cease-fire called for by UN Security Council Resolutions 235 and 236. Israel gained control of the Sinai Peninsula, the Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights, and the formerly Jordanian-controlled West Bank of the Jordan River. East Jerusalem was annexed by Israel.

The result of the 29 August 1967 Arab League summit was the Khartoum Resolution, which according to Abd al Azim Ramadan, left only one option – a war with Israel.

In 1968 Moshe Levinger led a group of Religious Zionists who created the first Jewish settlement, a town near Hebron called Kiryat Arba. There were no other religious settlements until after 1974. Ben-Gurion&#x27;s Rafi party merged with the Labour-Mapai alliance. Ben-Gurion remained outside as an independent. In 1968, compulsory education was extended until the age of 16 for all citizens (it had been 14) and the government embarked on an extensive program of integration in education. In the major cities children from mainly Sephardi/Mizrahi neighbourhoods were bused to newly established middle schools in better areas. The system remained in place until after 2000.

In March 1968, Israeli forces attacked the Palestinian militia, Fatah, at its base in the Jordanian town of Karameh. The attack was in response to land mines placed on Israeli roads. The Israelis retreated after destroying the camp, however the Israelis sustained unexpectedly high casualties and the attack was not viewed as a success. Despite heavy casualties, the Palestinians claimed victory, while Fatah and the PLO (of which it formed part) became famous across the Arab world. In early 1969, fighting broke out between Egypt and Israel along the Suez Canal. In retaliation for repeated Egyptian shelling of Israeli positions along the Suez Canal, Israeli planes made deep strikes into Egypt in the 1969–1970 &quot;War of Attrition&quot;.

===1969–1974: Meir===
In early 1969, Levi Eshkol died in office of a heart attack and Golda Meir became Prime Minister with the largest percentage of the vote ever won by an Israeli party, winning 56 of the 120 seats after the 1969 election. Meir was the first female prime minister of Israel and the first woman to have headed a Middle Eastern state in modern times. Gahal retained its 26 seats, and was the second largest party.

In September 1970 King Hussein of Jordan drove the Palestine Liberation Organization out of his country. On 18 September 1970, Syrian tanks invaded Jordan, intending to aid the PLO. At the request of the US, Israel moved troops to the border and threatened Syria, causing the Syrians to withdraw. The centre of PLO activity then shifted to Lebanon, where the 1969 Cairo agreement gave the Palestinians autonomy within the south of the country. The area controlled by the PLO became known by the international press and locals as &quot;Fatahland&quot; and contributed to the 1975–1990 Lebanese Civil War. The event also led to Hafez al-Assad taking power in Syria. Egyptian President Nasser died of a heart attack immediately after and was succeeded by Anwar Sadat.

Increased Soviet antisemitism and enthusiasm generated by the 1967 victory led to a wave of Soviet Jews applying to emigrate to Israel. Most Jews were refused exit visas and persecuted by the authorities. Some were arrested, becoming known as Prisoners of Zion. During 1971, violent demonstrations by the Israeli Black Panthers, made the Israeli public aware of resentment among Mizrahi Jews at ongoing discrimination and social gaps. In 1972 the US Jewish Mafia leader, Meyer Lansky, who had taken refuge in Israel, was deported to the United States.

At the 1972 Munich Olympics, two members of the Israeli team were killed, and nine members taken hostage by Palestinian terrorists. A botched German rescue attempt led to the death of the rest along with five of the eight hijackers. The three surviving Palestinians were released by the West German authorities eight weeks later without charge, in exchange for the hostages of hijacked Lufthansa Flight 615. The Israeli government responded with an air raid, a raid on the PLO headquarters in Lebanon (led by future Prime Minister, Ehud Barak) and an assassination campaign against the organizers of the massacre.

In 1972 the new Egyptian President Anwar Sadat expelled the Soviet advisers from Egypt. This and frequent invasion exercises by Egypt and Syria led to Israeli complacency about the threat from these countries. In addition the desire not to be held responsible for initiating conflict and an election campaign highlighting security, led to an Israeli failure to mobilize, despite receiving warnings of an impending attack.
The Yom Kippur War (also known as the October War) began on 6 October 1973, with the Syrian and Egyptian armies launching a surprise attack against the unprepared Israeli Defense Forces. Both the Soviets and the Americans (at the orders of Henry Kissinger) rushed arms to their allies in Operation Nickel Grass. The Syrians were repulsed at the Valley of Tears on the Golan and, while the Egyptians captured a strip of territory in Sinai, but were outflanked by Israeli forces over the Suez Canal in the Battle of Ismailia, which trapped the Egyptian Third Army in Sinai. On 18 January 1974, US diplomatic efforts led to a Disengagement of Forces agreement with the Egyptian government and on 31 May with the Syrian government.

The war was the catalyst for the 1973 oil crisis, a Saudi-led oil embargo in conjunction with OPEC against countries trading with Israel. Severe shortages led to massive increases in the price of oil, and as a result, many countries broke off relations with Israel or downgraded relations, and Israel was banned from participation in the Asian Games and other Asian sporting events.

Prior to the December 1973 elections, Gahal and a number of right-wing parties united to form the Likud (led by Begin). In the December 1973 elections, Labour won 51 seats, leaving Golda Meir as Prime Minister. The Likud won 39 seats.

In May 1974, Palestinians attacked a school in Ma&#x27;alot, holding 102 children hostage. Twenty-two children were killed. In November 1974 the PLO was granted observer status at the UN and Yasser Arafat addressed the General Assembly. Later that year, the Agranat Commission, appointed to assess responsibility for Israel&#x27;s lack of preparedness for the war, exonerated the government of responsibility, and held the Chief of Staff and head of military intelligence responsible. Despite the report, public anger at the Government led to Golda Meir&#x27;s resignation.

===1974–1977: Rabin I===

Following Meir&#x27;s resignation, Yitzhak Rabin became prime minister. Religious Zionist followers of the teachings of Abraham Isaac Kook, formed the Gush Emunim movement, and began an organized drive to settle the West Bank and Gaza Strip. In November 1975, the United Nations General Assembly, under the guidance of Austrian Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, adopted Resolution 3379, which asserted Zionism to be a form of racism. The General Assembly rescinded this resolution in December 1991 with Resolution 46/86. In March 1976, there was a massive strike by Israeli-Arabs in protest at a government plan to expropriate land in the Galilee.

In July 1976, Rabin ordered Operation Entebbe to rescue kidnapped Jewish passengers from an Air France flight hijacked by PFLP militants and German revolutionaries and flown to Uganda.

In January 1977, French authorities arrested Abu Daoud, the planner of the Munich massacre, releasing him a few days later. In March 1977 Anatoly Sharansky, a prominent Refusenik and spokesman for the Moscow Helsinki Group, was sentenced to 13 years&#x27; hard labour.

Rabin resigned in April 1977 after it emerged that his wife maintained a dollar account in the United States (illegal at the time), which had been opened while Rabin was Israeli ambassador. The incident became known as the Dollar Account affair. Shimon Peres informally replaced him as prime minister, leading the Alignment in the subsequent elections.

===1977–1983: Begin===
In a surprise result, the Likud led by Menachem Begin won 43 seats in the 1977 elections. This was the first time in Israeli history that the government was not led by the left. In November 1977, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat visited Jerusalem and spoke at the Knesset at the invitation of Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin. Sadat recognized Israel&#x27;s right to exist and established the basis for direct negotiations between Egypt and Israel. Following Sadat&#x27;s visit, 350 Yom Kippur War veterans organized the Peace Now movement to encourage Israeli governments to make peace with the Arabs.

In March 1978, eleven armed Lebanese Palestinians reached Israel in boats and carried out the Coastal Road Massacre in opposition to the Egyptian–Israeli peace process. Three days later, Israeli forces crossed into Lebanon beginning Operation Litani. After passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 425, calling for Israeli withdrawal and the creation of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) peace-keeping force, Israel withdrew its troops.

In September 1978, US President Jimmy Carter invited President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin to meet with him at Camp David, and on 11 September they agreed on a framework for peace between Israel and Egypt, and a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. It set out broad principles to guide negotiations between Israel and the Arab states. It also established guidelines for a West Bank–Gaza transitional regime of full autonomy for the Palestinians residing in these territories, and for a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. The treaty was signed 26 March 1979 by Begin and Sadat, with President Carter signing as witness. Under the treaty, Israel returned the Sinai peninsula to Egypt in April 1982. The Arab League reacted to the peace treaty by suspending Egypt from the organization and moving its headquarters from Cairo to Tunis. Sadat was assassinated in 1981 by Islamic fundamentalist members of the Egyptian army who opposed peace with Israel. Following the agreement Israel and Egypt became the two largest recipients of US military and financial aid (Iraq and Afghanistan have now overtaken them).

In December 1978 the Israeli Merkava battle tank entered use with the IDF. In 1979, over 40,000 Iranian Jews migrated to Israel, escaping the Islamic Revolution there. On 30 June 1981, the Israeli air force destroyed the Osirak nuclear reactor in Operation Opera that France was building for Iraq. Three weeks later, Begin won again, in the 1981 elections (48 seats Likud, 47 Labour). Ariel Sharon was made defence minister. The new government annexed the Golan Heights and banned the national airline from flying on Shabbat. By the 1980s a diverse set of high-tech industries had developed in Israel.

In the decades following the 1948 war, Israel&#x27;s border with Lebanon was quiet compared to its borders with other neighbours. But the 1969 Cairo agreement gave the PLO a free hand to attack Israel from South Lebanon. The area was governed by the PLO independently of the Lebanese Government and became known as &quot;Fatahland&quot; (Fatah was the largest faction in the PLO). Palestinian irregulars constantly shelled the Israeli north, especially the town of Kiryat Shmona, which was a Likud stronghold inhabited primarily by Jews who had fled the Arab world. Lack of control over Palestinian areas was an important factor in causing civil war in Lebanon.

In June 1982, the attempted assassination of Shlomo Argov, the ambassador to Britain, was used as a pretext for an Israeli invasion aiming to drive the PLO out of the southern half of Lebanon. Sharon agreed with Chief of Staff Raphael Eitan to expand the invasion deep into Lebanon even though the cabinet had only authorized a 40 kilometre deep invasion. The invasion became known as the 1982 Lebanon War and the Israeli army occupied Beirut, the only time an Arab capital has been occupied by Israel. Some of the Shia and Christian population of South Lebanon welcomed the Israelis, as PLO forces had maltreated them, but Lebanese resentment of Israeli occupation grew over time and the Shia became gradually radicalized under Iranian guidance. Constant casualties among Israeli soldiers and Lebanese civilians led to growing opposition to the war in Israel.

In August 1982, the PLO withdrew its forces from Lebanon (moving to Tunisia). Bashir Gemayel was elected President of Lebanon, and reportedly agreed to recognize Israel and sign a peace treaty. However, Gemayal was assassinated before an agreement could be signed, and one day later Phalangist Christian forces led by Elie Hobeika entered two Palestinian refugee camps and massacred the occupants. The massacres led to the biggest demonstration ever in Israel against the war, with as many as 400,000 people (almost 10% of the population) gathering in Tel Aviv. In 1983, an Israeli public inquiry found that Israel&#x27;s defence minister, Sharon, was indirectly but personally responsible for the massacres. It also recommended that he never again be allowed to hold the post (it did not forbid him from being Prime Minister). In 1983, the May 17 Agreement was signed between Israel and Lebanon, paving the way for an Israeli withdrawal from Lebanese territory through a few stages. Israel continued to operate against the PLO until its eventual departure in 1985, and kept a small force stationed in Southern Lebanon in support of the South Lebanon Army until May 2000.

===1983–1992: Shamir I; Peres I; Shamir II===

In September 1983, Begin resigned and was succeeded by Yitzhak Shamir as prime minister. The 1984 election was inconclusive, and led to a power sharing agreement between Shimon Peres of the Alignment and Shamir of Likud. Peres was prime minister from 1984 to 1986 and Shamir from 1986 to 1988. In 1984, continual discrimination against Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox Jews by the Ashkenazi Ultra-Orthodox establishment led political activist Aryeh Deri to leave the Agudat Israel party and join former chief Rabbi Ovadia Yosef in forming Shas, a new party aimed at the non-Ashkenazi Ultra-Orthodox vote.

In June 1985, Israel withdrew most of its troops from Lebanon, leaving a residual Israeli force and an Israeli-supported militia in southern Lebanon as a &quot;security zone&quot; and buffer against attacks on its northern territory. Since then, the IDF fought for many years against the Shia organization Hezbollah, which became a growing threat to Israel. By July 1985, Israel&#x27;s inflation, buttressed by complex index linking of salaries, had reached 480% per annum and was the highest in the world. Peres introduced emergency control of prices and cut government expenditure successfully bringing inflation under control. The currency (known as the old Israeli shekel) was replaced and renamed the Israeli new shekel at a rate of 1,000 old shkalim = 1 new shekel.

Growing Israeli settlement and continuing occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip led to the First Intifada in 1987, which lasted until the Oslo accords of 1993, despite Israeli attempts to suppress it. Human rights abuses by Israeli troops led a group of Israelis to form B&#x27;Tselem, an organization devoted to improving awareness and compliance with human rights requirements in Israel.

The Alignment and Likud remained neck and neck in the 1988 elections. Shamir successfully formed a national unity coalition with the Labour Alignment. In March 1990, Alignment leader Shimon Peres engineered a defeat of the government in a non-confidence vote and then tried to form a new government. The attempt, which became known as &quot;the dirty trick&quot;, failed and Shamir became prime minister at the head of a right-wing coalition.

In August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait, triggering the Gulf War between Iraq and a large allied force, led by the United States. Iraq attacked Israel with 39 Scud missiles. Israel did not retaliate at request of the US, fearing that if Israel responded against Iraq, other Arab nations might desert the allied coalition.

The coalition&#x27;s victory in the Gulf War opened new possibilities for regional peace, and in October 1991 the US president, George H. W. Bush, and Soviet Union Premier, Mikhail Gorbachev, jointly convened a historic meeting in Madrid of Israeli, Lebanese, Jordanian, Syrian, and Palestinian leaders. Shamir opposed the idea but agreed in return for loan guarantees to help with absorption of immigrants from the former Soviet Union. His participation in the conference led to the collapse of his (right-wing) coalition.

===1992–1996: Rabin II; Peres II===
In the 1992 elections, the Labour Party, led by Yitzhak Rabin, won a significant victory (44 seats) promising to pursue peace while promoting Rabin as a &quot;tough general&quot; and pledging not to deal with the PLO in any way. The left Zionist party Meretz won 12 seats, and the Arab and communist parties a further 5, meaning that parties supporting a peace treaty had a full (albeit small) majority in the Knesset.
On 25 July 1993, Israel carried out a week-long military operation in Lebanon to attack Hezbollah positions dubbed Operation Accountability. On 13 September 1993, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) signed the Oslo Accords (a Declaration of Principles) on the South Lawn of the White House. The principles established objectives relating to a transfer of authority from Israel to an interim Palestinian Authority, as a prelude to a final treaty establishing a Palestinian state, in exchange for mutual recognition. The DOP established May 1999 as the date by which a permanent status agreement for the West Bank and Gaza Strip would take effect. In February 1994, Baruch Goldstein, a follower of the Kach party, killed 29 Palestinians and wounded 125 at the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron, which became known as the Cave of the Patriarchs massacre. Kach had been barred from participation in the 1992 elections (on the grounds that the movement was racist). It was subsequently made illegal. Israel and the PLO signed the Gaza–Jericho Agreement in May 1994, and the Agreement on Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities in August, which began the process of transferring authority from Israel to the Palestinians. On 25 July 1994, Jordan and Israel signed the Washington Declaration, which formally ended the state of war that had existed between them since 1948 and on 26 October the Israel–Jordan Treaty of Peace, witnessed by US President Bill Clinton.

Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat signed the Israeli–Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip on 28 September 1995 in Washington. The agreement was witnessed by President Bill Clinton on behalf of the United States and by Russia, Egypt, Norway and the European Union, and incorporates and supersedes the previous agreements, marking the conclusion of the first stage of negotiations between Israel and the PLO. The agreement allowed the PLO leadership to relocate to the occupied territories and granted autonomy to the Palestinians with talks to follow regarding final status. In return the Palestinians promised to abstain from use of terror and changed the Palestinian National Covenant, which had called for the expulsion of all Jews who migrated after 1917 and the elimination of Israel.

The agreement was opposed by Hamas and other Palestinian factions, which launched suicide bomber attacks at Israel. Rabin had a barrier constructed around Gaza to prevent attacks. The growing separation between Israel and the &quot;Palestinian Territories&quot; led to a labour shortage in Israel, mainly in the construction industry. Israeli firms began importing labourers from the Philippines, Thailand, China and Romania; some of these labourers stayed on without visas. In addition, a growing number of Africans began illegally migrating to Israel. On 4 November 1995, a far-right-wing religious Zionist opponent of the Oslo Accords assassinated Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. In February 1996 Rabin&#x27;s successor, Shimon Peres, called early elections. In April 1996, Israel launched Operation Grapes of Wrath in southern Lebanon as a result of Hezbollah&#x27;s Katyusha rocket attacks on Israeli population centres along the border.

===1996–2001: Netanyahu I; Barak===
The May 1996 elections were the first featuring direct election of the prime minister and resulted in a narrow election victory for Likud leader Binyamin Netanyahu. A spate of suicide bombings reinforced the Likud position for security. Hamas claimed responsibility for most of the bombings. Despite his stated differences with the Oslo Accords, Prime Minister Netanyahu continued their implementation, but his prime ministership saw a marked slow-down in the Peace Process. Netanyahu also pledged to gradually reduce US aid to Israel.

In September 1996, a Palestinian riot broke out against the creation of an exit in the Western Wall tunnel. Over the subsequent few weeks, around 80 people were killed as a result. In January 1997 Netanyahu signed the Hebron Protocol with the Palestinian Authority, resulting in the redeployment of Israeli forces in Hebron and the turnover of civilian authority in much of the area to the Palestinian Authority.

In the election of July 1999, Ehud Barak of the Labour Party became Prime Minister. His party was the largest in the Knesset with 26 seats. In September 1999 the Supreme Court of Israel ruled that the use of torture in interrogation of Palestinian prisoners was illegal. On 21 March 2000, Pope John Paul II arrived in Israel for an historic visit.

On 25 May 2000, Israel unilaterally withdrew its remaining forces from the &quot;security zone&quot; in southern Lebanon. Several thousand members of the South Lebanon Army (and their families) left with the Israelis. The UN Secretary-General concluded that, as of 16 June 2000, Israel had withdrawn its forces from Lebanon in accordance with UN Security Council Resolution 425. Lebanon claims that Israel continues to occupy Lebanese territory called &quot;Sheba&#x27;a Farms&quot; (however this area was governed by Syria until 1967 when Israel took control). The Sheba&#x27;a Farms provided Hezbollah with a pretext to maintain warfare with Israel. The Lebanese government, in contravention of the UN Security Council resolution, did not assert sovereignty in the area, which came under Hezbollah control. In the Fall of 2000, talks were held at Camp David to reach a final agreement on the Israel/Palestine conflict. Ehud Barak offered to meet most of the Palestinian teams requests for territory and political concessions, including Arab parts of east Jerusalem; however, Arafat abandoned the talks without making a counterproposal.

Following its withdrawal from South Lebanon, Israel became a member of the Western European and Others Group at the United Nations. Prior to this Israel was the only nation at the UN which was not a member of any group (the Arab states would not allow it to join the Asia group), which meant it could not be a member of the Security Council or appoint anyone to the International Court and other key UN roles. Since December 2013 it has been a permanent member of the group.

On 28 September 2000, Israeli opposition leader Ariel Sharon visited the Al-Aqsa compound, or Temple Mount, the following day the Palestinians launched the al-Aqsa Intifada. David Samuels and Khaled Abu Toameh have stated that the uprising was planned much earlier.

In 2001, with the Peace Process increasingly in disarray, Ehud Barak called a special election for Prime Minister. Barak hoped a victory would give him renewed authority in negotiations with the Palestinians. Instead opposition leader Ariel Sharon was elected PM. After this election, the system of directly electing the Premier was abandoned.

===2001–2006: Sharon===

The failure of the peace process, increased Palestinian terror and occasional attacks by Hezbollah from Lebanon, led much of the Israeli public and political leadership to lose confidence in the Palestinian Authority as a peace partner. Most felt that many Palestinians viewed the peace treaty with Israel as a temporary measure only. Many Israelis were thus anxious to disengage from the Palestinians. In response to a wave of suicide bomb attacks, culminating in the Passover massacre (see List of Israeli civilian casualties in the Second Intifada), Israel launched Operation Defensive Shield in March 2002, and Sharon began the construction of a barrier around the West Bank. Around the same time, the Israeli town of Sderot and other Israeli communities near Gaza became subject to constant shelling and mortar bomb attacks from Gaza.

Thousands of Jews from Latin America began arriving in Israel due to economic crises in their countries of origin. In January 2003 separate elections were held for the Knesset. Likud won the most seats (27). An anti-religion party, Shinui, led by media pundit Tommy Lapid, won 15 seats on a secularist platform, making it the third largest party (ahead of orthodox Shas). Internal fighting led to Shinui&#x27;s demise at the next election. In 2004, the Black Hebrews were granted permanent residency in Israel. The group had begun migrating to Israel 25 years earlier from the United States, but had not been recognized as Jews by the state and hence not granted citizenship under Israel&#x27;s Law of Return. They had settled in Israel without official status. From 2004 onwards, they received citizen&#x27;s rights.

In 2005, all Jewish settlers were evacuated from Gaza (some forcibly) and their homes demolished. Disengagement from the Gaza Strip was completed on 12 September 2005. Military disengagement from the northern West Bank was completed ten days later.

In 2005 Sharon left the Likud and formed a new party called Kadima, which accepted that the peace process would lead to creation of a Palestinian state. He was joined by many leading figures from both Likud and Labour.

Hamas won the 2006 Palestinian legislative election, the first and only genuinely free Palestinian elections. Hamas&#x27; leaders rejected all agreements signed with Israel, refused to recognize Israel&#x27;s right to exist, refused to abandon terror, and occasionally claimed the Holocaust was a Jewish conspiracy. The withdrawal and Hamas victory left the status of Gaza unclear, as Israel asserted it was no longer an occupying power but continued to control air and sea access to Gaza although it did not exercise sovereignty on the ground. Egypt insisted that it was still occupied and refused to open border crossings with Gaza, although it was free to do so.

In April 2006 Ariel Sharon was incapacitated by a severe hemorrhagic stroke and Ehud Olmert became Prime Minister.

===2006–2009: Olmert===
Ehud Olmert was elected Prime Minister after his party, Kadima, won the most seats (29) in the 2006 Israeli legislative election. In 2005 Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was officially elected president of Iran; since then, Iranian policy towards Israel has grown more confrontational.

On 14 March 2006, Israel carried out Operation Bringing Home the Goods in the Palestinian Authority prison of Jericho in order to capture Ahmad Sa&#x27;adat and several Palestinian Arab prisoners located there who assassinated Israeli politician Rehavam Ze&#x27;evi in 2001. The operation was conducted as a result of the expressed intentions of the newly elected Hamas government to release these prisoners. On 25 June 2006, a Hamas force crossed the border from Gaza and attacked a tank, capturing Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, sparking clashes in Gaza.
On 12 July, Hezbollah attacked Israel from Lebanon, shelled Israeli towns and attacked a border patrol, taking two dead or badly wounded Israeli soldiers. These incidents led Israel to initiate the Second Lebanon War, which lasted through August 2006. Israeli forces entered some villages in Southern Lebanon, while the air force attacked targets all across the country. Israel only made limited ground gains until the launch of Operation Changing Direction 11, which lasted for 3 days with disputed results. Shortly before a UN ceasefire came into effect, Israeli troops captured Wadi Saluki. The war concluded with Hezbollah evacuating its forces from Southern Lebanon, while the IDF remained until its positions could be handed over to the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL.

In June 2007 Hamas took control of the Gaza Strip in the course of the Battle of Gaza, seizing government institutions and replacing Fatah and other government officials with its own. Following the takeover, Egypt and Israel imposed a partial blockade, on the grounds that Fatah had fled and was no longer providing security on the Palestinian side, and to prevent arms smuggling by terrorist groups. On 6 September 2007, the Israeli Air Force destroyed a nuclear reactor in Syria in Operation Orchard. On 28 February 2008, Israel launched Operation Hot Winter in Gaza in response to the constant firing of Qassam rockets by Hamas militants. On 16 July 2008, Hezbollah swapped the bodies of Israeli soldiers Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev, kidnapped in 2006, in exchange for the Lebanese terrorist Samir Kuntar, four Hezbollah prisoners, and the bodies of 199 Palestinian Arab and Lebanese fighters.

Olmert came under investigation for corruption and this led him to announce on 30 July 2008, that he would be stepping down as Prime Minister following election of a new leader of the Kadima party in September 2008. Tzipi Livni won the election, but was unable to form a coalition and Olmert remained in office until the general election. Israel carried out Operation Cast Lead in the Gaza Strip from 27 December 2008 to 18 January 2009 in response to rocket attacks from Hamas militants, leading to a decrease of Palestinian rocket attacks.

===2009–2021: Netanyahu II===
In the 2009 legislative election Likud won 27 seats and Kadima 28; however, the right-wing camp won a majority of seats, and President Shimon Peres called on Netanyahu to form the government. Russian immigrant-dominated Yisrael Beiteinu came third with 15 seats, and Labour was reduced to fourth place with 13 seats. In 2009, Israeli billionaire Yitzhak Tshuva announced the discovery of huge natural gas reserves off the coast of Israel.

On 31 May 2010, an international incident broke out in the Mediterranean Sea when foreign activists trying to break the maritime blockade over Gaza, clashed with Israeli troops. During the struggle, nine Turkish activists were killed. In late September 2010 took place direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians without success. As a defensive countermeasure to the rocket threat against Israel&#x27;s civilian population, at the end of March 2011 Israel began to operate the advanced mobile air defence system &quot;Iron Dome&quot; in the southern region of Israel and along the border with the Gaza Strip.

On 14 July 2011, the 2011 Israeli housing protests, in which hundreds of thousands of protesters from a variety of socio-economic and religious backgrounds in Israel protested against the continuing rise in the cost of living (particularly housing) and the deterioration of public services in the country (such as health and education). It was the largest social protest in the history of Israel, and peaked on 3 September 2011, when about 400,000 people demonstrated across the country.

In October 2011, a deal was reached between Israel and Hamas, by which the kidnapped Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit was released in exchange for 1,027 Palestinians and Arab-Israeli prisoners. In March 2012, Secretary-general of the Popular Resistance Committees, Zuhir al-Qaisi, a senior PRC member and two additional Palestinian militants were assassinated during a targeted killing carried out by Israeli forces in Gaza.

In May 2012, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu reached an agreement with the Head of Opposition Shaul Mofaz for Kadima to join the government, thus cancelling the early election supposed to be held in September. However, in July, the Kadima party left Netanyahu&#x27;s government due to a dispute concerning military conscription for ultra-Orthodox Jews in Israel.

In response to over a hundred rocket attacks on southern Israeli cities, Israel began Operation Pillar of Defense in Gaza on 14 November 2012, with the targeted killing of Ahmed Jabari, chief of Hamas military wing, and airstrikes against twenty underground sites housing long-range missile launchers capable of striking Tel Aviv. In January 2013, construction of the barrier on the Israeli–Egyptian border was completed in its main section.

Benjamin Netanyahu was elected Prime Minister again after the Likud Yisrael Beiteinu alliance won the most seats (31) in the 2013 legislative election and formed a coalition government with secular centrist Yesh Atid party (19), rightist The Jewish Home (12) and Livni&#x27;s Hatnuah (6), excluding Haredi parties. Labour came in third with 15 seats. In July 2013, as a &quot;good will gesture&quot; to restart peace talks with the Palestinian Authority, Israel agreed to release 104 Palestinian prisoners, most of whom had been in jail since before the 1993 Oslo Accords, including militants who had killed Israeli civilians. In April 2014, Israel suspended peace talks after Hamas and Fatah agreed to form a unity government.

Following an escalation of rocket attacks by Hamas, Israel started Operation Protective Edge in the Gaza Strip on 8 July 2014, which included a ground incursion aimed at destroying the cross-border tunnels. Differences over the budget and a &quot;Jewish state&quot; bill triggered early elections in December 2014. After the 2015 Israeli elections, Netanyahu renewed his mandate as Prime Minister when Likud obtained 30 seats and formed a right-wing coalition government with Kulanu (10), The Jewish Home (8), and Orthodox parties Shas (7) and United Torah Judaism (6), the bare minimum of seats required to form a coalition. The Zionist Union alliance came second with 24 seats. A wave of lone-wolf attacks by Palestinians took place in 2015 and 2016, particularly stabbings.

On 6 December 2017, President Donald Trump formally announced United States recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, which was followed by the United States recognition of the Golan Heights as part of Israel on 25 March 2019. In March 2018, Palestinians in Gaza initiated &quot;the Great March of Return,&quot; a series of weekly protests along the Gaza–Israel border.

The COVID-19 pandemic began in Israel with the first case detected in February 2020 and the first death being that of a Holocaust survivor in March 2020. Israel Shield was the government&#x27;s program to combat against the virus. Nationwide lockdowns and mask mandates were present throughout the country for much of 2020 into 2021, with the vaccination campaign beginning in December 2020 along with green passes.

In late 2020, Israel normalised relations with four Arab League countries: the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain in September (known as the Abraham Accords), Sudan in October, and Morocco in December. In May 2021, after tensions escalated in Jerusalem, Israel launched Operation Guardian of the Walls, trading blows with Hamas for eleven days.

The 2019–2022 political crisis featured political instability in Israel leading to five elections to the Knesset over a 4-year time period. The April 2019 and September 2019 elections saw no party able to form a coalition leading to the March 2020 election. This election again looked to result in deadlock, but due to the worsening COVID-19 pandemic, Netanyahu, and Blue and White leader, Benny Gantz, were able to establish a unity government with a planned rotating prime ministership where Netanyahu would serve first and later be replaced by Gantz. The coalition failed by December due to a dispute over the budget and new elections were called for March 2021.

===2021–present: Bennett; Lapid; Netanyahu III===

Following the March 2021 election, Naftali Bennett signed a coalition agreement with Yair Lapid and different parties opposed to Netanyahu on the right, center and left whereby Bennett would serve as Prime Minister until September 2023 and then Lapid would assume the role until November 2025. An Israeli Arab party, Ra&#x27;am, was included in the government coalition for the first time in decades. In June 2022, following several legislative defeats for the governing coalition, Bennett announced the introduction of a bill to dissolve the Knesset and call for new elections to be held in November. Yair Lapid became the new interim Prime Minister. After the 2022 elections, Netanyahu was able to return as Prime Minister under a coalition that included Likud, Shas, United Torah Judaism, Religious Zionist Party, Otzma Yehudit and Noam, in what was described as the most right-wing government in the country&#x27;s history. The government has overseen an uptick in violence in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, driven by military actions such as the July 2023 Jenin incursion as well as Palestinian political violence, producing a death toll in 2023 that is the highest in the conflict since 2005. In October 2023, the 2023 Israel–Hamas war started.

On 1 April 2024, Israel&#x27;s air strike on an Iranian consulate building in the Syrian capital Damascus killed an important senior commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC), Brig Gen Mohammad Reza Zahedi. In retaliation for the Israeli strike, Iran attacked Israel with over 300 drones and missiles on 13 April. However, the Iranian attack was intercepted either outside Israeli airspace or over the country itself. It was followed by a retaliatory missile strike by Israel on Isfahan, Iran.

==Demographics==

==See also==
* Archaeology of Israel
* Hebrew calendar
* History of the Arab–Israeli conflict
* History of the Israel Defense Forces
* History of Jerusalem
* History of the Jews and Judaism in the Land of Israel
* History of the Middle East
* History of Palestine
* History of Zionism
* Jewish history
* Jewish military history
* Levantine archaeology
* LGBT history in Israel
* List of Israeli museums
* List of Jewish leaders in the Land of Israel
* List of years in Israel
* Politics of Israel
* Postage stamps and postal history of Israel
* Time periods in the Palestine region
* Timeline of Israeli history
* Timeline of the Palestine region
==Notes==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==

* Berger, Earl &quot;The Covenant and the Sword: Arab–Israeli Relations, 1948–56&quot;, London, Routledge K. Paul, 1965.
* Bregman, Ahron &quot;A History of Israel&quot;, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire; New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002 .
* Butler, L. J. &quot;Britain and Empire: Adjusting to a Post-Imperial World&quot; I.B. Tauris 2002 
* Caspit, Ben. &quot;The Netanyahu Years&quot; (2017) excerpt 
* Darwin, John &quot;Britain and Decolonisation: The Retreat from Empire in the Post-War World&quot; Palgrave Macmillan 1988 
* Davis, John, &quot;The Evasive Peace: a Study of the Zionist-Arab Problem&quot;, London: J. Murray, 1968.
* Eytan, Walter &quot;The First Ten Years: a Diplomatic History of Israel&quot;, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1958
* Feis, Herbert. &quot;The birth of Israel: the tousled diplomatic bed&quot; (1969) online
* Gilbert, Martin &quot;Israel: A History&quot;, New York: Morrow, 1998 .
* Horrox, James &quot;A Living Revolution: Anarchism in the Kibbutz Movement&quot;, Oakland: AK Press, 2009
* Herzog, Chaim &quot;The Arab–Israeli Wars: War and Peace in the Middle East from the War of Independence to Lebanon&quot;, London: Arms and Armour; Tel Aviv, Israel: Steimatzky, 1984 .
* Israel Office of Information &quot;Israel&#x27;s Struggle for Peace&quot;, New York, 1960.
* Klagsbrun, Francine. &quot;Lioness: Golda Meir and the Nation of Israel&quot; (Schocken, 2017) excerpt .
* Laqueur, Walter &quot;Confrontation: the Middle-East War and World Politics&quot;, London: Wildwood House, 1974, .
* Lucas, Noah &quot;The Modern History of Israel&quot;, New York: Praeger, 1975.
* Morris, Benny &quot;1948: A History of the First Arab–Israeli War&quot;, Yale University Press, 2008. .
* O&#x27;Brian, Conor Cruise &quot;The Siege: the Saga of Israel and Zionism&quot;, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986 .
* Oren, Michael &quot;Six Days of War: June 1967 and the Making of the Modern Middle East&quot;, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002 .
* Pfeffer, Anshel. &quot;Bibi: The Turbulent Life and Times of Benjamin Netanyahu&quot; (2018).
* Rabinovich, Itamar. &quot;Yitzhak Rabin: Soldier, Leader, Statesman&quot; (Yale UP, 2017). excerpt 
* Rubinstein, Alvin Z. (editor) &quot;The Arab–Israeli Conflict: Perspectives&quot;, New York: Praeger, 1984 .
* Lord Russell of Liverpool, &quot;If I Forget Thee; the Story of a Nation&#x27;s Rebirth&quot;, London, Cassell 1960.
* Samuel, Rinna &quot;A History of Israel: the Birth, Growth and Development of Today&#x27;s Jewish State&quot;, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1989 .
* Schultz, Joseph &amp; Klausner, Carla &quot;From Destruction to Rebirth: The Holocaust and the State of Israel&quot;, Washington, D.C.: University Press of America, 1978 .
* Segev, Tom &quot;The Seventh Million: the Israelis and the Holocaust&quot;, New York: Hill and Wang, 1993 .
* Shapira Anita. &quot;Israel: A History&quot; (Brandeis University Press/University Press of New England; 2012) 502 pages;
* Sharon, Assaf, &quot;The Long Paralysis of the Israeli Left&quot; (review of Dan Ephron, &quot;Killing a King: The Assassination of Yitzhak Rabin and the Remaking of Israel&quot;, Norton, 290 pp.; and Itamar Rabinovich, &quot;Yitzhak Rabin: Soldier, Leader, Statesman&quot;, Yale University Press, 272 pp.), &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;, vol. LXVI, no. 17 (7 November 2019), pp. 32–34.
* Shatz, Adam, &quot;We Are Conquerors&quot; (review of Tom Segev, &quot;A State at Any Cost: The Life of David Ben-Gurion&quot;, Head of Zeus, 2019, 804 pp., ), &quot;London Review of Books&quot;, vol. 41, no. 20 (24 October 2019), pp. 37–38, 40–42. &quot;Segev&#x27;s biography... shows how central exclusionary nationalism, war and racism were to Ben-Gurion&#x27;s vision of the Jewish homeland in Palestine, and how contemptuous he was not only of the Arabs but of Jewish life outside Zion. [Liberal Jews] may look at the state that Ben-Gurion built, and ask if the cost has been worth it.&quot; (p. 42 of Shatz&#x27;s review.)
* Shlaim, Avi, &quot;The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World &quot;(2001)
* Talmon, Jacob L. &quot;Israel Among the Nations&quot;, London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1970 .
* Wolffsohn, Michael &quot;Eternal Guilt?: Forty years of German-Jewish-Israeli Relations&quot;, New York: Columbia University Press, 1993 .
===Primary sources===
* Laqueur, Walter, and Dan Schueftan, eds. &quot;The Israel-Arab Reader: A Documentary History of the Middle East Conflict&quot; (8th ed. Penguin, 2016). online 2001 edition

==External links==

* Facts About Israel: History at the Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs
* Israel profile – Timeline at the BBC News Online
* History of Israel at the Knesset website
* Official website of the Israel State Archives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2696109" start="4" end="21" title="History of Israel" label="history of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="74" end="80" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="82" end="91" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="99" end="108" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="169" end="175" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="180" end="189" title="State of Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534922" start="233" end="251" title="Levantine corridor" label="Levantine corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="278" end="290" title="early humans" label="early humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q733489" start="326" end="342" title="Natufian culture" label="Natufian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="390" end="400" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="438" end="447" title="Canaanites" label="Canaanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="489" end="494" title="ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="502" end="517" title="Late Bronze Age" label="Late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="526" end="534" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q193748" start="552" end="568" title="History of ancient Israel and Judah" label="Israel and Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="636" end="642" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="647" end="656" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="680" end="705" title="Abrahamic faith tradition" label="Abrahamic faith tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="730" end="737" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981696" start="739" end="751" title="Samaritanism" label="Samaritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="753" end="765" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="767" end="772" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="774" end="781" title="Druze" label="Druzism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="783" end="796" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baha&amp;#x27;ism"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="886" end="900" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q126094556" start="915" end="924" title="List of conflicts in the Land of Israel" label="conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="1091" end="1099" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="1101" end="1111" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="1113" end="1120" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="1125" end="1142" title="Macedonian empire" label="Macedonian empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131976" start="1170" end="1179" title="Ptolemaic dynasty" label="Ptolemies"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="1188" end="1197" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucids"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="1242" end="1260" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q496922" start="1301" end="1318" title="Hasmonean dynasty" label="Hasmonean dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1421" end="1435" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205368" start="1456" end="1473" title="Jewish–Roman wars" label="Jewish-Roman Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="1625" end="1642" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1670" end="1682" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="1740" end="1750" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="1881" end="1898" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="1905" end="1913" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1934" end="1943" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q248984" start="2005" end="2034" title="Muslim conquest of the Levant" label="Muslim conquest of the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="2042" end="2060" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="2087" end="2094" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="2096" end="2103" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="2109" end="2116" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="2159" end="2166" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="2360" end="2368" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="2379" end="2399" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="2433" end="2440" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="2448" end="2456" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092093" start="2700" end="2715" title="Mongol invasions and conquests" label="Mongol conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397066" start="2724" end="2740" title="Mongol invasions of the Levant" label="this was stopped"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="2748" end="2764" title="Mamluk Sultanate" label="Mamluk Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2863" end="2877" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4145971" start="2904" end="2920" title="Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem" label="Ottoman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="3039" end="3046" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="3071" end="3077" title="aliyah" label="aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="3131" end="3143" title="Jewish diaspora" label="the diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3163" end="3174" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q727536" start="3180" end="3208" title="Sinai and Palestine campaign" label="Sinai and Palestine campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="3216" end="3222" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145246" start="3234" end="3268" title="Partition of the Ottoman Empire" label="partitioning of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970316" start="3315" end="3340" title="Mandate for Palestine" label="League of Nations mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="3366" end="3385" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220693" start="3461" end="3476" title="Homeland for the Jewish people" label="Jewish homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q187152" start="3489" end="3508" title="Balfour declaration" label="Balfour declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992527" start="3664" end="3684" title="Intercommunal conflict in Mandatory Palestine" label="Arab–Jewish tensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q846795" start="3790" end="3820" title="United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine" label="partition of Mandate Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379101" start="3945" end="3954" title="1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="3998" end="4033" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="Israeli Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="4046" end="4054" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220089" start="4147" end="4184" title="1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight" label="1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="4218" end="4271" title="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries" label="Jewish emigration from other parts of the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916388" start="4312" end="4336" title="Jewish population by country" label="global Jewish population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129412" start="4369" end="4394" title="Egypt–Israel peace treaty" label="Egypt–Israel peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q309204" start="4420" end="4438" title="Camp David Accords" label="Camp David Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q49107" start="4467" end="4480" title="Oslo I Accord" label="Oslo I Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="4490" end="4523" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestine Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="4572" end="4602" title="Palestinian National Authority" label="Palestinian National Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q620988" start="4617" end="4643" title="Israel–Jordan peace treaty" label="Israel–Jordan peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141816" start="4664" end="4703" title="Israeli–Palestinian peace process" label="efforts to finalize the peace agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="4856" end="4868" title="early humans" label="early humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660882" start="4950" end="4958" title="Ubeidiya prehistoric site" label="Ubeidiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q126982" start="4968" end="4982" title="Sea of Galilee" label="Sea of Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916534" start="5029" end="5034" title="Yiron" label="Yiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="5133" end="5142" title="Acheulean" label="Acheulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916595" start="5180" end="5198" title="Gesher Bnot Yaakov" label="Gesher Bnot Yaakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="5208" end="5220" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906739" start="5229" end="5237" title="Tabun, Israel" label="el-Tabun"/>
<link wikidata="Q287341" start="5243" end="5251" title="Es Skhul" label="Es Skhul"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="5253" end="5264" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="5328" end="5348" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphic record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="5415" end="5432" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83944" start="5493" end="5508" title="human evolution" label="human evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="5524" end="5535" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24252" start="5556" end="5561" title="Qesem Cave" label="Qesem"/>
<link wikidata="Q18916619" start="5566" end="5571" title="Manot Cave" label="Manot"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="5595" end="5620" title="anatomically modern human" label="anatomically modern human"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="5628" end="5642" title="Recent African origin of modern humans" label="outside Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245186" start="5651" end="5676" title="Skhul and Qafzeh hominids" label="Skhul and Qafzeh hominids"/>
<link wikidata="Q733489" start="5758" end="5774" title="Natufian culture" label="Natufian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="5866" end="5875" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q733489" start="6044" end="6060" title="Natufian culture" label="Natufian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047444" start="6130" end="6153" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic A" label="Pre-Pottery Neolithic A"/>
<link wikidata="Q897323" start="6166" end="6189" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic B" label="Pre-Pottery Neolithic B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190360" start="6202" end="6225" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic C" label="Pre-Pottery Neolithic C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915635" start="6289" end="6306" title="Yarmukian culture" label="Yarmukian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q85781897" start="6313" end="6340" title="Lodian culture" label="Lodian (Jericho IX) culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q21050153" start="6378" end="6396" title="Wadi Rabah culture" label="Wadi Rabah culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6403" end="6418" title="Timnian culture" label="Timnian culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6500" end="6512" title="Chalcolithic#Near East" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973199" start="6567" end="6579" title="Timna Valley" label="Timna Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="6607" end="6613" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="6655" end="6672" title="Middle Bronze Age" label="Middle Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q755017" start="6824" end="6867" title="Tell (archaeology)" label="archaeological mounds, or &amp;#x27;tells&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="6931" end="6941" title="Nile Delta" label="Nile Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q192319" start="7047" end="7053" title="Hyksos" label="Hyksos"/>
<link wikidata="Q463871" start="7108" end="7119" title="Lower Egypt" label="Lower Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="7181" end="7196" title="Late Bronze Age" label="Late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="7235" end="7247" title="vassal state" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="7271" end="7291" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="7313" end="7317" title="Gaza city" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q157899" start="7377" end="7389" title="Thutmose III" label="Thutmose III"/>
<link wikidata="Q690035" start="7456" end="7462" title="Kadesh (Syria)" label="Kadesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q733364" start="7482" end="7499" title="Battle of Megiddo (15th century BC)" label="Battle of Megiddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059758" start="7509" end="7524" title="Late Bronze Age collapse" label="Late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q740138" start="7688" end="7693" title="Tel Hazor" label="Hazor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152368" start="7695" end="7711" title="Beit She&amp;#x27;an" label="Beit She&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q208379" start="7713" end="7720" title="Tel Megiddo" label="Megiddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323557" start="7722" end="7727" title="Ekron" label="Ekron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183947" start="7729" end="7734" title="Isdud" label="Isdud"/>
<link wikidata="Q104664899" start="7739" end="7746" title="Ascalon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="7935" end="7946" title="Sea Peoples" label="Sea Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q193776" start="7965" end="7976" title="Philistines" label="Philistines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192530" start="8000" end="8012" title="Aegean civilization" label="Aegean world"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="8056" end="8066" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q618656" start="8165" end="8171" title="Habiru" label="Habiru"/>
<link wikidata="Q570868" start="8215" end="8222" title="Hebrews" label="Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="8433" end="8445" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q754378" start="8714" end="8729" title="Merneptah Stele" label="Merneptah Stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q158043" start="8751" end="8760" title="Merneptah" label="Merneptah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="8769" end="8780" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="9021" end="9033" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="9048" end="9055" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658538" start="9362" end="9378" title="William G. Dever" label="William G. Dever"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="9614" end="9631" title="Canaan" label="Canaanite peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q956859" start="9689" end="9702" title="Monolatry" label="monolatristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="9713" end="9725" title="Monotheism" label="monotheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="9761" end="9767" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="9847" end="9855" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="10136" end="10140" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425742" start="10174" end="10191" title="Mycenaean pottery" label="Mycenaean pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431943" start="10217" end="10244" title="Philistine Bichrome ware" label="bichrome Philistine pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q726264" start="10398" end="10416" title="Israel Finkelstein" label="Israel Finkelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="10565" end="10571" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="10588" end="10599" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="10717" end="10722" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="10727" end="10733" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="10747" end="10759" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185305" start="10797" end="10811" title="Kingdom of Israel (united monarchy)" label="single kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28730" start="10821" end="10825" title="Saul" label="Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="10827" end="10832" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="10837" end="10844" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="10876" end="10888" title="Solomon&amp;#x27;s Temple" label="First Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="11205" end="11231" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="northern Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="11259" end="11275" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Kingdom of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499949" start="11427" end="11441" title="Omride Dynasty" label="Omride dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="11457" end="11464" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="11466" end="11473" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463859" start="11485" end="11498" title="Jordan Valley" label="Jordan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q218907" start="11504" end="11510" title="Sharon plain" label="Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834492" start="11534" end="11545" title="Transjordan (region)" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757438" start="11547" end="11554" title="Samaria (ancient city)" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951237" start="11686" end="11693" title="Shechem" label="Shechem"/>
<link wikidata="Q733822" start="11695" end="11701" title="Penuel" label="Penuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002121" start="11706" end="11712" title="Tirzah (ancient city)" label="Tirzah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328820" start="12006" end="12023" title="Judaean Mountains" label="Judaean Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066007" start="12037" end="12046" title="Shephelah" label="Shephelah"/>
<link wikidata="Q41843" start="12055" end="12064" title="Beersheba" label="Beersheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="12088" end="12093" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793123" start="12143" end="12158" title="Kurkh Monoliths" label="Kurkh Monoliths"/>
<link wikidata="Q235901" start="12181" end="12185" title="Ahab" label="Ahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q717814" start="12200" end="12212" title="Ben-Hadad II" label="Ben Hadad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q625649" start="12216" end="12229" title="Aram-Damascus" label="Aram-Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="12271" end="12280" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849474" start="12304" end="12320" title="Battle of Qarqar" label="Battle of Qarqar"/>
<link wikidata="Q724954" start="12458" end="12469" title="Mesha Stele" label="Mesha Stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q326304" start="12473" end="12477" title="Moab" label="Moab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019166" start="12496" end="12502" title="Dhiban, Jordan" label="Dhiban"/>
<link wikidata="Q104093869" start="12508" end="12528" title="Sattam Al-Fayez" label="Emir Sattam Al-Fayez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729318" start="12533" end="12547" title="Henry Tristram" label="Henry Tristram"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199384" start="12601" end="12612" title="Bani Sakher" label="Bani Sakher"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="12638" end="12644" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q350258" start="12660" end="12665" title="Mesha" label="Mesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725600" start="12691" end="12698" title="Chemosh" label="Chemosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="12793" end="12810" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313225" start="13043" end="13047" title="Jehu" label="Jehu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471650" start="13083" end="13115" title="Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III" label="Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III"/>
<link wikidata="Q210074" start="13145" end="13164" title="Tiglath-Pileser III" label="Tiglath-Pileser III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757438" start="13292" end="13299" title="Samaria (ancient city)" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208336" start="13331" end="13340" title="Sargon II" label="Sargon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="13344" end="13351" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631462" start="13607" end="13628" title="Resettlement policy of the Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Assyrian deportations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="13654" end="13660" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125226" start="13673" end="13688" title="Ten Lost Tribes" label="Ten Lost Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="13781" end="13791" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="13819" end="13829" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620682" start="14031" end="14044" title="Siloam Tunnel" label="Siloam Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q244912" start="14069" end="14077" title="Hezekiah" label="Hezekiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q744869" start="14197" end="14215" title="Siloam inscription" label="Siloam inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q636978" start="14339" end="14366" title="Istanbul Archaeology Museum" label="Istanbul Archaeology Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207140" start="14398" end="14409" title="Sennacherib" label="Sennacherib"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089393" start="14430" end="14467" title="Sennacherib&amp;#x27;s campaign in the Levant" label="attempted but failed to capture Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q578076" start="14469" end="14485" title="Taylor prism" label="Assyrian records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267122" start="14537" end="14555" title="Assyrian Siege of Jerusalem" label="besieged Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="14591" end="14598" title="tribute" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007389" start="14624" end="14639" title="Lachish reliefs" label="Lachish reliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680" start="14643" end="14650" title="Nineveh" label="Nineveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q848509" start="14686" end="14693" title="Lachish" label="Lachish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="14733" end="14740" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q665541" start="14787" end="14792" title="Hosea" label="Hosea"/>
<link wikidata="Q213850" start="14797" end="14801" title="Amos (prophet)" label="Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804969" start="14816" end="14821" title="Micah (prophet)" label="Micah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188794" start="14826" end="14832" title="Isaiah" label="Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="14976" end="14987" title="free speech" label="free speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403414" start="15125" end="15153" title="Ethical monotheism" label="god-conscious ethical ideals"/>
<link wikidata="Q313228" start="15271" end="15277" title="Josiah" label="Josiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42614" start="15311" end="15330" title="Book of Deuteronomy" label="Book of Deuteronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47680" start="15371" end="15385" title="Book of Joshua" label="Book of Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="15447" end="15460" title="Books of Kings" label="Book of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q475346" start="15522" end="15535" title="Deuteronomist" label="Deuteronomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="15588" end="15598" title="monotheism" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="15872" end="15884" title="vassal state" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="15892" end="15913" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Neo-Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q319034" start="15927" end="15936" title="Jehoiakim" label="Jehoiakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="16045" end="16053" title="Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252915" start="16088" end="16106" title="Siege of Jerusalem (597 BC)" label="besieged Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061346" start="16160" end="16187" title="Babylonian Chronicles" label="recorded by the Babylonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q319049" start="16254" end="16262" title="Jeconiah" label="Jeconiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q184273" start="16314" end="16322" title="Zedekiah" label="Zedekiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="16533" end="16550" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290590" start="16562" end="16581" title="Siege of Jerusalem (587 BC)" label="conquered Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="16696" end="16713" title="Babylonian captivity" label="exiled to Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903991" start="16781" end="16786" title="Yehud (Babylonian province)" label="Yehud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755389" start="16806" end="16812" title="Mizpah in Benjamin" label="Mizpah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851192" start="16894" end="16946" title="Jehoiachin&amp;#x27;s Rations Tablets" label="Tablets that describe King Jehoiachin&amp;#x27;s rations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701168" start="17078" end="17093" title="Davidic line" label="Davidic dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517398" start="17115" end="17131" title="History of the Jews in Iraq" label="Babylonian Jewry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265579" start="17144" end="17166" title="Exilarch" label="&amp;quot;Rosh Galut&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="17427" end="17442" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="17450" end="17467" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12770033" start="17512" end="17539" title="Edict of Cyrus" label="Cyrus issued a proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q405008" start="17621" end="17635" title="Cyrus Cylinder" label="Cyrus Cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q320139" start="17720" end="17729" title="Zerubabel" label="Zerubabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="17789" end="17802" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q191787" start="17874" end="17878" title="Ezra" label="Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025598" start="17883" end="17891" title="Nehemiah" label="Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="17978" end="17993" title="Torah" label="religious rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q592272" start="18151" end="18156" title="Yehud (Province)" label="Yehud"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="18195" end="18200" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="18392" end="18402" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q26978" start="18414" end="18428" title="Aramaic script" label="Aramaic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502043" start="18448" end="18463" title="Ktav Ashuri" label="Ashuri alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="18543" end="18558" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q726847" start="18581" end="18600" title="Babylonian calendar" label="Babylonian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="19094" end="19103" title="theocracy" label="theocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51677" start="19125" end="19137" title="High Priest (Judaism)" label="High Priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q284009" start="19310" end="19328" title="Elephantine Island" label="Elephantine Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q520170" start="19377" end="19398" title="Elephantine papyri" label="175 papyrus documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="19563" end="19571" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="19631" end="19650" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="19654" end="19661" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q551888" start="19698" end="19733" title="Wars of Alexander the Great" label="campaign against the Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19776" end="19794" title="Alexander the Great#Division of the Macedonian Empire" label="divided the empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="19799" end="19804" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="19842" end="19857" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="19862" end="19879" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389951" start="19990" end="20006" title="battle of Panium" label="battle of Panium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51677" start="20145" end="20166" title="High Priest of Israel" label="High Priest of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="20240" end="20253" title="Hellenization" label="Hellenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356" start="20486" end="20508" title="Antiochus IV Epiphanes" label="Antiochus IV Epiphanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930888" start="20710" end="20726" title="Maccabean Revolt" label="Maccabean revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q75048" start="20741" end="20751" title="Mattathias" label="Mattathias"/>
<link wikidata="Q496922" start="20776" end="20785" title="Hasmonean dynasty" label="Hasmonean"/>
<link wikidata="Q516588" start="20880" end="20890" title="Greek Gods" label="Greek gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q12408891" start="20894" end="20906" title="Modi&amp;#x27;in (ancient city)" label="Modi&amp;#x27;in"/>
<link wikidata="Q111559" start="20916" end="20931" title="Judas Maccabeus" label="Judas Maccabeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130881" start="21090" end="21098" title="Hanukkah" label="Hannukah"/>
<link wikidata="Q75043" start="21139" end="21154" title="Jonathan Apphus" label="Jonathan Apphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q359711" start="21159" end="21171" title="Simon Thassi" label="Simon Thassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207759" start="21337" end="21341" title="Seleucid–Parthian Wars" label="wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="21351" end="21360" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="21398" end="21412" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q319043" start="21431" end="21444" title="John Hyrcanus" label="John Hyrcanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208475" start="21530" end="21537" title="Idumaea" label="Idumaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q152368" start="21595" end="21606" title="Beit She&amp;#x27;an" label="Scythopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="21611" end="21618" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679357" start="21710" end="21720" title="Hasmonean coinage" label="mint coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q335124" start="21744" end="21757" title="Aristobulus I" label="Aristobulus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q319107" start="21762" end="21780" title="Alexander Jannaeus" label="Alexander Jannaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915532" start="21879" end="21892" title="Israeli coastal plain" label="coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="21894" end="21901" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834492" start="21919" end="21930" title="Transjordan (region)" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266769" start="22012" end="22033" title="Development of the Hebrew Bible canon" label="Jewish biblical canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="22062" end="22071" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q182682" start="22073" end="22082" title="Sadducees" label="Sadducees"/>
<link wikidata="Q189204" start="22098" end="22105" title="Essenes" label="Essenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q338378" start="22174" end="22192" title="Simeon ben Shetach" label="Simeon ben Shetach"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="22254" end="22268" title="synagogue" label="meeting houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="22310" end="22328" title="Rabbinical Judaism" label="Rabbinical Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q266591" start="22364" end="22380" title="Salome Alexandra" label="Salome Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q359684" start="22407" end="22418" title="Hyrcanus II" label="Hyrcanus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q359679" start="22423" end="22437" title="Aristobulus II" label="Aristobulus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="22512" end="22518" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="22675" end="22680" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22689" end="22695" title="Pompey#Pompey in the East" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764124" start="22696" end="22705" title="Third Mithridatic War" label="conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566991" start="22716" end="22726" title="Siege of Jerusalem (63 BC)" label="intervened"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588511" start="22734" end="22753" title="Hasmonean civil war" label="Hasmonean civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q359684" start="22778" end="22789" title="Hyrcanus II" label="Hyrcanus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208146" start="22857" end="22886" title="Siege of Alexandria (47 BC)" label="siege of Alexandria in 47 BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="22901" end="22914" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="22923" end="22930" title="protégé" label="protégé"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="22931" end="22940" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q319075" start="23012" end="23021" title="Antipater the Idumaean" label="Antipater"/>
<link wikidata="Q878279" start="23094" end="23110" title="Herodian dynasty" label="Herodian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="23196" end="23211" title="Herod the Great" label="Herod the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="23250" end="23269" title="Herod&amp;#x27;s Temple" label="Herod&amp;#x27;s Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="23475" end="23483" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q244345" start="23552" end="23567" title="Herod Archelaus" label="Herod Archelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q371624" start="23657" end="23673" title="Judas of Galilee" label="Judas of Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="23810" end="23818" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524799" start="23892" end="23908" title="Joshua ben Gamla" label="Joshua ben Gamla"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="24320" end="24327" title="Rebellion" label="revolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="24331" end="24337" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="24359" end="24371" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="24429" end="24451" title="First Jewish–Roman War" label="First Jewish–Roman War"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="24471" end="24488" title="Bar Kokhba revolt" label="Bar Kokhba revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="24561" end="24566" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254" start="24605" end="24620" title="Diaspora Revolt" label="Diaspora Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="24681" end="24702" title="Eastern Mediterranean" label="Eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192091" start="24721" end="24730" title="Kitos War" label="Kitos War"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="24970" end="24994" title="Siege of Jerusalem (70 CE)" label="destruction of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250874" start="25533" end="25549" title="Aelia Capitolina" label="Aelia Capitolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669578" start="25590" end="25606" title="Syria Palaestina" label="Syria Palaestina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="25656" end="25671" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="25730" end="25737" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627700" start="25756" end="25765" title="Asoristan" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="25822" end="25833" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="25897" end="25904" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205363" start="25940" end="25961" title="Second Temple Judaism" label="Second Temple Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="25967" end="25980" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="26012" end="26017" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777205" start="26139" end="26145" title="Jewish prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068324" start="26147" end="26158" title="Torah study" label="Torah study"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="26187" end="26196" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="26259" end="26275" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="26327" end="26341" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="26373" end="26390" title="Talmud" label="Babylonian Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="26645" end="26653" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="26716" end="26725" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295115" start="26730" end="26736" title="History of the Jews in Saudi Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="26858" end="26865" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917083" start="26914" end="26926" title="Hebron Hills" label="Hebron Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011544" start="26931" end="26939" title="Ein Gedi" label="Ein Gedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="26971" end="26978" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q387422" start="26987" end="27003" title="Jerusalem Talmud" label="Jerusalem Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q151920" start="27101" end="27109" title="Tiberias" label="Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="27114" end="27123" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="27191" end="27196" title="Paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="27258" end="27263" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865253" start="27265" end="27274" title="Phoenicia under Roman rule" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221353" start="27280" end="27286" title="Arabia Petraea" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710285" start="27518" end="27533" title="House of Hillel" label="House of Hillel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279683" start="27552" end="27556" title="Nasi (Hebrew title)" label="Nasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q380427" start="27640" end="27653" title="Judah ha-Nasi" label="Judah ha-Nasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="27704" end="27711" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621334" start="27734" end="27756" title="Oral Torah" label="Jewish oral traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q990657" start="28002" end="28010" title="Shefaram" label="Shefaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q830805" start="28015" end="28026" title="Bet Shearim" label="Bet Shearim"/>
<link wikidata="Q208481" start="28099" end="28108" title="Sanhedrin" label="Sanhedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132798" start="28137" end="28146" title="Sepphoris" label="Sepphoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q830805" start="28252" end="28263" title="Beit She&amp;#x27;arim necropolis" label="burial site"/>
<link wikidata="Q830805" start="28307" end="28325" title="Beit She&amp;#x27;arim necropolis" label="Beit She&amp;#x27;arim"/>
<link wikidata="Q329838" start="28373" end="28388" title="Crisis of the Third Century" label="economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="28534" end="28549" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627039" start="28645" end="28663" title="Talmudic academies in Babylonia" label="Talmudic academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627700" start="28675" end="28684" title="Asoristan" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822468" start="28725" end="28743" title="Talmudic Academies in Syria Palaestina" label="Talmudic academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="28798" end="28809" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="28815" end="28829" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="28849" end="28866" title="East Roman Empire" label="East Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="28876" end="28888" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170164" start="28922" end="28928" title="Helena (empress)" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q194504" start="29002" end="29024" title="Church of the Nativity" label="Church of the Nativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="29065" end="29093" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="29446" end="29454" title="paganism" label="paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q882925" start="29571" end="29584" title="Jewish revolt against Gallus" label="Jewish revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="29779" end="29795" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="29885" end="29897" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118145" start="29992" end="30010" title="Christian pilgrimage" label="Christian pilgrims"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="30199" end="30207" title="Church (building)" label="churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279683" start="30780" end="30796" title="Nasi (Hebrew title)" label="&amp;quot;Nasi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q742029" start="30798" end="30808" title="Gamaliel VI" label="Gamliel VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q208481" start="30846" end="30855" title="Sanhedrin" label="Sanhedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627700" start="30987" end="30996" title="Asoristan" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259603" start="31167" end="31184" title="Samaritan revolts" label="Samaritan revolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q212732" start="31575" end="31585" title="Khosrow II" label="Khosrow II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="31596" end="31611" title="Sassanid Persia" label="Sassanid Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326099" start="31613" end="31620" title="Byzantine–Sasanian War of 602–628" label="invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725954" start="31650" end="31675" title="Revolt against Heraclius" label="helped by Jewish fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889453" start="31689" end="31709" title="Benjamin of Tiberias" label="Benjamin of Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915236" start="31714" end="31732" title="Siege of Jerusalem (614)" label="captured Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="31751" end="31761" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="31809" end="31826" title="Himyarite Kingdom" label="Himyarite Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987841" start="31868" end="31888" title="Nehemiah ben Hushiel" label="Nehemiah ben Hushiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="32276" end="32285" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q248984" start="32425" end="32445" title="Muslim conquest of the Levant" label="Levant was conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="32483" end="32503" title="Umar" label="ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183526" start="32539" end="32552" title="Bilad al-Sham" label="Bilad al-Sham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="32560" end="32578" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353320" start="32603" end="32616" title="Jund Filastin" label="Jund Filastin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818588" start="32621" end="32635" title="Jund al-Urdunn" label="Jund al-Urdunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q221447" start="32685" end="32691" title="Ramlah" label="Ramlah"/>
<link wikidata="Q151920" start="32748" end="32756" title="Tiberias" label="Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="Q181154" start="32869" end="32884" title="Mu&amp;#x27;awiya I" label="Mu&amp;#x27;awiya I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="32961" end="32976" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q36788" start="33001" end="33013" title="Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan" label="Abd al-Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q172077" start="33040" end="33056" title="Dome of the Rock" label="Dome of the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192963" start="33155" end="33169" title="Qibli Mosque" label="Al-Aqsa Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933860" start="33364" end="33382" title="Abbasid Revolution" label="Abbasid Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833785" start="33421" end="33436" title="Abbasid Caliphs" label="Abbasid Caliphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394486" start="33459" end="33466" title="History of Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="33517" end="33535" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q298403" start="33781" end="33788" title="Umar II" label="Umar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q329429" start="33893" end="33905" title="Yellow badge" label="yellow stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q461786" start="34101" end="34142" title="Jizya" label="A poll tax was imposed on all non-Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q286542" start="34235" end="34249" title="Al-Aziz Billah" label="Al-Aziz Billah"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="34269" end="34284" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="34338" end="34353" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ilism" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="34367" end="34377" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180123" start="34403" end="34409" title="Fatimah" label="Fatima"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="34463" end="34487" title="Church of Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q342137" start="34549" end="34564" title="Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah" label="Caliph al-Hakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="34686" end="34691" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="35180" end="35192" title="Islamization" label="Islamization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996414" start="35285" end="35295" title="Conversion to Islam" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="35755" end="35765" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="35770" end="35780" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q60956" start="36176" end="36184" title="Ashkelon" label="Ashkelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="36186" end="36190" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024886" start="36192" end="36197" title="Apollonia–Arsuf" label="Arsuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="36203" end="36207" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="36340" end="36347" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="36514" end="36535" title="Monophysitism" label="Jacobite Monophysitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920370" start="36899" end="36913" title="749 Galilee earthquake" label="749 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q30578" start="37886" end="37899" title="Pope Urban II" label="Pope Urban II"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="38033" end="38046" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="38107" end="38116" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q456993" start="38157" end="38196" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1099)" label="siege and conquest of Jerusalem in 1099"/>
<link wikidata="Q152368" start="38240" end="38256" title="Beit She&amp;#x27;an" label="Beit She&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q151920" start="38261" end="38269" title="Tiberias" label="Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115680" start="38349" end="38367" title="Italian city-states" label="Italian city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="38503" end="38518" title="Crusader states" label="Crusader states"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="38560" end="38580" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q931324" start="38915" end="38944" title="List of Crusader castles" label="robust castles and fortresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q316831" start="39034" end="39054" title="Raynald of Châtillon" label="Raynald of Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006572" start="39065" end="39076" title="Oultrejordain" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="39114" end="39121" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="39129" end="39136" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q233568" start="39204" end="39220" title="Battle of Hattin" label="Battle of Hattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151920" start="39228" end="39236" title="Tiberias" label="Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="39375" end="39385" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="39402" end="39409" title="Almohad" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="39434" end="39448" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="39572" end="39585" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="39635" end="39656" title="Richard the Lionheart" label="Richard the Lionheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837102" start="39683" end="39698" title="Treaty of Jaffa (1192)" label="Treaty of Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="39944" end="39956" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q293464" start="39976" end="39984" title="al-Kamil" label="al-Kamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q51660" start="40000" end="40013" title="Sixth Crusade" label="Sixth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q486918" start="40052" end="40063" title="Khwarazmian dynasty" label="Khwarezmian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="40064" end="40070" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q239133" start="40280" end="40312" title="Mongol raids into Palestine" label="frontier between Mongol invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404621" start="40314" end="40340" title="Franco-Mongol alliance" label="occasional Crusader allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="40350" end="40357" title="Mamluk Sultanate (Cairo)" label="Mamluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="40492" end="40498" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="40567" end="40581" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkish origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51661" start="40818" end="40833" title="Seventh Crusade" label="Seventh Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q336471" start="40861" end="40866" title="Qutuz" label="Qutuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q244356" start="40905" end="40924" title="Battle of Ain Jalut" label="Battle of Ain Jalut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339887" start="40965" end="40974" title="Ein Harod" label="Ein Harod"/>
<link wikidata="Q192960" start="41049" end="41056" title="Baibars" label="Baibars"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="41118" end="41124" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183526" start="41178" end="41183" title="Bilad a-Sham" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="41188" end="41194" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q204200" start="41237" end="41259" title="Cave of the Patriarchs" label="Cave of the Patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="41437" end="41449" title="Six Days War" label="Six Days War"/>
<link wikidata="Q392815" start="41478" end="41494" title="Al-Ashraf Khalil" label="Al-Ashraf Khalil"/>
<link wikidata="Q325985" start="41542" end="41546" title="Siege of Acre (1291)" label="1291"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="41709" end="41713" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424558" start="42082" end="42110" title="expulsion of Jews from Spain" label="expulsion of Jews from Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138579" start="42120" end="42175" title="persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal" label="persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="42352" end="42366" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q188336" start="42592" end="42597" title="Safed" label="Safed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="42610" end="42619" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908477" start="42631" end="42656" title="Musta&amp;#x27;arabi Jews" label="Musta&amp;#x27;arbi community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183526" start="42776" end="42788" title="Bilad a-Sham" label="Bilad a-Sham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338038" start="42805" end="42814" title="Ottoman–Mamluk War (1516–1517)" label="conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="42833" end="42840" title="Selim I" label="Selim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076765" start="42888" end="42901" title="Ottoman Syria" label="Ottoman Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934822" start="42944" end="42959" title="Damascus Eyalet" label="Damascus Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372503" start="42977" end="42990" title="Syria Vilayet" label="Syria Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="43006" end="43014" title="Tanzimat" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="43262" end="43276" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="43338" end="43346" title="Selim II" label="Selim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q238091" start="43394" end="43408" title="Nurbanu Sultan" label="Nurbanu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298184" start="43454" end="43472" title="Gracia Mendes Nasi" label="Gracia Mendes Nasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="43533" end="43544" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="43679" end="43687" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q472202" start="43714" end="43725" title="Joseph Nasi" label="Joseph Nasi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43817" end="43837" title="Druze power struggle (1658–1667)#Lebanon and Galilee campaign" label="Druze power struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920516" start="43864" end="43869" title="1660 destruction of Safed" label="Safed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551622" start="43874" end="43882" title="1660 destruction of Tiberias" label="Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="43928" end="43934" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207512" start="43941" end="43954" title="Zahir al-Umar" label="Zahir al-Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="44153" end="44161" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q253684" start="44170" end="44178" title="French campaign in Egypt and Syria" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44195" end="44217" title="Napoleon and the Jews#Bonaparte&amp;#x27;s proclamation to the Jews of Africa and Asia" label="planned a proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q815109" start="44294" end="44308" title="Siege of Acre (1799)" label="defeat at Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q182781" start="44319" end="44340" title="Muhammad Ali of Egypt" label="Muhammad Ali of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584439" start="44409" end="44418" title="Egyptian–Ottoman War (1831–1833)" label="conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554402" start="44474" end="44485" title="1834 Arab revolt in Palestine" label="Arab revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554486" start="44514" end="44526" title="1838 Druze revolt" label="Druze revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q733118" start="44536" end="44552" title="Moses Montefiore" label="Moses Montefiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934822" start="44654" end="44669" title="Damascus Eyalet" label="Damascus Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076765" start="44673" end="44686" title="Ottoman Syria" label="Ottoman Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q933141" start="45109" end="45121" title="First Aliyah" label="First Aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45165" end="45199" title="History of zionism#Persecution of the Jews in the Russian Empire" label="persecution and legal restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="45301" end="45319" title="Pale of Settlement" label="Pale of Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q247735" start="45321" end="45354" title="Pogroms in the Russian Empire" label="Severe pogroms in the early 1880s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852640" start="45359" end="45375" title="May Laws" label="legal repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q863392" start="45594" end="45598" title="Bilu (movement)" label="Bilu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071744" start="45603" end="45615" title="Hovevei Zion" label="Hovevei Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190828" start="45755" end="45766" title="Petah Tikva" label="Petah Tikva"/>
<link wikidata="Q201051" start="45816" end="45829" title="Rishon LeZion" label="Rishon LeZion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297681" start="45934" end="45950" title="Four Holy Cities" label="Four Holy Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011757" start="45992" end="45999" title="halukka" label="halukka"/>
<link wikidata="Q467167" start="46128" end="46154" title="Edmond James de Rothschild" label="Edmond James de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q657993" start="46390" end="46403" title="Yemenite Jews" label="Yemenite Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q630281" start="46449" end="46459" title="Messianism" label="Messianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44003" start="46470" end="46483" title="Theodor Herzl" label="Theodor Herzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141090" start="46500" end="46514" title="Der Judenstaat" label="Der Judenstaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="46603" end="46615" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q708764" start="46647" end="46662" title="Jewish Question" label="Jewish Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q205386" start="46716" end="46742" title="World Zionist Organization" label="World Zionist Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470656" start="46763" end="46785" title="First Zionist Congress" label="First Zionist Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q130865" start="46917" end="46925" title="Hatikvah" label="Hatikvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q970112" start="47052" end="47065" title="Second Aliyah" label="Second Aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="47367" end="47379" title="Ahuzat Bayit" label="Ahuzat Bayit"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="47395" end="47403" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q315888" start="47420" end="47432" title="Talaat Pasha" label="Talaat Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q83896" start="47440" end="47451" title="Young Turks" label="Young Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="47595" end="47612" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q85743007" start="47799" end="47822" title="Armenian ceramics in Jerusalem" label="iconic Armenian pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="47850" end="47861" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83896" start="48169" end="48180" title="Young Turks" label="Young Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="48209" end="48221" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="48446" end="48453" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="48510" end="48522" title="David Lloyd George" label="Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695557" start="48759" end="48871" title="Tel Aviv and Jaffa deportation" label="entire population, including Muslims, of both Jaffa and Tel Aviv was subject to an expulsion order in April 1917"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48918" end="48948" title="Sinai and Palestine Campaign#Palestine campaign" label="British conquest ended in 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="49048" end="49062" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Arthur Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q316669" start="49100" end="49115" title="Walter Rothschild, 2nd Baron Rothschild" label="Lord Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q187152" start="49227" end="49246" title="Balfour Declaration" label="Balfour Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="49334" end="49343" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211674" start="49538" end="49553" title="Sykes–Picot Agreement" label="by an agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q198954" start="49597" end="49610" title="Jewish Legion" label="Jewish Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q319896" start="49663" end="49684" title="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Jabotinsky" label="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Jabotinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q733064" start="49689" end="49706" title="Joseph Trumpeldor" label="Joseph Trumpeldor"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="49780" end="49798" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354204" start="49804" end="49808" title="Nili" label="Nili"/>
<link wikidata="Q112128" start="50147" end="50162" title="Hussein bin Ali" label="Hussein bin Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q956357" start="50170" end="50186" title="Kingdom of Hejaz" label="Kingdom of Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q239060" start="50241" end="50252" title="Arab revolt" label="Arab revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q180522" start="50400" end="50405" title="Aqaba" label="Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q211674" start="50710" end="50731" title="Sykes–Picot Agreement" label="Sykes–Picot Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075820" start="50944" end="50983" title="Occupied Enemy Territory Administration" label="Occupied Enemy Territory Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q328499" start="51021" end="51048" title="Armistice of Mudros" label="armistice with the Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970316" start="51144" end="51159" title="Mandate for Palestine" label="British Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="51256" end="51273" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121819" start="51329" end="51340" title="Emirate of Transjordan" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="51757" end="51792" title="October Revolution" label="Bolsheviks seized control of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="51819" end="51828" title="Russian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173148" start="51887" end="51894" title="Pogroms of the Russian Civil War" label="pogroms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390778" start="52154" end="52166" title="Third Aliyah" label="Third Aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471943" start="52218" end="52236" title="Poale Zion" label="Socialist Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="52255" end="52265" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q161387" start="52415" end="52422" title="kibbutz" label="kibbutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q763829" start="52450" end="52464" title="Jezreel Valley" label="Jezreel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52469" end="52480" title="Hefer Plain" label="Hefer Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q696658" start="52552" end="52572" title="Jewish National Fund" label="Jewish National Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992403" start="52655" end="52662" title="Franco-Syrian War" label="victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q146600" start="52672" end="52693" title="Arab Kingdom of Syria" label="Arab Kingdom of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341655" start="52794" end="52814" title="1920 Nebi Musa riots" label="1920 Nebi Musa riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575603" start="52822" end="52827" title="Jaffa riots" label="Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q252054" start="52884" end="52891" title="Haganah" label="Haganah"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="52922" end="52935" title="Jewish Agency" label="Jewish Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369620" start="53103" end="53116" title="Fourth Aliyah" label="Fourth Aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434492" start="53282" end="53305" title="Immigration Act of 1924" label="Immigration Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q475380" start="53376" end="53392" title="Pinhas Rutenberg" label="Pinhas Rutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229607" start="53403" end="53412" title="Commissar" label="Commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q239543" start="53461" end="53480" title="Kerensky Government" label="Kerensky Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="53577" end="53594" title="Hebrew University" label="Hebrew University"/>
<link wikidata="Q333705" start="53616" end="53624" title="Technion" label="Technion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973271" start="53697" end="53712" title="Palestine pound" label="Palestine pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q199462" start="53766" end="53780" title="Egyptian pound" label="Egyptian pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q47932" start="53878" end="53901" title="Jewish National Council" label="Jewish National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356549" start="53988" end="53994" title="Yishuv" label="Yishuv"/>
<link wikidata="Q134821" start="54303" end="54315" title="Wailing Wall" label="Wailing Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q164745" start="54566" end="54584" title="Haj Amin al-Husseini" label="Mufti of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="54720" end="54732" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281806" start="54773" end="54793" title="1929 Palestine riots" label="1929 Palestine riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417490" start="54799" end="54811" title="1929 Hebron massacre" label="main victims"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="54972" end="54977" title="Irgun" label="Irgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q609534" start="55676" end="55688" title="Fifth Aliyah" label="Fifth Aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q661547" start="55747" end="55770" title="Ha&amp;#x27;avara Agreement" label="Ha&amp;#x27;avara Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q726510" start="56378" end="56393" title="Haim Arlosoroff" label="Haim Arlosoroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q57202" start="56578" end="56592" title="Magda Goebbels" label="Magda Ritschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="56623" end="56638" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q46057" start="57132" end="57166" title="1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine" label="1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777649" start="57327" end="57335" title="Havlagah" label="Havlagah"/>
<link wikidata="Q655894" start="57555" end="57570" title="Peel Commission" label="Peel Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="57671" end="57678" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15589476" start="57712" end="57731" title="population transfer" label="population transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172183" start="57824" end="57838" title="Chaim Weizmann" label="Chaim Weizmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="57843" end="57859" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q694415" start="57879" end="57895" title="World Zionist Congress" label="Zionist Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q707531" start="58392" end="58416" title="Évian Conference" label="international conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q312490" start="58713" end="58728" title="Madagascar Plan" label="Madagascar Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501775" start="58947" end="58966" title="White Paper of 1939" label="White Paper of 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305697" start="59461" end="59471" title="Aliyah Bet" label="Aliyah Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25474" start="59527" end="59552" title="Mossad Le&amp;#x27;aliyah Bet" label="Mossad Le&amp;#x27;aliyah Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869697" start="59729" end="59752" title="History of the Jews in Mauritius" label="imprisoned in Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="59804" end="59820" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638412" start="60227" end="60252" title="Italian bombing of Mandatory Palestine in World War II" label="bombed Tel Aviv and Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q385509" start="60303" end="60310" title="Palmach" label="Palmach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356549" start="60341" end="60347" title="Yishuv" label="Yishuv"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="60368" end="60372" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="60390" end="60402" title="North African Campaign" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891628" start="60489" end="60512" title="200 days of dread" label="advancing through Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q700800" start="60972" end="60986" title="Jewish Brigade" label="Jewish Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q293332" start="61410" end="61420" title="Stern Gang" label="Stern Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q461846" start="61430" end="61443" title="Avraham Stern" label="Avraham Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="61458" end="61462" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="61503" end="61517" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="61527" end="61532" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q184351" start="61680" end="61694" title="Yitzhak Shamir" label="Yitzhak Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910059" start="61712" end="61727" title="Irgun and Lehi internment in Africa" label="camp in Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q641205" start="61975" end="61996" title="1941 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="pro-Axis coup in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352263" start="62016" end="62025" title="Farhud" label="massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315985" start="62224" end="62245" title="Responsibility for the Holocaust" label="aided by local forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="62327" end="62336" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="62712" end="62726" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="62728" end="62737" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sepharadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="62742" end="62754" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q622499" start="62888" end="62905" title="Displaced persons camp" label="displaced persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q541328" start="62921" end="62956" title="Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry" label="Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="63194" end="63197" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453052" start="63377" end="63382" title="Mapai" label="Mapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="63391" end="63407" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="63462" end="63476" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="63698" end="63704" title="VE Day" label="VE Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="63731" end="63758" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="general election in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305697" start="63965" end="63975" title="Aliyah Bet" label="Aliyah Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q691651" start="64044" end="64050" title="Bricha" label="Bricha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076908" start="64099" end="64108" title="Jewish partisans" label="partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420127" start="64113" end="64128" title="Jewish resistance under Nazi rule" label="ghetto fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409870" start="64139" end="64158" title="Holocaust survivors" label="Holocaust survivors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190058" start="64632" end="64645" title="British–Zionist conflict" label="guerrilla war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891566" start="64747" end="64773" title="Jewish Resistance Movement" label="Jewish Resistance Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917304" start="64895" end="64915" title="Night of the Bridges" label="Night of the Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025925" start="64938" end="64954" title="Operation Agatha" label="Operation Agatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q236163" start="65113" end="65139" title="Kielce Pogrom" label="a massive pogrom in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814446" start="65232" end="65272" title="King David Hotel bombing" label="bombed the British Military Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763587" start="65591" end="65596" title="Anglo-American loan" label="loans"/>
<link wikidata="Q691651" start="65916" end="65923" title="Berihah" label="Berihah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66035" end="66042" title="History of the Jews in Romania#Post-War" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902412" start="66207" end="66226" title="Atlit detainee camp" label="Atlit detainee camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200532" start="66231" end="66254" title="Cyprus internment camps" label="Cyprus internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="66875" end="66891" title="General Assembly of the United Nations" label="General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325131" start="66935" end="66980" title="United Nations Special Committee on Palestine" label="United Nations Special Committee on Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q624339" start="67134" end="67155" title="Arab Higher Committee" label="Arab Higher Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q332365" start="67227" end="67239" title="Ernest Bevin" label="Ernest Bevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305697" start="67272" end="67282" title="Aliyah Bet" label="Aliyah Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384118" start="67289" end="67310" title="SS Exodus" label="SS &amp;quot;Exodus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="67509" end="67515" title="Haredi" label="Haredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q398134" start="67524" end="67537" title="Agudat Israel" label="Agudat Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604544" start="67618" end="67638" title="Status quo (Israel)" label="status quo agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="67761" end="67768" title="yeshiva" label="yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="67876" end="67882" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q846795" start="68211" end="68225" title="Resolution 181" label="Resolution 181"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200532" start="69023" end="69029" title="Cyprus internment camps" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379101" start="69220" end="69229" title="1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q623911" start="69331" end="69351" title="Arab Liberation Army" label="Arab Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="69497" end="69504" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="69509" end="69516" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q307352" start="69518" end="69541" title="Abd al-Qadir al-Husayni" label="Abd al-Qadir al-Husayni"/>
<link wikidata="Q681182" start="69590" end="69610" title="Army of the Holy War" label="Army of the Holy War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356549" start="69732" end="69738" title="Yishuv" label="Yishuv"/>
<link wikidata="Q252054" start="69851" end="69858" title="Haganah" label="Haganah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="70298" end="70309" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="70551" end="70562" title="Jordan" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44202" start="70568" end="70582" title="Arab Legion" label="Jordanian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="70613" end="70629" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42992" start="70790" end="70800" title="Golda Meir" label="Golda Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="70883" end="70896" title="Zionism" label="Zionist cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793865" start="70951" end="70992" title="arms shipments from Czechoslovakia to Israel 1947–1949" label="purchase important arms in Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q359699" start="71011" end="71023" title="Yigael Yadin" label="Yigael Yadin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443243" start="71133" end="71143" title="Plan Dalet" label="Plan Dalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q151920" start="71292" end="71300" title="Tiberias" label="Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="71302" end="71307" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188336" start="71309" end="71314" title="Safed" label="Safed"/>
<link wikidata="Q152368" start="71316" end="71322" title="Beisan" label="Beisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180294" start="71324" end="71329" title="Jaffa" label="Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="71334" end="71338" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q47932" start="71571" end="71599" title="Jewish People&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Jewish People&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267958" start="71616" end="71631" title="Tel Aviv Museum" label="Tel Aviv Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="71647" end="71664" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="the establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915311" start="71670" end="71682" title="Jewish state" label="Jewish state"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="71686" end="71698" title="Eretz Israel" label="Eretz Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="71719" end="71734" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="71841" end="71851" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="71874" end="71889" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="71908" end="71921" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="71954" end="71965" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="72279" end="72301" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="first Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q613285" start="72527" end="72572" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 50" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="72614" end="72628" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793865" start="72629" end="72652" title="Arms shipments from Czechoslovakia to Israel 1947–1949" label="violated the resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q252054" start="72897" end="72904" title="Haganah" label="Haganah"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="72916" end="72937" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q385509" start="72949" end="72956" title="Palmach" label="Palmach"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="72958" end="72963" title="Irgun" label="Etzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q293332" start="72968" end="72972" title="Lehi (group)" label="Lehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q434166" start="73138" end="73146" title="Altalena" label="Altalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q192780" start="73874" end="73887" title="Abdullah I of Jordan" label="King Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q999143" start="74060" end="74070" title="1949 Armistice Agreements" label="armistices"/>
<link wikidata="Q999143" start="74200" end="74219" title="1949 Armistice Agreements" label="permanent ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132137" start="74286" end="74296" title="Green Line (Israel)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="74427" end="74434" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q763829" start="74436" end="74450" title="Jezreel Valley" label="Jezreel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213440" start="74452" end="74466" title="West Jerusalem" label="West Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915532" start="74472" end="74485" title="Israeli coastal plain" label="coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="74494" end="74499" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915530" start="74661" end="74673" title="Rosh HaNikra, Israel" label="Rosh Hanikra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893000" start="74813" end="74822" title="Jordanian annexation of the West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075778" start="74931" end="74955" title="Occupation of the Gaza Strip by Egypt" label="Gaza as an occupied zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888404" start="75133" end="75141" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 273" label="admitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220089" start="75411" end="75436" title="1948 Palestinian exodus" label="had fled or were expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="75543" end="75550" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="75565" end="75573" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="75588" end="75597" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674684" start="75657" end="75672" title="1949 Israeli legislative election" label="first elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453052" start="75704" end="75709" title="Mapai" label="Mapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428864" start="75714" end="75719" title="Mapam" label="Mapam"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="75786" end="75802" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="75818" end="75832" title="Prime Minister of Israel" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="75893" end="75902" title="Stalinist" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383903" start="75963" end="75967" title="Maki (historical political party)" label="Maki"/>
<link wikidata="Q172183" start="76095" end="76109" title="Chaim Weizmann" label="Chaim Weizmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q327948" start="76144" end="76163" title="President of Israel" label="President of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="76165" end="76171" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="76176" end="76182" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="76260" end="76270" title="coalitions" label="coalitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453052" start="76369" end="76374" title="Mapai" label="Mapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579409" start="76383" end="76392" title="Alignment (political party)" label="Alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q210703" start="76414" end="76426" title="Labor Party (Israel)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q607470" start="76443" end="76458" title="Labor Zionism" label="Labour Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="76477" end="76493" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="76559" end="76574" title="Socialism" label="socialist lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="76847" end="76891" title="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries" label="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="77158" end="77165" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154868" start="77380" end="77402" title="Displaced persons camps in post-World War II Europe" label="displaced persons camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q950320" start="77467" end="77480" title="Law of Return" label="Law of Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q113016" start="77701" end="77723" title="Operation Magic Carpet (Yemen)" label="Operation Magic Carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915021" start="77857" end="77884" title="Operation Ezra and Nehemiah" label="Operation Ezra and Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910546" start="78664" end="78680" title="Austerity in Israel" label="Austerity Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288374" start="78821" end="78835" title="ma&amp;#x27;abarot" label="ma&amp;#x27;abarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702533" start="78998" end="79017" title="American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee" label="outside the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q660521" start="79131" end="79152" title="Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany" label="reparations agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="79158" end="79170" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q398134" start="79569" end="79582" title="Agudat Israel" label="Agudat Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q769737" start="80183" end="80193" title="Payot" label="side-curls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905206" start="80215" end="80239" title="Yemenite Children Affair" label="Yemenite Children Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915671" start="80341" end="80349" title="1951 Israeli legislative election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q256664" start="80601" end="80619" title="Doctors&amp;#x27; plot" label="Doctors&amp;#x27; plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637407" start="80669" end="80682" title="Slánský trial" label="Slánský trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q208191" start="80739" end="80757" title="Bandung Conference" label="Bandung Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="80770" end="80788" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="non-aligned states"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="80930" end="80940" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="80993" end="81006" title="Egyptian Revolution of 1952" label="military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="81024" end="81036" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q781607" start="81152" end="81174" title="Free Officers Movement (Egypt)" label="Free Officers Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q151509" start="81179" end="81203" title="Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia" label="Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="81317" end="81323" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="81366" end="81378" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917065" start="81388" end="81410" title="1955 Israeli legislative election" label="January 1955 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q208477" start="81455" end="81468" title="Moshe Sharett" label="Moshe Sharett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606352" start="81637" end="81646" title="List of attacks against Israeli civilians before 1967" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825628" start="81698" end="81711" title="Retribution operations" label="counter-raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880647" start="81713" end="81733" title="Palestinian fedayeen" label="Palestinian fedayeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075778" start="81806" end="81830" title="Occupation of the Gaza Strip by Egypt" label="(Egyptian) occupied Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307675" start="81903" end="81919" title="Unit 101" label="reprisal attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155644" start="81946" end="81949" title="Uzi" label="Uzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q507542" start="82166" end="82178" title="Lavon Affair" label="Lavon Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q662218" start="82362" end="82367" title="Pinhas Lavon" label="Lavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909843" start="82589" end="82618" title="Egyptian–Czechoslovak arms deal" label="arms deal with Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="82799" end="82809" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81611" start="82892" end="82905" title="Gulf of Aqaba" label="Gulf of Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="82939" end="82946" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176586" start="82962" end="82978" title="Protocol of Sèvres" label="secret agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752912" start="83192" end="83205" title="Negev Nuclear Research Center" label="nuclear plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q65455964" start="83265" end="83280" title="Nuclear weapons and Israel" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q188783" start="83608" end="83619" title="Moshe Dayan" label="Moshe Dayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="83630" end="83646" title="Operation Kadesh" label="Operation Kadesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="84039" end="84044" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369193" start="84333" end="84348" title="United Nations Emergency Force" label="Emergency Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771622" start="85037" end="85052" title="Modern Orthodox Judaism" label="modern-orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577041" start="85058" end="85075" title="Religious Zionism" label="religious-zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q285354" start="85086" end="85094" title="Mizrachi (political party)" label="Mizrachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917054" start="85099" end="85116" title="Hapoel HaMizrachi" label="Hapoel HaMizrachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501088" start="85137" end="85161" title="National Religious Party" label="National Religious Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916954" start="85310" end="85324" title="1959 Israeli legislative election" label="1959 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q557665" start="85414" end="85429" title="Rudolph Kastner" label="Rudolph Kastner"/>
<link wikidata="Q399798" start="85601" end="85614" title="Supreme Court of Israel" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q28085" start="85643" end="85657" title="Adolf Eichmann" label="Adolf Eichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="85746" end="85752" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070487" start="86179" end="86184" title="Herut" label="Herut"/>
<link wikidata="Q507542" start="86226" end="86238" title="Lavon Affair" label="Lavon affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457407" start="86382" end="86391" title="Histadrut" label="Histadrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916994" start="86478" end="86491" title="1961 Israeli legislative election" label="1961 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575588" start="86621" end="86629" title="Liberal Party (Israel)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="86672" end="86678" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487302" start="86744" end="86762" title="Operation Damocles" label="Operation Damocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220887" start="86826" end="86849" title="Egypt and weapons of mass destruction" label="carry chemical warheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q350744" start="86923" end="86934" title="Isser Harel" label="Isser Harel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453052" start="87033" end="87038" title="Mapai" label="Mapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q191123" start="87074" end="87085" title="Levi Eshkol" label="Levi Eshkol"/>
<link wikidata="Q359699" start="87170" end="87182" title="Yigael Yadin" label="Yigael Yadin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186312" start="87200" end="87206" title="Masada" label="Masada"/>
<link wikidata="Q890229" start="87306" end="87328" title="National Water Carrier of Israel" label="national water carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="87410" end="87422" title="Jordan river" label="Jordan river"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="87545" end="87550" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904516" start="87648" end="87656" title="War over Water (Jordan river)" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915113" start="87728" end="87732" title="Rafi (political party)" label="Rafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q57410" start="87751" end="87763" title="Shimon Peres" label="Shimon Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q188783" start="87768" end="87779" title="Moshe Dayan" label="Moshe Dayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070487" start="87794" end="87799" title="Herut" label="Herut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575544" start="87839" end="87844" title="Gahal" label="Gahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917013" start="87878" end="87892" title="1965 Israeli legislative election" label="1965 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q191123" start="87927" end="87938" title="Levi Eshkol" label="Levi Eshkol"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="88115" end="88121" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="88170" end="88177" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="88179" end="88196" title="Politics of grandeur" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160327" start="88544" end="88553" title="M48 Patton" label="M48 tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q334759" start="88605" end="88616" title="A-4 Skyhawk" label="A-4 Skyhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="88686" end="88699" title="Arab-Israelis" label="Arab-Israelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674688" start="88775" end="88793" title="Television in Israel" label="black-and-white TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q238719" start="88860" end="88872" title="Naomi Shemer" label="Naomi Shemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q634180" start="88899" end="88916" title="Jerusalem of Gold" label="Jerusalem of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q208157" start="89099" end="89115" title="Straits of Tiran" label="Straits of Tiran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369193" start="89162" end="89166" title="United Nations Emergency Force" label="UNEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="89283" end="89289" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q208157" start="89418" end="89434" title="Straits of Tiran" label="Straits of Tiran"/>
<link wikidata="Q45635" start="89445" end="89456" title="Casus belli" label="Casus belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220887" start="89651" end="89694" title="Egypt and weapons of mass destruction" label="Egyptian troops had tested chemical weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q521199" start="89731" end="89773" title="North Yemen Civil War" label="Egyptian intervention in support of rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q63863" start="89862" end="89877" title="Operation Focus" label="Operation Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="89986" end="89997" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="90243" end="90258" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="90264" end="90274" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="90280" end="90293" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="90333" end="90342" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="90350" end="90362" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q212938" start="90364" end="90378" title="East Jerusalem" label="East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634035" start="90383" end="90390" title="Jerusalem Law" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489934" start="90431" end="90454" title="1967 Arab League summit" label="1967 Arab League summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740597" start="90463" end="90482" title="Khartoum Resolution" label="Khartoum Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q328515" start="90575" end="90589" title="Moshe Levinger" label="Moshe Levinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577041" start="90605" end="90622" title="Religious Zionist" label="Religious Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q582706" start="90646" end="90663" title="Israeli settlement" label="Jewish settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q247003" start="90691" end="90702" title="Kiryat Arba" label="Kiryat Arba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915113" start="90782" end="90786" title="Rafi (political party)" label="Rafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q370735" start="91031" end="91042" title="Social integration" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="91098" end="91106" title="Sephardi" label="Sephardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="91107" end="91114" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="91135" end="91138" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="91162" end="91175" title="middle school" label="middle school"/>
<link wikidata="Q178888" start="91306" end="91311" title="Fatah" label="Fatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930278" start="91320" end="91357" title="Battle of Karameh" label="base in the Jordanian town of Karameh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="91659" end="91662" title="PLO" label="PLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q322607" start="91963" end="91979" title="War of Attrition" label="War of Attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q42992" start="92074" end="92084" title="Golda Meir" label="Golda Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890121" start="92215" end="92228" title="1969 Israeli legislative election" label="1969 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643067" start="92243" end="92280" title="List of the first female holders of political offices in Asia" label="first female prime minister of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154288" start="92423" end="92437" title="Black September in Jordan" label="September 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q146906" start="92438" end="92450" title="King Hussein" label="King Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="92454" end="92460" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="92471" end="92504" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestine Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="92760" end="92767" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15140616" start="92784" end="92799" title="Cairo Agreement (1969)" label="Cairo agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127419" start="92955" end="92964" title="Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon" label="Fatahland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="93004" end="93022" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q118725" start="93046" end="93060" title="Hafez al-Assad" label="Hafez al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="93172" end="93183" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485133" start="93196" end="93215" title="Zionology" label="Soviet antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901225" start="93302" end="93310" title="Aliyah from the Soviet Union in the 1970s" label="emigrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q126214" start="93337" end="93355" title="Refusenik" label="refused exit visas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14805828" start="93429" end="93446" title="Prisoners of Zion" label="Prisoners of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738551" start="93491" end="93513" title="Israeli Black Panthers" label="Israeli Black Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="93565" end="93577" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q620642" start="93636" end="93648" title="Jewish Mafia" label="Jewish Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312167" start="93657" end="93669" title="Meyer Lansky" label="Meyer Lansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="93751" end="93766" title="Munich Olympics" label="Munich Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="93830" end="93869" title="Munich massacre" label="taken hostage by Palestinian terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="93903" end="93931" title="Munich Massacre" label="led to the death of the rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994229" start="94125" end="94145" title="Lufthansa Flight 615" label="Lufthansa Flight 615"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575041" start="94188" end="94196" title="1972 Israeli air raid in Syria and Lebanon" label="air raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q654777" start="94200" end="94239" title="1973 Israeli raid on Lebanon" label="raid on the PLO headquarters in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27851" start="94290" end="94312" title="Mossad assassinations following the Munich massacre" label="assassination campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="94389" end="94400" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="94780" end="94794" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="95016" end="95031" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007093" start="95064" end="95086" title="Operation Nickel Grass" label="Operation Nickel Grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907870" start="95121" end="95136" title="Valley of Tears" label="Valley of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871286" start="95280" end="95298" title="Battle of Ismailia" label="Battle of Ismailia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428532" start="95399" end="95432" title="United Nations Disengagement Observer Force Zone" label="Disengagement of Forces agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="95538" end="95553" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="95599" end="95603" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q483463" start="95843" end="95854" title="Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q187009" start="95987" end="95992" title="Likud" label="Likud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890132" start="96016" end="96039" title="1973 Israeli legislative election" label="December 1973 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q818618" start="96138" end="96150" title="DFLP" label="Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638587" start="96172" end="96184" title="Ma&amp;#x27;alot massacre" label="Ma&amp;#x27;alot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="96316" end="96329" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594416" start="96383" end="96401" title="Agranat Commission" label="Agranat Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q467177" start="96548" end="96562" title="David Elazar" label="Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910612" start="96567" end="96596" title="Eli Zeira" label="head of military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q42992" start="96668" end="96678" title="Golda Meir" label="Golda Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q34060" start="96761" end="96774" title="Yitzhak Rabin" label="Yitzhak Rabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577041" start="96798" end="96815" title="Religious Zionist" label="Religious Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q330110" start="96846" end="96864" title="Abraham Isaac Kook" label="Abraham Isaac Kook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506923" start="96877" end="96888" title="Gush Emunim" label="Gush Emunim"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="96942" end="96951" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="96956" end="96966" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260" start="97072" end="97085" title="Kurt Waldheim" label="Kurt Waldheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q287908" start="97095" end="97110" title="UN General Assembly Resolution 3379" label="Resolution 3379"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="97127" end="97134" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q287908" start="97228" end="97244" title="UN General Assembly Resolution 46/86" label="Resolution 46/86"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97281" end="97304" title="Land Day#The protest of 1976" label="strike by Israeli-Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q33933" start="97402" end="97419" title="Operation Entebbe" label="Operation Entebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="97466" end="97476" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918659" start="97496" end="97510" title="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine – External Operations" label="PFLP militants"/>
<link wikidata="Q701219" start="97515" end="97537" title="Revolutionary Cells (RZ)" label="German revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q334903" start="97605" end="97614" title="Abu Daoud" label="Abu Daoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q360961" start="97698" end="97715" title="Anatoly Sharansky" label="Anatoly Sharansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q126214" start="97729" end="97738" title="Refusenik" label="Refusenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630398" start="97761" end="97782" title="Moscow Helsinki Group" label="Moscow Helsinki Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q441183" start="97885" end="97889" title="Leah Rabin" label="wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289203" start="98053" end="98074" title="Dollar Account affair" label="Dollar Account affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q57410" start="98076" end="98088" title="Shimon Peres" label="Shimon Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579409" start="98144" end="98153" title="Alignment (political party)" label="Alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917062" start="98161" end="98181" title="1977 Israeli legislative election" label="subsequent elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q187009" start="98233" end="98238" title="Likud" label="Likud"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="98246" end="98260" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917062" start="98281" end="98295" title="1977 Israeli legislative election" label="1977 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="98422" end="98433" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="98469" end="98476" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="98521" end="98535" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351415" start="98731" end="98740" title="Peace Now" label="Peace Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q301448" start="98908" end="98929" title="Coastal Road Massacre" label="Coastal Road Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121402" start="99047" end="99063" title="Operation Litani" label="Operation Litani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642172" start="99082" end="99128" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 425" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 425"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="99185" end="99224" title="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon" label="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="99316" end="99328" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q309202" start="99398" end="99408" title="Camp David" label="Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q309204" start="99447" end="99456" title="Camp David Accords" label="framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129412" start="99776" end="99813" title="Egypt–Israel peace treaty" label="peace treaty between Egypt and Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="99995" end="100006" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="100110" end="100115" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="100119" end="100124" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="100126" end="100131" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q310214" start="100160" end="100182" title="Egyptian Islamic Jihad" label="Islamic fundamentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892491" start="100307" end="100317" title="United States foreign aid" label="recipients"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="100321" end="100350" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="US military and financial aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449700" start="100382" end="100396" title="Financial cost of the Iraq War" label="overtaken them"/>
<link wikidata="Q190986" start="100429" end="100436" title="Merkava" label="Merkava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309935" start="100496" end="100508" title="Iranian Jews" label="Iranian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="100542" end="100560" title="Islamic Revolution" label="Islamic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q725043" start="100647" end="100662" title="Operation Opera" label="Operation Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="100668" end="100674" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="100692" end="100696" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917008" start="100741" end="100755" title="1981 Israeli legislative election" label="1981 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="100785" end="100797" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667243" start="100844" end="100869" title="Golan Heights Law" label="annexed the Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q208489" start="100885" end="100901" title="El Al" label="national airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="100917" end="100924" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q592008" start="100956" end="100965" title="Science and technology in Israel" label="high-tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426839" start="100981" end="100990" title="Silicon Wadi" label="developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="101068" end="101075" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15140616" start="101146" end="101161" title="Cairo Agreement (1969)" label="Cairo agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127419" start="101190" end="101196" title="Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127419" start="101324" end="101333" title="Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon" label="Fatahland"/>
<link wikidata="Q178888" start="101341" end="101346" title="Fatah" label="Fatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q192223" start="101418" end="101425" title="Katyusha rocket launcher" label="shelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q327413" start="101468" end="101481" title="Kiryat Shmona" label="Kiryat Shmona"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="101643" end="101663" title="Lebanese civil war" label="civil war in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363874" start="101711" end="101723" title="Shlomo Argov" label="Shlomo Argov"/>
<link wikidata="Q545206" start="101878" end="101892" title="Chief of General Staff (Israel)" label="Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q365524" start="101893" end="101906" title="Raphael Eitan" label="Raphael Eitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49103" start="102055" end="102071" title="1982 Lebanon War" label="1982 Lebanon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="102102" end="102108" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777998" start="102181" end="102185" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a Islam in Lebanon" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="102190" end="102199" title="Maronites" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480109" start="102214" end="102227" title="South Lebanon" label="South Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q452670" start="102355" end="102359" title="Amal Movement" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q672145" start="102377" end="102388" title="Musa al-Sadr" label="radicalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="102596" end="102603" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q315534" start="102606" end="102620" title="Bashir Gemayel" label="Bashir Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="102811" end="102821" title="Kataeb Party" label="Phalangist"/>
<link wikidata="Q467879" start="102846" end="102858" title="Elie Hobeika" label="Elie Hobeika"/>
<link wikidata="Q208199" start="102901" end="102910" title="Sabra and Shatila massacre" label="massacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="102959" end="102972" title="anti-war protest" label="demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721160" start="103102" end="103124" title="Kahan commission" label="Israeli public inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q321851" start="103369" end="103385" title="May 17 Agreement" label="May 17 Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q929554" start="103665" end="103683" title="South Lebanon Army" label="South Lebanon Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q184351" start="103803" end="103817" title="Yitzhak Shamir" label="Yitzhak Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917025" start="103841" end="103854" title="1984 Israeli legislative election" label="1984 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57410" start="103918" end="103930" title="Shimon Peres" label="Shimon Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670985" start="104182" end="104192" title="Aryeh Deri" label="Aryeh Deri"/>
<link wikidata="Q398134" start="104206" end="104219" title="Agudat Israel" label="Agudat Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q467172" start="104248" end="104266" title="Rabbi Ovadia Yosef" label="Rabbi Ovadia Yosef"/>
<link wikidata="Q904635" start="104278" end="104282" title="Shas" label="Shas"/>
<link wikidata="Q929554" start="104466" end="104473" title="South Lebanon Army" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480109" start="104477" end="104493" title="southern Lebanon" label="southern Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910225" start="104505" end="104518" title="Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon" label="security zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479435" start="104599" end="104605" title="South Lebanon conflict (1982–2000)" label="fought"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="104633" end="104637" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="104651" end="104660" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581056" start="104731" end="104740" title="1983 Israel bank stock crisis" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019121" start="104764" end="104777" title="index linking" label="index linking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582343" start="104869" end="104896" title="1985 Israel Economic Stabilization Plan" label="emergency control of prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720762" start="105002" end="105020" title="old Israeli shekel" label="old Israeli shekel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131309" start="105051" end="105069" title="Israeli new shekel" label="Israeli new shekel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49105" start="105214" end="105228" title="First Intifada" label="First Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q49107" start="105261" end="105281" title="Oslo I Accord" label="Oslo accords of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="105324" end="105336" title="Human rights" label="Human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334053" start="105394" end="105407" title="B&amp;#x27;Tselem" label="B&amp;#x27;Tselem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917001" start="105568" end="105582" title="1988 Israeli legislative election" label="1988 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579409" start="105643" end="105663" title="Alignment (political party)" label="the Labour Alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q57410" start="105697" end="105709" title="Shimon Peres" label="Shimon Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260705" start="105849" end="105876" title="The dirty trick (Israel)" label="&amp;quot;the dirty trick&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="105987" end="105993" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="106010" end="106018" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="106069" end="106082" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q221641" start="106113" end="106125" title="Scud missile" label="Scud missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="106405" end="106422" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="106450" end="106467" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343802" start="106488" end="106514" title="Madrid Conference of 1991" label="historic meeting in Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890021" start="106673" end="106712" title="1990s post-Soviet aliyah" label="immigrants from the former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917044" start="106845" end="106859" title="1992 Israeli legislative election" label="1992 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q210703" start="106865" end="106877" title="Labor Party (Israel)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q34060" start="106886" end="106899" title="Yitzhak Rabin" label="Yitzhak Rabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q239951" start="107090" end="107096" title="Meretz" label="Meretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="107345" end="107354" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026496" start="107372" end="107396" title="Operation Accountability" label="Operation Accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="107435" end="107468" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestine Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013132" start="107486" end="107498" title="Oslo Accords" label="Oslo Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="107554" end="107565" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="107667" end="107688" title="Palestinian Authority" label="Palestinian Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q380435" start="107940" end="107956" title="Baruch Goldstein" label="Baruch Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q331852" start="107976" end="107980" title="Kach and Kahane Chai" label="Kach"/>
<link wikidata="Q204200" start="108034" end="108056" title="Cave of the Patriarchs" label="Cave of the Patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="108060" end="108066" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783157" start="108094" end="108125" title="Cave of the Patriarchs massacre" label="Cave of the Patriarchs massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496605" start="108300" end="108322" title="Gaza–Jericho Agreement" label="Gaza–Jericho Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q371247" start="108344" end="108408" title="Agreement on Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities" label="Agreement on Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q620988" start="108549" end="108571" title="Israel–Jordan peace treaty" label="Washington Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="108598" end="108610" title="war" label="state of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q620988" start="108674" end="108703" title="Israel–Jordan Treaty of Peace" label="Israel–Jordan Treaty of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="108731" end="108743" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34060" start="108761" end="108774" title="Yitzhak Rabin" label="Yitzhak Rabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="108792" end="108805" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q371247" start="108817" end="108854" title="Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip" label="Israeli–Palestinian Interim Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961176" start="109457" end="109486" title="Palestinian National Covenant" label="Palestinian National Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="109620" end="109625" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109673" end="109695" title="List of Palestinian suicide attacks#1990s" label="suicide bomber attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759150" start="109719" end="109726" title="Gaza–Israel barrier" label="barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="109823" end="109846" title="Palestinian Territories" label="Palestinian Territories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109956" end="109965" title="Demographics of Israel#Foreign workers" label="labourers"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="109975" end="109986" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="109988" end="109996" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="109998" end="110003" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="110008" end="110015" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q319029" start="110182" end="110199" title="Yigal Amir" label="religious Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013132" start="110216" end="110228" title="Oslo Accords" label="Oslo Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608162" start="110229" end="110270" title="Assassination of Yitzhak Rabin" label="assassinated Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57410" start="110313" end="110325" title="Shimon Peres" label="Shimon Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473919" start="110382" end="110407" title="Operation Grapes of Wrath" label="Operation Grapes of Wrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q192223" start="110460" end="110468" title="Katyusha rocket launcher" label="Katyusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576609" start="110469" end="110483" title="List of Lebanese rocket attacks on Israel" label="rocket attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917048" start="110582" end="110591" title="1996 Israeli legislative election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917048" start="110617" end="110654" title="1996 Israeli prime ministerial election" label="direct election of the prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q187009" start="110701" end="110706" title="Likud" label="Likud"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="110714" end="110732" title="Binyamin Netanyahu" label="Binyamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="110806" end="110811" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013132" start="110901" end="110913" title="Oslo Accords" label="Oslo Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808958" start="111127" end="111143" title="Western Wall Tunnel riots" label="Palestinian riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335177" start="111193" end="111212" title="Western Wall tunnel" label="Western Wall tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712222" start="111324" end="111339" title="Hebron Protocol" label="Hebron Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="111423" end="111429" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480394" start="111527" end="111535" title="1999 Israeli legislative election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q125731" start="111550" end="111560" title="Ehud Barak" label="Ehud Barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q399798" start="111682" end="111705" title="Supreme Court of Israel" label="Supreme Court of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="111809" end="111826" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111905" end="111913" title="South Lebanon conflict (1982–2000)#2000 Israeli withdrawal and collapse of South Lebanon Army" label="withdrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q929554" start="112023" end="112041" title="South Lebanon Army" label="South Lebanon Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642172" start="112212" end="112246" title="UN Security Council Resolution 425" label="UN Security Council Resolution 425"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133272" start="112327" end="112345" title="Sheba&amp;#x27;a Farms" label="Sheba&amp;#x27;a Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="112463" end="112472" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029825" start="112699" end="112728" title="2000 Camp David Summit" label="talks were held at Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158595" start="112874" end="112895" title="concession (politics)" label="political concessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117820" start="113083" end="113116" title="Western European and Others Group" label="Western European and Others Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="113532" end="113544" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="113578" end="113590" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="113640" end="113656" title="al-Aqsa Intifada" label="al-Aqsa Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733907" start="113829" end="113864" title="2001 Israeli prime ministerial election" label="special election for Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="113986" end="113998" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598399" start="114199" end="114206" title="2000–2006 Shebaa Farms conflict" label="attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="114210" end="114219" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114549" end="114569" title="List of Palestinian suicide attacks#2000s" label="suicide bomb attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660905" start="114590" end="114607" title="Passover massacre" label="Passover massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124738" start="114613" end="114671" title="List of Israeli civilian casualties in the Second Intifada" label="List of Israeli civilian casualties in the Second Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276724" start="114690" end="114716" title="Operation Defensive Shield" label="Operation Defensive Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759150" start="114771" end="114778" title="Gaza–Israel barrier" label="barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q123196" start="114843" end="114849" title="Sderot" label="Sderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330027" start="114917" end="114925" title="Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel" label="shelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903772" start="115005" end="115013" title="Aliyah from Latin America in the 2000s" label="arriving"/>
<link wikidata="Q782051" start="115102" end="115111" title="2003 Israeli legislative election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500739" start="115194" end="115200" title="Shinui" label="Shinui"/>
<link wikidata="Q471751" start="115222" end="115233" title="Tommy Lapid" label="Tommy Lapid"/>
<link wikidata="Q904635" start="115327" end="115331" title="Shas" label="Shas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390424" start="115415" end="115428" title="African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem" label="Black Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q950320" start="115657" end="115670" title="Law of Return" label="Law of Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="115830" end="115834" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q196122" start="115879" end="115912" title="Israel&amp;#x27;s unilateral disengagement plan" label="Disengagement from the Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q39655" start="116091" end="116097" title="Kadima" label="Kadima"/>
<link wikidata="Q977390" start="116265" end="116302" title="2006 Palestinian legislative election" label="2006 Palestinian legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644137" start="116520" end="116565" title="Hamas–UNRWA Holocaust dispute" label="claimed the Holocaust was a Jewish conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="116769" end="116780" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="116932" end="116944" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="116975" end="116993" title="hemorrhagic stroke" label="hemorrhagic stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q93181" start="116998" end="117009" title="Ehud Olmert" label="Ehud Olmert"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="117017" end="117031" title="Prime Minister of Israel" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q93181" start="117058" end="117069" title="Ehud Olmert" label="Ehud Olmert"/>
<link wikidata="Q39655" start="117114" end="117120" title="Kadima" label="Kadima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720560" start="117153" end="117186" title="2006 Israeli legislative election" label="2006 Israeli legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q34448" start="117196" end="117215" title="Mahmoud Ahmadinejad" label="Mahmoud Ahmadinejad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059994" start="117315" end="117330" title="Israel–Iran proxy conflict" label="confrontational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777814" start="117370" end="117403" title="Operation Bringing Home the Goods" label="Operation Bringing Home the Goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687" start="117443" end="117450" title="Jericho" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q400735" start="117471" end="117489" title="Ahmad Sa&amp;#x27;adat" label="Ahmad Sa&amp;#x27;adat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170310" start="117579" end="117598" title="Rehavam Ze&amp;#x27;evi" label="Rehavam Ze&amp;#x27;evi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606339" start="117806" end="117814" title="2006 Hamas cross-border raid" label="attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q214821" start="117849" end="117861" title="Gilad Shalit" label="Gilad Shalit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316163" start="117872" end="117879" title="2006 Israel–Gaza conflict" label="clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026122" start="117911" end="117926" title="Zar&amp;#x27;it-Shtula incident" label="attacked Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49104" start="118087" end="118105" title="2006 Lebanon War" label="Second Lebanon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q94794" start="118318" end="118349" title="Operation Changing Direction 11" label="Operation Changing Direction 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q117184250" start="118461" end="118481" title="Battle of Wadi Saluki" label="captured Wadi Saluki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="118632" end="118653" title="Lebanese Armed Forces" label="Lebanese Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="118658" end="118664" title="UNIFIL" label="UNIFIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q373655" start="118738" end="118752" title="Battle of Gaza (2007)" label="Battle of Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q653112" start="118910" end="118918" title="Blockade of the Gaza Strip" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q574543" start="119151" end="119168" title="Operation Orchard" label="Operation Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560749" start="119207" end="119227" title="Operation Hot Winter" label="Operation Hot Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q333739" start="119274" end="119287" title="Qassam rocket" label="Qassam rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611309" start="119336" end="119343" title="2008 Israel-Hezbollah prisoner swap" label="swapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386243" start="119375" end="119390" title="Ehud Goldwasser" label="Ehud Goldwasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399601" start="119395" end="119406" title="Eldad Regev" label="Eldad Regev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389167" start="119466" end="119478" title="Samir Kuntar" label="Samir Kuntar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511013" start="119485" end="119504" title="Lebanese prisoners in Israel" label="Hezbollah prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q39655" start="119753" end="119759" title="Kadima" label="Kadima"/>
<link wikidata="Q151796" start="119785" end="119796" title="Tzipi Livni" label="Tzipi Livni"/>
<link wikidata="Q170682" start="119927" end="119946" title="Operation Cast Lead" label="Operation Cast Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593472" start="120083" end="120109" title="List of Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel, 2009" label="Palestinian rocket attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q911180" start="120149" end="120174" title="2009 Israeli legislative election" label="2009 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q514442" start="120362" end="120378" title="Yisrael Beiteinu" label="Yisrael Beiteinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053933" start="120488" end="120502" title="Yitzhak Tshuva" label="Yitzhak Tshuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499333" start="120530" end="120555" title="Tamar gas field" label="huge natural gas reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q205512" start="120601" end="120623" title="Gaza flotilla raid" label="international incident"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="120702" end="120719" title="Blockade of the Gaza Strip#Naval blockade" label="maritime blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280371" start="120851" end="120906" title="Direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians (2010-2011)" label="direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q81231" start="121112" end="121121" title="Iron Dome" label="Iron Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113637" start="121225" end="121254" title="2011 Israeli housing protests" label="2011 Israeli housing protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="121319" end="121333" title="socio-economic" label="socio-economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q575619" start="121415" end="121429" title="cost of living" label="cost of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915558" start="121710" end="121728" title="Gilad Shalit prisoner exchange" label="a deal was reached"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="121748" end="121753" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q214821" start="121794" end="121806" title="Gilad Shalit" label="Gilad Shalit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166511" start="121842" end="121854" title="Palestinian prisoners in Israel" label="Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="121859" end="121871" title="Arab citizens of Israel" label="Arab-Israeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q628461" start="121923" end="121952" title="Popular Resistance Committees" label="Popular Resistance Committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075040" start="121954" end="121968" title="Zuhir al-Qaisi" label="Zuhir al-Qaisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q135162" start="122058" end="122074" title="Israeli targeted killings" label="targeted killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q359689" start="122211" end="122222" title="Shaul Mofaz" label="Shaul Mofaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q39655" start="122227" end="122233" title="Kadima" label="Kadima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892322" start="122423" end="122478" title="Plesner Committee" label="military conscription for ultra-Orthodox Jews in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q53692" start="122567" end="122594" title="Operation Pillar of Defense" label="Operation Pillar of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q65055" start="122653" end="122665" title="Ahmed Jabari" label="Ahmed Jabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924380" start="122849" end="122856" title="Egypt–Israel barrier" label="barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813338" start="122986" end="123008" title="Likud Yisrael Beiteinu" label="Likud Yisrael Beiteinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334537" start="123049" end="123074" title="2013 Israeli legislative election" label="2013 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q622716" start="123131" end="123140" title="Yesh Atid" label="Yesh Atid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530720" start="123162" end="123177" title="The Jewish Home" label="The Jewish Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q195956" start="123200" end="123207" title="Hatnuah" label="Hatnuah"/>
<link wikidata="Q14395609" start="123335" end="123346" title="2013 Israeli-Palestinian peace talks" label="peace talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17324420" start="123720" end="123745" title="Operation Protective Edge" label="Operation Protective Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16132623" start="123838" end="123858" title="Palestinian tunnel warfare in the Gaza Strip" label="cross-border tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="" start="123894" end="123923" title="Basic Law proposal: Israel as the Nation-State of the Jewish People" label="&amp;quot;Jewish state&amp;quot; bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012412" start="123978" end="124000" title="2015 Israeli legislative election" label="2015 Israeli elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q187009" start="124055" end="124060" title="Likud" label="Likud"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618867" start="124129" end="124135" title="Kulanu" label="Kulanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530720" start="124142" end="124157" title="The Jewish Home" label="The Jewish Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q904635" start="124184" end="124188" title="Shas" label="Shas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466053" start="124197" end="124217" title="United Torah Judaism" label="United Torah Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18669899" start="124283" end="124296" title="Zionist Union" label="Zionist Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21083298" start="124343" end="124376" title="2015–2016 wave of violence in Israeli-Palestinian conflict" label="lone-wolf attacks by Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="124461" end="124473" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q45266620" start="124493" end="124556" title="United States recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel" label="United States recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q62469885" start="124584" end="124648" title="United States recognition of the Golan Heights as part of Israel" label="United States recognition of the Golan Heights as part of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51139646" start="124719" end="124744" title="2018–19 Gaza border protests" label="the Great March of Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q87070975" start="124815" end="124832" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Israel" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87070975" start="124839" end="124848" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Israel" label="in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q108619505" start="124965" end="124978" title="Israel Shield" label="Israel Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q87866152" start="125042" end="125062" title="COVID-19 lockdowns" label="Nationwide lockdowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q90416196" start="125067" end="125080" title="Face masks during the COVID-19 pandemic" label="mask mandates"/>
<link wikidata="Q104621249" start="125154" end="125174" title="COVID-19 vaccination in Israel" label="vaccination campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q108883056" start="125213" end="125225" title="Vaccine passports during the COVID-19 pandemic" label="green passes"/>
<link wikidata="Q99495661" start="125367" end="125382" title="Abraham Accords" label="Abraham Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q100744326" start="125385" end="125401" title="Israel–Sudan normalization agreement" label="Sudan in October"/>
<link wikidata="Q104102352" start="125407" end="125426" title="Israel–Morocco normalization agreement" label="Morocco in December"/>
<link wikidata="Q106775117" start="125496" end="125527" title="Operation Guardian of the Walls" label="Operation Guardian of the Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q89194084" start="125576" end="125602" title="2019–2022 Israeli political crisis" label="2019–2022 political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24909108" start="125716" end="125726" title="April 2019 Israeli legislative election" label="April 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q64159775" start="125731" end="125745" title="September 2019 Israeli legislative election" label="September 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q77929387" start="125809" end="125819" title="2020 Israeli legislative election" label="March 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q61788155" start="125939" end="125953" title="Blue and White (political alliance)" label="Blue and White"/>
<link wikidata="Q557436" start="125962" end="125973" title="Benny Gantz" label="Benny Gantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q28196000" start="126000" end="126016" title="Thirty-fifth government of Israel" label="unity government"/>
<link wikidata="Q96395543" start="126304" end="126323" title="2021 Israeli legislative election" label="March 2021 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q39318" start="126325" end="126340" title="Naftali Bennett" label="Naftali Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396120" start="126375" end="126385" title="Yair Lapid" label="Yair Lapid"/>
<link wikidata="Q249078" start="126607" end="126617" title="Ra&amp;#x27;am" label="Ra&amp;#x27;am"/>
<link wikidata="Q106181016" start="126952" end="126966" title="2022 Israeli legislative election" label="2022 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q187009" start="127047" end="127052" title="Likud" label="Likud"/>
<link wikidata="Q904635" start="127054" end="127058" title="Shas" label="Shas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466053" start="127060" end="127080" title="United Torah Judaism" label="United Torah Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665610" start="127082" end="127105" title="Religious Zionist Party" label="Religious Zionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q46559" start="127107" end="127120" title="Otzma Yehudit" label="Otzma Yehudit"/>
<link wikidata="Q65553954" start="127125" end="127129" title="Noam (political party)" label="Noam"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="127275" end="127303" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q120201630" start="127344" end="127369" title="July 2023 Jenin incursion" label="July 2023 Jenin incursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342867" start="127381" end="127411" title="Palestinian political violence" label="Palestinian political violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="127513" end="127534" title="2023 Israel–Hamas war" label="2023 Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q125257835" start="127580" end="127586" title="Israeli bombing of the Iranian embassy in Damascus" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q271110" start="127695" end="127729" title="Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188894" start="127747" end="127767" title="Mohammad Reza Zahedi" label="Mohammad Reza Zahedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q125464497" start="127813" end="127821" title="April 2024 Iranian strikes against Israel" label="attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q125521954" start="128021" end="128027" title="April 2024 Israeli strikes on Iran" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916356" start="128090" end="128111" title="Archaeology of Israel" label="Archaeology of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="128114" end="128129" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967235" start="128132" end="128168" title="History of the Arab–Israeli conflict" label="History of the Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q373662" start="128171" end="128207" title="History of the Israel Defense Forces" label="History of the Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765144" start="128210" end="128230" title="History of Jerusalem" label="History of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q726702" start="128233" end="128286" title="History of the Jews and Judaism in the Land of Israel" label="History of the Jews and Judaism in the Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51615" start="128289" end="128315" title="History of the Middle East" label="History of the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q556079" start="128318" end="128338" title="History of Palestine" label="History of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137945" start="128341" end="128359" title="History of Zionism" label="History of Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q961603" start="128362" end="128376" title="Jewish history" label="Jewish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190080" start="128379" end="128402" title="Jewish military history" label="Jewish military history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663500" start="128405" end="128426" title="Levantine archaeology" label="Levantine archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457877" start="128429" end="128451" title="LGBT history in Israel" label="LGBT history in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434866" start="128454" end="128477" title="List of Israeli museums" label="List of Israeli museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q169431" start="128480" end="128524" title="List of Jewish leaders in the Land of Israel" label="List of Jewish leaders in the Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050977" start="128527" end="128550" title="List of years in Israel" label="List of years in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130120" start="128553" end="128571" title="Politics of Israel" label="Politics of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898133" start="128574" end="128617" title="Postage stamps and postal history of Israel" label="Postage stamps and postal history of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805421" start="128620" end="128656" title="Time periods in the Palestine region" label="Time periods in the Palestine region"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501795" start="128659" end="128686" title="Timeline of Israeli history" label="Timeline of Israeli history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806447" start="128689" end="128721" title="Timeline of the Palestine region" label="Timeline of the Palestine region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776882" start="129459" end="129472" title="Walter Eytan" label="Eytan, Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734072" start="129578" end="129592" title="Herbert Feis" label="Feis, Herbert."/>
<link wikidata="Q575610" start="129669" end="129684" title="Martin Gilbert" label="Gilbert, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q295141" start="129851" end="129864" title="Chaim Herzog" label="Herzog, Chaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q213692" start="130238" end="130253" title="Walter Laqueur" label="Laqueur, Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q735593" start="130542" end="130568" title="Conor Cruise O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="O&amp;#x27;Brian, Conor Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581825" start="130663" end="130676" title="Michael Oren" label="Oren, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404111" start="130800" end="130815" title="Anshel Pfeffer" label="Pfeffer, Anshel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393067" start="131555" end="131565" title="Tom Segev" label="Segev, Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q701793" start="131990" end="132007" title="Itamar Rabinovich" label="Itamar Rabinovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="132103" end="132131" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393067" start="132243" end="132252" title="Tom Segev" label="Tom Segev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869064" start="132355" end="132377" title="London Review of Books" label="London Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="132501" end="132512" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="132514" end="132517" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="132522" end="132528" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="132537" end="132547" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220693" start="132569" end="132584" title="Jewish homeland" label="Jewish homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="132588" end="132597" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="132643" end="132648" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q205318" start="132676" end="132680" title="Zion" label="Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q790712" start="132821" end="132832" title="Avi Shlaim" label="Shlaim, Avi"/>
<link wikidata="Q939379" start="132896" end="132912" title="Jacob Talmon" label="Talmon, Jacob L."/>
<link wikidata="Q78353" start="132995" end="133013" title="Michael Wolffsohn" label="Wolffsohn, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431423" start="133388" end="133422" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Israel)" label="Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704926" start="133458" end="133473" title="BBC News Online" label="BBC News Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="133501" end="133508" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637340" start="133543" end="133564" title="Israel State Archives" label="Israel State Archives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13810" wikidata="Q12236173" url="?curid=13810" title="Harvey Mudd College">
<text>Harvey Mudd College (HMC) is a private liberal arts college in Claremont, California, focused on science and engineering. It is part of the Claremont Colleges, which share adjoining campus grounds and resources. The college enrolled 902 undergraduate students and awards the Bachelor of Science degree. Admission to Harvey Mudd is highly competitive, and the college maintains an intense academic culture.

The college was funded by the friends and family of Harvey Seeley Mudd, one of the initial investors in the Cyprus Mines Corporation. Although involved in the planning of the new institution, Mudd died before it opened in 1955. The campus was designed by Edward Durell Stone in a modernist brutalist style.

==History==

Harvey Mudd College was founded in 1955. Classes began in 1957 with a class of 48 students, 7 faculty and one building–Mildred E. Mudd Hall, a dormitory. Classes and meals took place at 
Claremont Men&#x27;s College (Claremont McKenna College), and labs in the Baxter Science Building until additional buildings could be built: Jacobs Science Building (1959), Thomas-Garett Hall (1961) and Platt Campus Center (1963). By 1966, the campus had grown to 283 students and 43 faculty.

Under the presidency of Maria Klawe as of 2006, Harvey Mudd became a leading advocate for women in STEM in higher education.

In April 2017, all classes were cancelled for two days in response to tensions on campus over workload, race issues, and mistrust of faculty. Contributing events included the deaths of two Mudd students and a Scripps student that year and the leak of the Wabash Report on teaching, learning, and workload at Mudd.

On July 1, 2023, Harriet Nembhard became the sixth President of Harvey Mudd College.

==Campus==
The original buildings of the campus, designed by Edward Durell Stone and completed in 1959, feature &quot;knobbly concrete squares that students of Harvey Mudd affectionately call &quot;warts&quot; and use as hooks for skateboards.&quot; The school&#x27;s unofficial mascot &quot;Wally the Wart&quot; is an anthropomorphic concrete wart.

In 2013, &quot;Travel and Leisure&quot; named the college as one of &quot;America&#x27;s ugliest college campuses&quot; and noted that while Stone regarded his design as a &quot;Modernist masterpiece&quot;, the result was &quot;layering drab, slab-sided buildings with Beaux-Arts decoration.&quot;

=== Academic buildings ===
The official names for the academic buildings of Harvey Mudd College are:

* F.W. Olin Science Center (&quot;Olin&quot;) - 1992
* Parsons Engineering Building (&quot;Parsons&quot;) - 1972
* R. Michael Shanahan Center for Teaching and Learning (&quot;Shan&quot;) - 2013
* Jacobs Science Center (&quot;Jacobs&quot;) - 1959
* W.M. Keck Laboratories (&quot;Keck&quot;) 
* Scott A. McGregor Computer Science Center (&quot;Greg&quot;) - 2021

===Dormitories===

The official names for the dormitories of Harvey Mudd College are (listed in order of construction):
* Mildred E. Mudd Hall (&quot;East&quot;) - 1957
* West Hall (&quot;West&quot;) - 1958
* North Hall (&quot;North&quot;) - 1959
* Marks Residence Hall (&quot;South&quot;) - 1968
* J. L. Atwood Residence Hall (&quot;Atwood&quot;) - 1981
* Case Residence Hall (&quot;Case&quot;) - 1985
* Ronald and Maxine Linde Residence Hall (&quot;Linde&quot;) - 1993
* Frederick and Susan Sontag Residence Hall (&quot;Sontag&quot;) - 2004
* Wayne and Julie Drinkward Residence Hall (&quot;Drinkward&quot;) - 2015
* Garrett House - completed in 1959 as the president&#x27;s house, converted to a dorm in 2023

Until the addition of the Linde and Sontag dorms, Atwood and Case dorms were occasionally referred to as New Dorm and New Dorm II; Mildred E. Mudd Hall and Marks Hall are almost invariably referred to as East Dorm and South Dorm.

During the construction of Case Dorm some students decided as a prank to move all of the survey stakes exactly six inches in one direction.

&quot;East&quot; was the first dorm, but it wasn&#x27;t until &quot;West&quot; was built west of it that it was actually referred to as &quot;East&quot;. Then, &quot;North&quot; was built, directly north of &quot;East&quot;. When the fourth dorm, Marks Hall, was built, there was one corner of the quad available (the northwest) and one directional name, &quot;South&quot;, remaining. To this day, &quot;South&quot; dorm is the northernmost HMC inner dorm.

The fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth dorms built are Atwood, Case, Linde, Sontag, and Drinkward, respectively. They were initially referred to as &quot;the colonies&quot; by some students, a reference to the fact that they were newer and at the farthest end of the campus; these dorms are now more commonly referred to as &quot;the outer dorms&quot;, with the four directional dorms referred to as &quot;the inner dorms&quot;. The college had initially purchased an apartment building adjacent to the newer dorms to house additional students, but it was demolished to make room for Sontag.

Since any HMC student, regardless of class year, can live in any of the dormitories, several of the dorms have accumulated long-standing traditions and so-called &quot;personalities&quot;.

==Academics==

HMC offers four-year degrees in chemistry, mathematics, physics, computer science, biology, and engineering, interdisciplinary degrees in mathematical and computational biology, and joint majors in computer science and mathematics; computer science and physics; physics and mathematics; and biology and chemistry. Students may also elect an Individual Program of Study (IPS) or an off-campus major offered by any of the other Claremont Colleges, provided one also completes a minor in one of the technical fields that Harvey Mudd offers as a major.

All HMC students are required to take the college&#x27;s Common Core Curriculum, typically throughout their freshman and sophomore years. This includes courses in computer science, engineering, biology, chemistry, physics, mathematics, writing, a critical inquiry course, and a social impact course.

Its most popular majors, by 2023 graduates, were:

# Computer Science (55)
# Engineering (53)
# Computer Science &amp; Mathematics (44)
# Mathematics (16)

In 2018, the &quot;Chronicle of Higher Education&quot; reported that in response to student &quot;complaints first to mental-health counsellors and then to outside evaluators,&quot; the college was &quot;considering how to ease pressure on students without sacrificing rigour.&quot;

=== Admissions ===
For the class of 2026, the college received 4,440 applications and admitted 593 applicants (a 13.4% acceptance rate). Of the 237 freshmen who enrolled, the middle 50% of SAT scores reported were 760–790 in mathematics and 720–770 in reading and writing, while the ACT Composite range was 34–36.

Harvey Mudd, along with Wake Forest University, long held out as the last four-year colleges or universities in the U.S. to accept only SAT and not ACT test scores for admission. In August 2007, at the beginning of the application process for the class of 2012, HMC began accepting ACT results, a year after Wake Forest abandoned its former SAT-only policy.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Harvey Mudd waived the requirement for SAT or ACT scores for the graduating classes of 2021 or 2022. This policy was extended to the classes of 2023 and 2024.

The college is need-blind for domestic applicants.

===Rankings===
&quot;Washington Monthly&quot; ranked Harvey Mudd second in 2024 among 194 liberal arts colleges in the U.S. based on its contribution to the public good, as measured by social mobility, research, and promoting public service. &quot;Money&quot; magazine ranked Harvey Mudd 136th out of 744 in its &quot;Best Colleges For Your Money 2019&quot; report.

In &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; 2025 &quot;America&#x27;s Best Colleges&quot; report, Harvey Mudd College is tied for the 12th best U.S. liberal arts college, and is third among undergraduate engineering schools in the U.S. whose highest degree is a Master&#x27;s. &quot;Forbes&quot; in 2019 rated it 23rd in its &quot;America&#x27;s Top Colleges&quot; ranking of 650 military academies, national universities and liberal arts colleges.

Harvey Mudd is ranked 1st nationally for Return on Investment for Students by PayScale&#x27;s 2024 rankings

==Tuition and other costs==
For the 2024-25 academic year, Harvey Mudd&#x27;s total annual cost of attendance (tuition, fees, and room and board) was $93,131. About 70% of freshmen receive financial aid.

== Student life ==

=== Athletics ===

Athletes from Harvey Mudd compete alongside athletes from Claremont McKenna College and Scripps College as the Claremont-Mudd-Scripps Stags and Athenas (CMS). The teams participate in NCAA Division III in the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC). The mascot for the men&#x27;s teams is Stanley the Stag, and the women&#x27;s teams are the Athenas. Their colours are cardinal and gold.

According to the Division III Fall Learfield Director&#x27;s Cup Standings for the 2016-2017 year, CMS ranks 12th among all Division III programs, and first among SCIAC colleges.

The other sports combination of the Claremont Colleges, and CMS&#x27; primary rival, is the team made up of Pomona College and Pitzer College known as the Pomona–Pitzer Sagehens (PP). This is known to students as the Sixth Street Rivalry.

==== Athletic facilities ====
* Baseball — Bill Arce Field
* Basketball and Volleyball — Roberts Pavilion
* Football and Lacrosse — John Zinda Field
* Softball — Softball Field
* Soccer — John Pritzlaff Field
* Aquatics — Matt M. Axelrood Pool
* Tennis — Biszantz Family Tennis Center
* Track and Field — Burns Track Complex

=== Relations with Caltech ===
The California Institute of Technology (Caltech), another university with strength in the natural sciences and engineering, is located away from Harvey Mudd College. Mudders occasionally amuse themselves by pranking Caltech. For example, in 1986, students from Mudd stole a memorial cannon from Fleming House at Caltech (originally from the National Guard) by dressing as maintenance people and carting it off on a flatbed truck for &quot;cleaning&quot;. The students eventually returned the cannon after Caltech threatened to take legal action. In 2006, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) replicated the prank and moved the same cannon to their campus in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

==Notable alumni==

Notable Harvey Mudd College alumni include:

* Donald D. Chamberlin, co-inventor of SQL
* Jonathan Gay (1989), creator of Adobe Flash software
* Jennifer Holmgren, CEO of LanzaTech
* Richard H. Jones, diplomat, U.S. ambassador to Israel
* Stan Love, astronaut
* George &quot;Pinky&quot; Nelson, astronaut
* Sean &quot;Day9&quot; Plott, esports commentator and game designer
* Tom Preston-Werner (dropped out), co-founder of GitHub, creator of Gravatar

== See also ==

* Association of Independent Technological Universities

==References==
==Bibliography==


==External links==
*Website of &quot;The Student Life&quot;, the 5C newspaper
* Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12236173" start="0" end="19" title="Harvey Mudd College" label="Harvey Mudd College"/>
<link wikidata="Q12236173" start="21" end="24" title="Harvey Mudd College" label="HMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="31" end="38" title="Private college" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540832" start="39" end="59" title="Liberal arts colleges in the United States" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q506398" start="63" end="84" title="Claremont, California" label="Claremont, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246557" start="140" end="158" title="Claremont Colleges" label="Claremont Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="237" end="250" title="Undergraduate education" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="275" end="294" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677579" start="459" end="477" title="Harvey Seeley Mudd" label="Harvey Seeley Mudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200470" start="515" end="539" title="Cyprus Mines Corporation" label="Cyprus Mines Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048508" start="662" end="681" title="Edward Durell Stone" label="Edward Durell Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="687" end="696" title="Modern architecture" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="697" end="706" title="Brutalist architecture" label="brutalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126318" start="945" end="970" title="Claremont McKenna College" label="Claremont McKenna College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11754" start="1233" end="1244" title="Maria Klawe" label="Maria Klawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693003" start="1299" end="1312" title="women in STEM" label="women in STEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q60795962" start="1667" end="1683" title="Harriet Nembhard" label="Harriet Nembhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048508" start="1797" end="1816" title="Edward Durell Stone" label="Edward Durell Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505734" start="2102" end="2120" title="Travel and Leisure" label="Travel and Leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="2265" end="2274" title="Modernist architecture" label="Modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="2356" end="2366" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q931092" start="3858" end="3863" title="prank" label="prank"/>
<link wikidata="Q811934" start="3883" end="3896" title="survey stakes" label="survey stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="5229" end="5238" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="5240" end="5251" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="5253" end="5260" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="5262" end="5278" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="5280" end="5287" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="5293" end="5304" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q73617" start="6217" end="6258" title="The Chronicle of Higher Education" label="&amp;quot;Chronicle of Higher Education&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="6677" end="6680" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="6771" end="6774" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q392667" start="6827" end="6849" title="Wake Forest University" label="Wake Forest University"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="6939" end="6942" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="6951" end="6954" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q936700" start="7367" end="7377" title="need-blind" label="need-blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972062" start="7425" end="7443" title="Washington Monthly" label="Washington Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q825316" start="7652" end="7657" title="Money (magazine)" label="Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="7780" end="7808" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="8054" end="8060" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156560" start="8299" end="8307" title="PayScale" label="PayScale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126318" start="8632" end="8657" title="Claremont McKenna College" label="Claremont McKenna College"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664609" start="8662" end="8677" title="Scripps College" label="Scripps College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126295" start="8685" end="8725" title="Claremont-Mudd-Scripps Stags and Athenas" label="Claremont-Mudd-Scripps Stags and Athenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="8758" end="8775" title="NCAA Division III" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="8783" end="8838" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227384" start="9275" end="9289" title="Pomona College" label="Pomona College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199570" start="9294" end="9308" title="Pitzer College" label="Pitzer College"/>
<link wikidata="Q56291680" start="9322" end="9344" title="Pomona–Pitzer Sagehens" label="Pomona–Pitzer Sagehens"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="9768" end="9802" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="10105" end="10119" title="United States National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="10319" end="10356" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="10429" end="10453" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q93071" start="10523" end="10543" title="Donald D. Chamberlin" label="Donald D. Chamberlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="10560" end="10563" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273180" start="10566" end="10578" title="Jonathan Gay" label="Jonathan Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="10598" end="10609" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q114874308" start="10621" end="10638" title="Jennifer Holmgren" label="Jennifer Holmgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q56585187" start="10647" end="10656" title="LanzaTech" label="LanzaTech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326932" start="10659" end="10675" title="Richard Jones (U.S. Ambassador to Israel)" label="Richard H. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q706859" start="10715" end="10724" title="Stanley G. Love" label="Stan Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q519124" start="10738" end="10769" title="George Nelson (astronaut)" label="George &amp;quot;Pinky&amp;quot; Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q511167" start="10783" end="10810" title="Sean Plott" label="Sean &amp;quot;Day9&amp;quot; Plott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16602077" start="10852" end="10870" title="Tom Preston-Werner" label="Tom Preston-Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q364" start="10900" end="10906" title="GitHub" label="GitHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187349" start="10919" end="10927" title="Gravatar" label="Gravatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809856" start="10947" end="11000" title="Association of Independent Technological Universities" label="Association of Independent Technological Universities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13811" wikidata="Q4489450" url="?curid=13811" title="Heaven">
<text>Heaven, or the Heavens, is a common religious cosmological or transcendent supernatural place where beings such as deities, angels, souls, saints, or venerated ancestors are said to originate, be enthroned, or reside. According to the beliefs of some religions, heavenly beings can descend to Earth or incarnate and earthly beings can ascend to Heaven in the afterlife or, in exceptional cases, enter Heaven without dying. 

Heaven is often described as a &quot;highest place&quot;, the holiest place, a paradise, in contrast to Hell or the Underworld or the &quot;low places&quot; and universally or conditionally accessible by earthly beings according to various standards of divinity, goodness, piety, faith, or other virtues or right beliefs or simply divine will. Some believe in the possibility of a heaven on Earth in a &quot;world to come&quot;. 

Another belief is in an axis mundi or world tree which connects the heavens, the terrestrial world, and the underworld. In Indian religions, heaven is considered as &quot;Svargaloka&quot;, and the soul is again subjected to rebirth in different living forms according to its &quot;karma&quot;. This cycle can be broken after a soul achieves &quot;Moksha&quot; or &quot;Nirvana&quot;. Any place of existence, either of humans, souls or deities, outside the tangible world (Heaven, Hell, or other) is referred to as the &quot;otherworld&quot;.

At least in the Abrahamic faiths of Christianity, Islam, and some schools of Judaism, as well as Zoroastrianism, heaven is the realm of afterlife where good actions in the previous life are rewarded for eternity (Hell being the place where bad behavior is punished).

== Etymology ==
The modern English word &quot;heaven&quot; is derived from the earlier (Middle English) &quot;heven&quot; (attested 1159); this in turn was developed from the previous Old English form &quot;heofon&quot;. By about 1000, &quot;heofon&quot; was being used in reference to the Christianized &quot;place where God dwells&quot;, but originally, it had signified &quot;sky, firmament&quot; (e.g. in &quot;Beowulf&quot;, c. 725). 

The English term has cognates in the other Germanic languages: Old Saxon &quot;heƀan&quot; &quot;sky, heaven&quot; (hence also Middle Low German &quot;heven&quot; &quot;sky&quot;), Old Icelandic &quot;himinn&quot;, Gothic &quot;himins&quot;; and those with a variant final &quot;-l&quot;: Old Frisian &quot;himel, himul&quot; &quot;sky, heaven&quot;, Old Saxon and Old High German &quot;himil&quot;, Old Saxon and Middle Low German &quot;hemmel&quot;, Old Dutch and Dutch &quot;hemel&quot;, and modern German &quot;Himmel&quot;. All of these have been derived from a reconstructed Proto-Germanic form *&quot;hemina-&quot;. or &quot;*hemō&quot;.

The further derivation of this form is uncertain. A connection to Proto-Indo-European &quot;*ḱem-&quot; &quot;cover, shroud&quot;, via a reconstructed &quot;*k̑emen-&quot; or &quot;*k̑ōmen-&quot; &quot;stone, heaven&quot;, has been proposed. 

Others endorse the derivation from a Proto-Indo-European root &quot;*h₂éḱmō&quot; &quot;stone&quot; and, possibly, &quot;heavenly vault&quot; at the origin of this word, which then would have as cognates ancient Greek ἄκμων (ákmōn &quot;anvil, pestle; meteorite&quot;), Persian آسمان (&quot;âsemân, âsmân&quot; &quot;stone, sling-stone; sky, heaven&quot;) and Sanskrit अश्मन् (&quot;aśman&quot; &quot;stone, rock, sling-stone; thunderbolt; the firmament&quot;). In the latter case English &quot;hammer&quot; would be another cognate to the word.

== Ancient Near East ==
=== Mesopotamia ===

The ancient Mesopotamians regarded the sky as a series of domes (usually three, but sometimes seven) covering the flat Earth. Each dome was made of a different kind of precious stone. The lowest dome of heaven was made of jasper and was the home of the stars. The middle dome of heaven was made of &quot;saggilmut&quot; stone and was the abode of the Igigi. The highest and outermost dome of heaven was made of &quot;luludānītu&quot; stone and was personified as An, the god of the sky. The celestial bodies were equated with specific deities as well. The planet Venus was believed to be Inanna, the goddess of sex and war. The Sun was her brother Utu, the god of justice, and the Moon was their father Nanna.

In ancient Near Eastern cultures in general and in Mesopotamia in particular, humans had little to no access to the divine realm. Heaven and Earth were separated by their very nature; humans could see and be affected by elements of the lower heaven, such as stars and storms, but ordinary mortals could not go to Heaven because it was the abode of the gods alone. In the &quot;Epic of Gilgamesh&quot;, Gilgamesh says to Enkidu, &quot;Who can go up to heaven, my friend? Only the gods dwell with Shamash forever.&quot; Instead, after a person died, his or her soul went to Kur (later known as Irkalla), a dark shadowy underworld, located deep below the surface of the earth.

All souls went to the same afterlife, and a person&#x27;s actions during life had no impact on how he would be treated in the world to come. Nonetheless, funerary evidence indicates that some people believed that Inanna had the power to bestow special favors upon her devotees in the afterlife. Despite the separation between heaven and earth, humans sought access to the gods through oracles and omens. The gods were believed to live in Heaven, but also in their temples, which were seen as the channels of communication between Earth and Heaven, which allowed mortal access to the gods. The Ekur temple in Nippur was known as the &quot;Dur-an-ki&quot;, the &quot;mooring rope&quot; of heaven and earth. It was widely thought to have been built and established by Enlil himself.

=== Hurrians and Hittites ===

The ancient Hittites believed that some deities lived in Heaven while others lived in remote places on Earth, such as mountains, where humans had little access. In the Middle Hittite myths, Heaven is the abode of the gods. In the Song of Kumarbi, Alalu was king in Heaven for nine years before giving birth to his son, Anu. Anu was himself overthrown by his son, Kumarbi.

=== Canaanites ===

Almost nothing is known of Bronze Age (pre-1200 BC) Canaanite views of heaven and the archaeological findings at Ugarit (destroyed c. 1200 BC) have not provided information. The first century Greek author Philo of Byblos may have preserved elements of Iron Age Phoenician religion in his &quot;Sanchuniathon&quot;.

=== Zoroastrians ===

Zoroaster, the Zoroastrian prophet who introduced the Gathas, spoke of the existence of Heaven and Hell.

Historically, the unique features of Zoroastrianism, such as its conception of heaven, hell, angels, monotheism, belief in free will, and the day of judgement, among other concepts, may have influenced other religious and philosophical systems, including the Abrahamic religions, Gnosticism, Northern Buddhism, and Greek philosophy.

== Abrahamic and Abrahamic-inspired religions ==
=== Hebrew Bible ===

As in other ancient Near Eastern cultures, in the Hebrew Bible, the universe is commonly divided into two realms: heaven (&quot;šāmayim&quot;) and earth (&quot;″ereṣ&quot;). Sometimes a third realm is added: either &quot;sea&quot;, &quot;water under the earth&quot;, or sometimes a vague &quot;land of the dead&quot; that is never described in depth. The structure of heaven itself is not fully described in the Hebrew Bible, but the fact that the Hebrew word &quot;šāmayim&quot; is plural has been interpreted by scholars as an indication that the ancient Israelites envisioned the heavens as having multiple layers, much like the ancient Mesopotamians. This reading is also supported by the use of the phrase &quot;heaven of heavens&quot; in verses such as Deuteronomy 10:14, 1 Kings 8:27, and 2 Chronicles 2:6.

In line with the typical view of most Near Eastern cultures, the Hebrew Bible depicts Heaven as a place that is inaccessible to humans. Although some prophets are occasionally granted temporary visionary access to heaven, such as in 1 Kings 22:19–23, Job 1:6–12 and 2:1–6, and Isaiah 6, they hear only God&#x27;s deliberations concerning the Earth and learn nothing of what Heaven is like. There is almost no mention in the Hebrew Bible of Heaven as a possible afterlife destination for human beings, who are instead described as &quot;resting&quot; in Sheol. The only two possible exceptions to this are Enoch, who is described in Genesis 5:24 as having been &quot;taken&quot; by God, and the prophet Elijah, who is described in 2 Kings 2:11 as having ascended to Heaven in a chariot of fire. According to Michael B. Hundley, the text in both of these instances is ambiguous regarding the significance of the actions being described and in neither of these cases does the text explain what happened to the subject afterwards.

The God of the Israelites is described as ruling both Heaven and Earth. Other passages, such as 1 Kings 8:27 state that even the vastness of Heaven cannot contain God&#x27;s majesty. A number of passages throughout the Hebrew Bible indicate that Heaven and Earth will one day come to an end. This view is paralleled in other ancient Near Eastern cultures, which also regarded Heaven and Earth as vulnerable and subject to dissolution. However, the Hebrew Bible differs from other ancient Near Eastern cultures in that it portrays the God of Israel as independent of creation and unthreatened by its potential destruction. Because most of the Hebrew Bible concerns the God of Israel&#x27;s relationship with his people, most of the events described in it take place on Earth, not in Heaven. The Deuteronomistic source, Deuteronomistic History, and Priestly source all portray the Temple in Jerusalem as the sole channel of communication between Earth and Heaven.

=== Second Temple Judaism ===
During the period of the Second Temple ( 515 BC – 70 AD), the Hebrew people lived under the rule of first the Persian Achaemenid Empire, then the Greek kingdoms of the Diadochi, and finally the Roman Empire. Their culture was profoundly influenced by those of the peoples who ruled them. Consequently, their views on existence after death were profoundly shaped by the ideas of the Persians, Greeks, and Romans. The idea of the immortality of the soul is derived from Greek philosophy and the idea of the resurrection of the dead is thought to be derived from Persian cosmology, although the later claim has been recently questioned. By the early first century AD, these two seemingly incompatible ideas were often conflated by Hebrew thinkers. The Hebrews also inherited from the Persians, Greeks, and Romans the idea that the human soul originates in the divine realm and seeks to return there. The idea that a human soul belongs in Heaven and that Earth is merely a temporary abode in which the soul is tested to prove its worthiness became increasingly popular during the Hellenistic period (323–31 BC). Gradually, some Hebrews began to adopt the idea of Heaven as the eternal home of the righteous dead.

=== Christianity ===

Descriptions of Heaven in the New Testament are more fully developed than those in the Old Testament, but are still generally vague. As in the Old Testament, in the New Testament God is described as the ruler of Heaven and Earth, but his power over the Earth is challenged by Satan. The Gospels of Mark and Luke speak of the &quot;Kingdom of God&quot; (; ), while the Gospel of Matthew more commonly uses the term &quot;Kingdom of heaven&quot; (; ). Both phrases are thought to have the same meaning, but the author of the Gospel of Matthew changed the name &quot;Kingdom of God&quot; to &quot;Kingdom of Heaven&quot; in most instances because it was the more acceptable phrase in his own cultural and religious context in the late first century.

Modern scholars agree that the Kingdom of God was an essential part of the teachings of the historical Jesus but there is no agreement on what this kingdom was. None of the gospels record Jesus as having explained exactly what the phrase &quot;Kingdom of God&quot; means. The most likely explanation for this apparent omission is that the Kingdom of God was a commonly understood concept that required no explanation.

According to Sanders and Casey, Jews in Judea during the early first century believed that God reigns eternally in Heaven, but many also believed that God would eventually establish his kingdom on earth as well. Because God&#x27;s Kingdom was believed to be superior to any human kingdom, this meant that God would necessarily drive out the Romans, who ruled Judea, and establish his own direct rule over the Jewish people. This belief is referenced in the first petition of the Lord&#x27;s Prayer, taught by Jesus to his disciples and recorded in Matthew and Luke 11:2: &quot;Your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.&quot;

Other scholars contend that Jesus&#x27; teaching of the Kingdom of God was of something that is present but also still yet to come. For instance, Wright points to the synoptic gospels that Jesus&#x27; death and resurrection was anticipated as the climax and fulfillment of his &quot;Kingdom of God&quot; messages and that his combined prophecy about the temple&#x27;s doom, through apocalyptic language, would serve as his vindication. The synoptic gospels and Pauline epistles portray Jesus as believing his death and resurrection would complete the work of inaugurating the Kingdom of God and that his followers who wrote everything down expressed their belief he had done so, using first-century Jewish idioms, and that such events &quot;did with evil and launch the project of new creation&quot;.

In the teachings of the historical Jesus, people are expected to prepare for the coming of the Kingdom of God by living moral lives. Jesus&#x27;s commands for his followers to adopt lifestyles of moral perfectionism are found in many passages throughout the Synoptic Gospels, particularly in the Sermon on the Mount in Matthew 5–7. Jesus also taught that, in the Kingdom of Heaven, there would be a reversal of roles in which &quot;the last will be first and the first will be last.&quot; This teaching recurs throughout the recorded teachings of Jesus, including in the admonition to be like a child, the Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus in Luke 16, the Parable of the Workers in the Vineyard in Matthew 20, the Parable of the Great Banquet in Matthew 22, and the Parable of the Prodigal Son in Luke 15.

Traditionally, Christianity has taught that Heaven is the location of the throne of God as well as the holy angels, although this is in varying degrees considered metaphorical. In traditional Christianity, it is considered a state or condition of existence (rather than a particular place somewhere in the cosmos) of the supreme fulfillment of theosis in the beatific vision of the Godhead. In most forms of Christianity, Heaven is also understood as the abode for the redeemed dead in the afterlife, usually a temporary stage before the resurrection of the dead and the saints&#x27; return to the New Earth.

The resurrected Jesus is said to have ascended to Heaven where he now sits at the Right Hand of God and will return to Earth in the Second Coming. Various people have been said to have entered Heaven while still alive, including Enoch, Elijah and Jesus, after his resurrection. According to Roman Catholic teaching, Mary, mother of Jesus, is also said to have been assumed into Heaven and is titled the Queen of Heaven.

In the second century AD, Irenaeus of Lyons recorded a belief that, in accordance with John 14, those who in the afterlife see the Saviour are in different mansions, some dwelling in the heavens, others in paradise and others in &quot;the city&quot;.

While the word used in all these writings, in particular the New Testament Greek word (&quot;ouranos&quot;), applies primarily to the sky, it is also used metaphorically of the dwelling place of God and the blessed. Similarly, though the English word &quot;heaven&quot; keeps its original physical meaning when used, for instance, in allusions to the stars as &quot;lights shining through from heaven&quot;, and in phrases such as heavenly body to mean an astronomical object, the heaven or happiness that Christianity looks forward to is, according to Pope John Paul II, &quot;neither an abstraction nor a physical place in the clouds, but a living, personal relationship with the Holy Trinity. It is our meeting with the Father which takes place in the risen Christ through the communion of the Holy Spirit.&quot;

=== Rabbinical Judaism ===
While the concept of Heaven (&quot;malkuth hashamaim&quot; מלכות השמים, the Kingdom of Heaven) is much discussed in Christian thought, the Jewish concept of the afterlife, sometimes known as &quot;olam haba&quot;, the World-to-come, is not discussed as often. The Torah has little to say on the subject of survival after death, but by the time of the rabbis two ideas had made inroads among the Jews: one, which is probably derived from Greek thought, is that of the immortal soul which returns to its creator after death; the other, which is thought to be of Persian origin, is that of resurrection of the dead.

Jewish writings refer to a &quot;new earth&quot; as the abode of mankind following the resurrection of the dead. Originally, the two ideas of immortality and resurrection were different but in rabbinic thought they are combined: the soul departs from the body at death but is returned to it at the resurrection. This idea is linked to another rabbinic teaching, that men&#x27;s good and bad actions are rewarded and punished not in this life but after death, whether immediately or at the subsequent resurrection. Around 1 CE, the Pharisees believed in an afterlife but the Sadducees did not.

The Mishnah has many sayings about the World to Come, for example, &quot;Rabbi Yaakov said: This world is like a lobby before the World to Come; prepare yourself in the lobby so that you may enter the banquet hall.&quot;

Judaism holds that the righteous of all nations have a share in the World-to-come.

According to Nicholas de Lange, Judaism offers no clear teaching about the destiny which lies in wait for the individual after death and its attitude to life after death has been expressed as follows: &quot;For the future is inscrutable, and the accepted sources of knowledge, whether experience, or reason, or revelation, offer no clear guidance about what is to come. The only certainty is that each man must die – beyond that we can only guess.&quot;

=== Islam ===

Similar to Jewish traditions such as the Talmud, the Qur&#x27;an and Hadith frequently mention the existence of seven &quot;samāwāt&quot; (سماوات), the plural of &quot;samāʾ&quot; (سماء), meaning &#x27;heaven, sky, celestial sphere&#x27;, and cognate with Hebrew &quot;shamāyim&quot; (שמים). Some of the verses in the Qur&#x27;an mentioning the &quot;samaawat&quot; are , and . Sidrat al-Muntaha, a large enigmatic Lote tree, marks the end of the seventh heaven and the utmost extremity for all of God&#x27;s creatures and heavenly knowledge.

One interpretation of &quot;heavens&quot; is that all the stars and galaxies (including the Milky Way) are part of the &quot;first heaven&quot;, and &quot;beyond that six still bigger worlds are there,&quot; which have yet to be discovered by scientists.

According to Shi&#x27;ite sources, Ali mentioned the names of the seven heavens as below:
#Rafi&#x27; (رفیع) the least heaven (سماء الدنیا)
#Qaydum (قیدوم)
#Marum (ماروم)
#Arfalun (أرفلون)
#Hay&#x27;oun (هيعون)
#Arous (عروس)
#Ajma&#x27; (عجماء)

Still an afterlife destination of the righteous is conceived in Islam as &quot;Jannah&quot; ( &quot;Garden [of Eden]&quot; translated as &quot;paradise&quot;). Regarding Eden or paradise the Quran says, &quot;The description of the Paradise promised to the righteous is that under it rivers flow; eternal is its fruit as well as its shade. That is the ˹ultimate˺ outcome for the righteous. But the outcome for the disbelievers is the Fire!&quot; Islam rejects the concept of original sin, and Muslims believe that all human beings are born pure. Children automatically go to paradise when they die, regardless of the religion of their parents.

Paradise is described primarily in physical terms as a place where every wish is immediately fulfilled when asked. Islamic texts describe immortal life in Jannah as happy, without negative emotions. Those who dwell in Jannah are said to wear costly apparel, partake in exquisite banquets, and recline on couches inlaid with gold or precious stones. Inhabitants will rejoice in the company of their parents, spouses, and children. In Islam if one&#x27;s good deeds outweigh one&#x27;s sins then one may gain entrance to paradise only through God&#x27;s mercy. Conversely, if one&#x27;s sins outweigh their good deeds they are sent to hell. The more good deeds one has performed the higher the level of Jannah one is directed to.
Quran verses which describe paradise include: 13:15, 18:31, 38:49–54, 35:33–35 and 52:17.

The Quran refers to Jannah with different names: &quot;Al-Firdaws&quot;, &quot;Jannātu-′Adn&quot; (&quot;Garden of Eden&quot; or &quot;Everlasting Gardens&quot;), &quot;Jannatu-n-Na&#x27;īm&quot; (&quot;Garden of Delight&quot;), &quot;Jannatu-l-Ma&#x27;wa&quot; (&quot;Garden of Refuge&quot;), &quot;Dāru-s-Salām&quot; (&quot;Abode of Peace&quot;), &quot;Dāru-l-Muqāma&quot; (&quot;Abode of Permanent Stay&quot;), &quot;al-Muqāmu-l-Amin&quot; (&quot;The Secure Station&quot;) and &quot;Jannātu-l-Khuld&quot; (&quot;Garden of Immortality&quot;). In the Hadiths, these are the different regions in paradise.

==== Ahmadiyya ====
According to the Ahmadiyya view, much of the imagery presented in the Quran regarding Heaven, but also Hell, is metaphorical. They propound the verse which describes, according to them, how the life to come after death is different from the life on Earth. The &quot;Quran&quot; says: &quot;From bringing in your place others like you, and from developing you into a form which at present you know not.&quot; According to Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the founder of the Ahmadiyya sect in Islam, the soul will give birth to another rarer entity and will resemble the life on earth in the sense that this entity will bear a similar relationship to the soul, as the soul bears relationship with the human existence on earth. On earth, if a person leads a righteous life and submits to the will of God, his or her tastes become attuned to enjoying spiritual pleasures as opposed to carnal desires. With this, an &quot;embryonic soul&quot; begins to take shape. Different tastes are said to be born in which a person given to carnal passions finds no enjoyment. For example, sacrifice of one&#x27;s own rights over that of other&#x27;s becomes enjoyable, or that forgiveness becomes second nature. In such a state a person finds contentment and Peace at heart and at this stage, according to Ahmadiyya beliefs, it can be said that a soul within the soul has begun to take shape.

=== Baháʼí Faith ===
The Baháʼí Faith regards the conventional description of heaven (and hell) as a specific place as symbolic. The Baháʼí writings describe heaven as a &quot;spiritual condition&quot; where closeness to God is defined as heaven; conversely hell is seen as a state of remoteness from God. Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh, the founder of the Baháʼí Faith, has stated that the nature of the life of the soul in the afterlife is beyond comprehension in the physical plane, but has stated that the soul will retain its consciousness and individuality and remember its physical life; the soul will be able to recognize other souls and communicate with them.

For Baháʼís, entry into the next life has the potential to bring great joy. Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh likened death to the process of birth. He explains: &quot;The world beyond is as different from this world as this world is different from that of the child while still in the womb of its mother.&quot; The analogy to the womb in many ways summarizes the Baháʼí view of earthly existence: just as the womb constitutes an important place for a person&#x27;s initial physical development, the physical world provides for the development of the individual soul. Accordingly, Baháʼís view life as a preparatory stage, where one can develop and perfect those qualities which will be needed in the next life. The key to spiritual progress is to follow the path outlined by the current Manifestation of God, which Baháʼís believe is currently Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh. Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh wrote, &quot;Know thou, of a truth, that if the soul of man hath walked in the ways of God, it will, assuredly return and be gathered to the glory of the Beloved.&quot;

The Baháʼí teachings state that there exists a hierarchy of souls in the afterlife, where the merits of each soul determines their place in the hierarchy, and that souls lower in the hierarchy cannot completely understand the station of those above. Each soul can continue to progress in the afterlife, but the soul&#x27;s development is not entirely dependent on its own conscious efforts, the nature of which we are not aware, but also augmented by the grace of God, the prayers of others, and good deeds performed by others on Earth in the name of that person.

===Mandaeism===
Mandaeans believe in an afterlife or heaven called &quot;Alma d-Nhura&quot; (World of Light). The World of Light is the primeval, transcendent world from which Tibil and the World of Darkness emerged. The Great Living God (&quot;Hayyi Rabbi&quot;) and his uthras (angels or guardians) dwell in the World of Light. The World of Light is also the source of Piriawis, the Great &quot;Yardena&quot; (or Jordan River) of Life.

=== Gnosticism ===
The cosmological description of the universe in the Gnostic codex On the Origin of the World presents seven heavens created by the lesser god or Demiurge called Yaldabaoth, which are individually ruled over by one of his Archons. Above these realms is the eighth heaven, where the benevolent, higher divinities dwell. During the end of days, the seven heavens of the Archons will collapse on each other. The heaven of Yaldabaoth will split in two and cause the stars in his celestial sphere to fall.

== Chinese religions ==


In the native Chinese Confucian traditions, heaven (Tian) is an important concept, where the ancestors reside and from which emperors drew their mandate to rule in their dynastic propaganda, for example.

Heaven is a key concept in Chinese mythology, philosophies, and religions, and is on one end of the spectrum a synonym of &quot;Shangdi&quot; (&quot;Supreme Deity&quot;) and on the other naturalistic end, a synonym for nature and the sky. The Chinese term for &quot;heaven&quot;, &quot;Tian&quot; (天), derives from the name of the supreme deity of the Zhou dynasty. After their conquest of the Shang dynasty in 1122 BC, the Zhou people considered their supreme deity &quot;Tian&quot; to be identical with the Shang supreme deity &quot;Shangdi&quot;. The Zhou people attributed Heaven with anthropomorphic attributes, evidenced in the etymology of the Chinese character for heaven or sky, which originally depicted a person with a large cranium. Heaven is said to see, hear and watch over all people. Heaven is affected by people&#x27;s doings, and having personality, is happy and angry with them. Heaven blesses those who please it and sends calamities upon those who offend it. Heaven was also believed to transcend all other spirits and gods, with Confucius asserting, &quot;He who offends against Heaven has none to whom he can pray.&quot;

Other philosophers born around the time of Confucius such as Mozi took an even more theistic view of heaven, believing that heaven is the divine ruler, just as the Son of Heaven (the King of Zhou) is the earthly ruler. Mozi believed that spirits and minor gods exist, but their function is merely to carry out the will of heaven, watching for evil-doers and punishing them. Thus they function as angels of heaven and do not detract from its monotheistic government of the world. With such a high monotheism, it is not surprising that Mohism championed a concept called &quot;universal love&quot; (&quot;jian&#x27;ai&quot;, 兼愛), which taught that heaven loves all people equally and that each person should similarly love all human beings without distinguishing between his own relatives and those of others. In Mozi&#x27;s &quot;Will of Heaven&quot; (天志), he writes:

Mozi criticized the Confucians of his own time for not following the teachings of Confucius. By the time of the later Han dynasty, however, under the influence of Xunzi, the Chinese concept of heaven and Confucianism itself had become mostly naturalistic, though some Confucians argued that Heaven was where ancestors reside. Worship of heaven in China continued with the erection of shrines, the last and greatest being the Temple of Heaven in Beijing, and the offering of prayers. The ruler of China in every Chinese dynasty would perform annual sacrificial rituals to heaven, usually by slaughtering two healthy bulls as a sacrifice.

== Indian religions ==
=== Buddhism ===
In Buddhism there are several heavens, all of which are still part of &quot;samsara&quot; (illusionary reality). Those who accumulate good karma may be reborn in one of them. However, their stay in heaven is not eternal—eventually they will use up their good karma and will undergo rebirth into another realm, as a human, animal or other being. Because heaven is temporary and part of &quot;samsara&quot;, Buddhists focus more on escaping the cycle of rebirth and reaching enlightenment (&quot;nirvana&quot;). Nirvana is not a heaven but a mental state.

According to Buddhist cosmology the universe is impermanent and beings transmigrate through several existential &quot;planes&quot; in which this human world is only one &quot;realm&quot; or &quot;path&quot;. These are traditionally envisioned as a vertical continuum with the heavens existing above the human realm, and the realms of the animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings existing beneath it. According to Jan Chozen Bays in her book, &quot;Jizo: Guardian of Children, Travelers, and Other Voyagers&quot;, the realm of the &quot;asura&quot; is a later refinement of the heavenly realm and was inserted between the human realm and the heavens. One important Buddhist heaven is the &quot;Trāyastriṃśa&quot;, which resembles Olympus of Greek mythology.

In the Mahayana world view, there are also pure lands which lie outside this continuum and are created by the Buddhas upon attaining enlightenment. Rebirth in the pure land of Amitabha is seen as an assurance of Buddhahood, for once reborn there, beings do not fall back into cyclical existence unless they choose to do so to save other beings, the goal of Buddhism being the obtainment of enlightenment and freeing oneself and others from the birth-death cycle.

The Tibetan word &quot;Bardo&quot; means literally &quot;intermediate state&quot;. In Sanskrit the concept has the name &quot;antarabhāva&quot;.

The lists below are ordered from highest to lowest of the heavenly worlds.

====Theravada====
===== According to the Aṅguttara Nikāya=====
Brahmāloka

Here the denizens are Brahmās, and the ruler is Mahābrahmā. After developing the four Brahmavihāras, King Makhādeva rebirths here after death. The monk Tissa and Brāhmana Jānussoni were also reborn here.

The lifespan of a Brahmās is not stated but is not eternal.

Parinirmita-vaśavartin (Pali: Paranimmita-vasavatti)

The heaven of devas have &quot;power over (others&#x27;) creations&quot;. These devas do not create pleasing forms that they desire for themselves, but their desires are fulfilled by the acts of other devas who seek their favor. The ruler of this world is called Vaśavartin (Pāli: Vasavatti), who has longer life, greater beauty, more power and happiness and more delightful sense-objects than the other devas of his world. This world is also the home of the devaputra (being of a divine race) called Māra, who endeavors to keep all beings of the Kāmadhātu in the grip of sensual pleasures. Māra is also sometimes called Vaśavartin, but in general these two dwellers in this world are kept distinct. The beings of this world are 3 lǐ () tall and live for 9,216,000,000 years (Sarvāstivāda tradition).

Nirmāṇarati (Pali: Nimmānaratī)

The world of devas &quot;delighting in their creations&quot;. The devas of this world are capable of making any appearance to please themselves. The lord of this world is called Sunirmita (Pāli Sunimmita); his wife is the rebirth of Visākhā, formerly the chief upāsikā (female lay devotee) of the Buddha. The beings of this world are lǐ () tall and live for 2,304,000,000 years (Sarvāstivāda tradition).

 (Pali: Tusita)

The world of the &quot;joyful&quot; devas, it is best known for being the world in which a Bodhisattva lives before being reborn in the world of humans. Until a few thousand years ago, the Bodhisattva of this world was Śvetaketu (Pāli: Setaketu), who was reborn as Siddhārtha, who would become the Buddha Śākyamuni; since then the Bodhisattva has been Nātha (or Nāthadeva) who will be reborn as Ajita and will become the Buddha Maitreya (Pāli Metteyya). While this Bodhisattva is the foremost of the dwellers in , the ruler of this world is another deva called (Pāli: Santusita). The beings of this world are 2 lǐ () tall and live for 576,000,000 years (Sarvāstivāda tradition). Anāthapindika, a Kosālan householder and benefactor to the Buddha&#x27;s order was reborn here.

Yāma

The denizens here have a lifespan of 144,000,000 years.

Trāyastriṃśa (Pali: Tāvatimsa)

The ruler of this heaven is Indra or Shakra, and the realm is also called Trayatrimia. Each denizen addresses other denizens with the title &quot;mārisa&quot;.

The governing hall of this heaven is called Sudhamma Hall. This heaven has a garden Nandanavana with damsels, as its most magnificent sight.

Ajita, the Licchavi army general, was reborn here. Gopika, the Sākyan girl, was reborn as a male god in this realm.

Any Buddhist reborn in this realm can outshine any of the previously dwelling denizens because of the extra merit acquired for following the Buddha&#x27;s teachings. The denizens here have a lifespan of 36,000,000 years.

Cātummahārājika

The heaven &quot;of the Four Great Kings&quot;, its rulers are the four Great Kings of the name, , , , and their leader . The devas who guide the Sun and Moon are also considered part of this world, as are the retinues of the four kings, composed of  (dwarfs), Gandharva गन्धर्वs (fairies), Nāgas नाग (snakes) and  (goblins). The beings of this world are tall and live for 9,000,000 years (Sarvāstivāda tradition) or 90,000 years (Vibhajyavāda tradition).

====Mahayana====
=====According to the Śūraṅgama Sūtra=====
=====The Form Realm: The First Dhyana, the Second Dhyana, the Third Dhyana and the Fourth Dhyana.=====
*The Third Dhyana

:The Heaven of Pervasive Purity
::Those for whom the world, the body, and the mind are all perfectly pure have accomplished the virtue of purity, and a superior level emerges. They return to the bliss of still extinction, and they are among those in the Heaven of Pervasive Purity

:The Heaven of Limitless Purity
::Those in whom the emptiness of purity manifests are led to discover its boundlessness. Their bodies and minds experience light ease, and they accomplish the bliss of still extinction. They are among those in the Heaven of Limitless Purity.

:The Heaven of Lesser Purity
::The heavenly beings for whom the perfection of light has become sound and who further open out the sound to disclose its wonder discover a subtler level of practice. They penetrate to the bliss of still extinction and are among those in the Heaven of Lesser Purity.

*The Second Dhyana
:Those who flow to these levels will not be oppressed by worries or vexations. Although they have not developed proper samadhi, their minds are pure to the point that they have subdued their coarser outflows

:The Light-Sound Heaven
::Those who take in and hold the light to perfection accomplish the substance of the teaching. Creating and transforming the purity into endless responses and functions, they are among those in the Light-Sound Heaven.

:The Heaven of Limitless Light
::Those whose lights illumine each other in an endless dazzling blaze shine throughout the realms of the ten directions so that everything becomes like crystal. They are among those in the Heaven of Limitless Light.

:The Heaven of Lesser Light
::Those beyond the Brahma heavens gather in and govern the Brahma beings, for their Brahma conduct is perfect and fulfilled. Unmoving and with settled minds, they produce light in profound stillness, and they are among those in the Heaven of Lesser Light.

*The First Dhyana
:Those who flow to these levels will not be oppressed by any suffering or affliction. Although they have not developed proper samadhi, their minds are pure to the point that they are not moved by outflows.

:The Great Brahma Heaven
::Those whose bodies and minds are wonderfully perfect, and whose awesome deportment is not in the least deficient, are pure in the prohibitive precepts and have a thorough understanding of them as well. At all times these people can govern the Brahma multitudes as great Brahma lords, and they are among those in the Great Brahma Heaven.

:The Heaven of the Ministers of Brahma
::Those whose hearts of desire have already been cast aside, the mind apart from desire manifests. They have a fond regard for the rules of discipline and delight in being in accord with them. These people can practice the Brahma virtue at all times, and they are among those in the Heaven of the Ministers of Brahma.

:The Heaven of the Multitudes of Brahma
::Those in the world who cultivate their minds but do not avail themselves of dhyana and so have no wisdom, can only control their bodies so as to not engage in sexual desire. Whether walking or sitting, or in their thoughts, they are totally devoid of it. Since they do not give rise to defiling love, they do not remain in the realm of desire. These people can, in response to their thoughts, assume the bodies of Brahma beings. They are among those in the Heaven of the Multitudes of Brahma.

The Six Desire Heavens
The cause for birth in the Six Desire Heavens are the ten virtuous actions.

The Heaven of the Comfort from Others&#x27; Transformations
:Those who have no kind of worldly thoughts while doing what worldly people do, who are lucid and beyond such activity while involved in it, are capable at the end of their lives of entirely transcending states where transformations may be present and may be lacking. They are among those born in the Heaven of the Comfort from Others&#x27; Transformations.

The Heaven of Bliss by Transformation
:Those who are devoid of desire, but who will engage in it for the sake of their partner, even though the flavor of doing so is like the flavor of chewing wax, are born at the end of their lives in a place of transcending transformations. They are among those born in the Heaven of Bliss by Transformation.

The Tushita Heaven
:Those who practice constant silence, but who are not yet able to control their impulses when stimulated by contact, ascend at the end of their lives to a subtle and ethereal place; they will not be drawn into the lower realms. The destruction of the realms of humans and gods and the obliteration of the kalpas by the three disasters will not reach them. They are among those born in the Tushita Heaven.

The Suyama Heaven
:Those who become temporarily involved when they meet with desire but who forget about it when it is finished. While in the human realm, one is less active and more quiet, abiding in light and emptiness where the illumination of sun and moon does not reach. By the end of their lives, these beings have their own light. They are among those born in the Suyama Heaven.

The Trayastrimsha Heaven
:Those whose sexual love for their wives is slight, but who have not yet obtained the entire flavor of dwelling in purity, transcend the light of the sun and moon at the end of their lives, and reside at the summit of the human realm. They are among those born in the Trayastrimsha Heaven.

The Heaven of the Four Kings 
:Those with no interest in deviant sexual activity and develop a purity such that one produces light. When their life ends, they draw near to the sun and moon and are among those born in the Heaven of the Four Kings.

Ouyi Zhixu explains that the Shurangama sutra only emphasizes avoidance of deviant sexual desire, but one would naturally need to abide by the 10 good conducts to be born in these heavens.

==== Tibetan Buddhism ====
Tibetan literature classifies the heavenly worlds into 5 major types:
# Akanishtha or Ghanavyiiha This is the most supreme heaven wherein beings that have achieved Nirvana live for eternity.
# Heaven of the Jinas
# Heavens of Formless Spirits These are 4 in number.
# Brahmaloka These are 16 in number, and are free from sensuality.
# Devaloka These are 6 in number, and contain sensuality.

=== Hinduism ===

Attaining heaven is not the final pursuit in Hinduism as heaven itself is ephemeral and related to physical body. Only being tied by the bhoot-tattvas, heaven cannot be perfect either and is just another name for pleasurable and mundane material life. According to Hindu cosmology, above the earthly plane, are other planes: (1) Bhuva Loka, (2) Swarga Loka, meaning Good Kingdom, is the general name for heaven in Hinduism, a heavenly paradise of pleasure, where most of the Hindu Devatas (Deva) reside along with the king of Devas, Indra, and beatified mortals. Some other planes are Mahar Loka, Jana Loka, Tapa Loka and Satya Loka. Since heavenly abodes are also tied to the cycle of birth and death, any dweller of heaven or hell will again be recycled to a different plane and in a different form per the karma and &quot;maya&quot; i.e. the illusion of Samsara. This cycle is broken only by self-realization by the Jivatma. This self-realization is Moksha (Turiya, Kaivalya).

The concept of moksha is unique to Hinduism. Moksha stands for liberation from the cycle of birth and death and final communion with Brahman. With moksha, a liberated soul attains the stature and oneness with Brahman or Paramatma. Different schools such as Vedanta, Mimansa, Sankhya, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, and Yoga offer subtle differences in the concept of Brahman, obvious Universe, its genesis and regular destruction, Jivatma, Nature (Prakriti) and also the right way in attaining perfect bliss or moksha.

In the Vaishnava traditions the highest heaven is Vaikuntha, which exists above the six heavenly lokas and outside of the mahat-tattva or mundane world. It&#x27;s where eternally liberated souls who have attained moksha reside in eternal sublime beauty with Lakshmi and Narayana (a manifestation of Vishnu).

In the Nasadiya Sukta, the heavens/sky Vyoman is mentioned as a place from which an overseeing entity surveys what has been created. However, the Nasadiya Sukta questions the omniscience of this overseer.

=== Jainism ===

The shape of the Universe as described in Jainism is shown at right. Unlike the current convention of using North direction as the top of map, this uses South as the top. The shape is similar to a part of human form standing upright.

The &quot;Deva Loka&quot; (heavens) are at the symbolic &quot;chest&quot;, where all souls enjoying the positive karmic effects reside. The heavenly beings are referred to as &quot;devas&quot; (masculine form) and &quot;devis&quot; (feminine form). According to Jainism, there is not one heavenly abode, but several layers to reward appropriately the souls of varying degree of karmic merits. Similarly, beneath the &quot;waist&quot; are the &quot;Narka Loka&quot; (hell). Human, animal, insect, plant and microscopic life forms reside on the middle.

The pure souls (who reached Siddha status) reside at the very southernmost end (top) of the Universe. They are referred to in Tamil literature as தென்புலத்தார் (Kural 43).

=== Sikh religion ===
Sikhs believe that heaven and hell are also both in this world where everyone reaps the fruit of karma. They refer to good and evil stages of life respectively and can be lived now and here during our life on Earth. Kabir in the &quot;Guru Granth Sahib&quot; rejects the otherworldly heaven and says that one can experience heaven on this Earth through the company of holy people.

== Mesoamerican religions ==

The Nahua people such as the Aztecs, Chichimecs and the Toltecs believed that the heavens were constructed and separated into 13 levels. Each level had from one to many Lords living in and ruling these heavens. Most important of these heavens was Omeyocan (Place of Two). The Thirteen Heavens were ruled by Ometeotl, the dual Lord, creator of the Dual-Genesis who, as male, takes the name Ometecuhtli (Two Lord), and as female is named Omecihuatl (Two Lady).

== Polynesia ==

In the creation myths of Polynesian mythology are found various concepts of the heavens and the underworld. These differ from one island to another. What they share is the view of the universe as an egg or coconut that is divided between the world of humans (earth), the upper world of heavenly gods, and the underworld. Each of these is subdivided in a manner reminiscent of Dante&#x27;s Divine Comedy, but the number of divisions and their names differs from one Polynesian culture to another.

=== Māori ===
In Māori mythology, the heavens are divided into a number of realms. Different tribes number the heaven differently, with as few as two and as many as fourteen levels. One of the more common versions divides heaven thus:

# Kiko-rangi, presided over by the gods Toumau
# Waka-maru, the heaven of sunshine and rain
# Nga-roto, the heaven of lakes where the god Maru rules
# Hauora, where the spirits of newborn children originate
# Nga-Tauira, home of the servant gods
# Nga-atua, which is ruled over by the hero Tawhaki
# Autoia, where human souls are created
# Aukumea, where spirits live
# Wairua, where spirit gods live while waiting on those in
# Naherangi or Tuwarea, where the great gods live presided over by Rehua

The Māori believe these heavens are supported by pillars. Other Polynesian peoples see them being supported by gods (as in Hawaii). In one Tahitian legend, heaven is supported by an octopus.

=== Paumotu, Tuamotus ===

The Polynesian conception of the universe and its division is nicely illustrated by a famous drawing made by a Tuomotuan chief in 1869. Here, the nine heavens are further divided into left and right, and each stage is associated with a stage in the evolution of the earth that is portrayed below. The lowest division represents a period when the heavens hung low over the earth, which was inhabited by animals that were not known to the islanders. In the third division is shown the first murder, the first burials, and the first canoes, built by Rata. In the fourth division, the first coconut tree and other significant plants are born.

== Theosophy ==

It is believed in Theosophy, founded mainly by Helena Blavatsky, that each religion (including Theosophy) has its own individual heaven in various regions of the upper astral plane that fits the description of that heaven that is given in each religion, to which a soul that has been good in their previous life on Earth will go. The area of the upper astral plane of Earth in the upper atmosphere where the various heavens are located is called &quot;Summerland&quot; (Theosophists believe hell is located in the lower astral plane of Earth which extends downward from the surface of the earth to its center). However, Theosophists believe that the soul is recalled back to Earth after an average of about 1400 years by the &quot;Lords of Karma&quot; to incarnate again. The final heaven that souls go to billions of years in the future after they finish their cycle of incarnations is called &quot;Devachan&quot;.

== Criticism of the belief in heaven ==
Anarchist Emma Goldman expressed this view when she wrote, &quot;Consciously or unconsciously, most theists see in gods and devils, heaven and hell, reward and punishment, a whip to lash the people into obedience, meekness and contentment.&quot;

Some have argued that a belief in a reward after death is poor motivation for moral behavior while alive. Sam Harris wrote, &quot;It is rather more noble to help people purely out of concern for their suffering than it is to help them because you think the Creator of the Universe wants you to do it, or will reward you for doing it, or will punish you for not doing it. The problem with this linkage between religion and morality is that it gives people bad reasons to help other human beings when good reasons are available.&quot;

== Neuroscience ==
Many neuroscientists and neurophilosophers, such as Daniel Dennett, believe that consciousness is dependent upon the functioning of the brain and death is a cessation of consciousness, which would rule out heaven. Scientific research has discovered that some areas of the brain, like the reticular activating system or the thalamus, appear to be necessary for consciousness, because dysfunction of or damage to these structures causes a loss of consciousness.

In &quot;Inside the Neolithic Mind&quot; (2005), Lewis-Williams and Pearce argue that many cultures around the world and through history neurally perceive a tiered structure of heaven, along with similarly structured circles of hell. The reports match so similarly across time and space that Lewis-Williams and Pearce argue for a neuroscientific explanation, accepting the percepts as real neural activations and subjective percepts during particular altered states of consciousness.

Many people who come close to death and have near-death experiences report meeting relatives or entering &quot;the Light&quot; in an otherworldly dimension, which shares similarities with the religious concept of heaven. Even though there are also reports of distressing experiences and negative life-reviews, which share some similarities with the concept of hell, the positive experience of meeting or entering &quot;the Light&quot; is reported as an immensely intense feeling of a state of love, peace and joy beyond human comprehension. Together with this intensely positive-feeling state, people who have near-death experiences also report that consciousness or a heightened state of awareness seems as if it is at the heart of experiencing a taste of &quot;heaven&quot;.

== Representations in arts ==
Works of fiction have included numerous conceptions of Heaven and Hell. The two most famous descriptions of Heaven are given in Dante Alighieri&#x27;s &quot;Paradiso&quot; (of the &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;) and John Milton&#x27;s &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;.

== See also ==

* Baptism
* Beatification
* Indulgence
* List of angels in theology
* Penance
* Redemption
==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited references ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* , UK
* &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;: Heaven
* &quot;Jewish Encyclopedia&quot;: Heaven
* &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot; entry on heaven and hell
* Heaven: A fool&#x27;s paradise, &quot;The Independent&quot;, April 21, 2010
* Maps of heaven at the &quot;Hell and heaven&quot; subject, the Persuasive Cartography, The PJ Mode Collection, Cornell University Library, New York
*Collection: Heaven, Hell, and Afterlives from the University of Michigan Museum of Art, Ann Arbor, Michigan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="0" end="6" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="11" end="22" title="Heaven" label="the Heavens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998321" start="36" end="58" title="Religious cosmology" label="religious cosmological"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493282" start="62" end="74" title="transcendence (religion)" label="transcendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="75" end="87" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="115" end="122" title="deity" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="124" end="129" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="132" end="136" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="139" end="144" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="150" end="169" title="Veneration of the dead" label="venerated ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q189233" start="196" end="205" title="throne" label="enthroned"/>
<link wikidata="Q41374" start="302" end="311" title="Incarnation" label="incarnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="359" end="368" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363686" start="408" end="421" title="Entering heaven alive" label="without dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="487" end="494" title="Sacred" label="holiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363340" start="504" end="512" title="paradise" label="paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="529" end="533" title="Hell" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q154365" start="541" end="551" title="Underworld" label="Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268820" start="586" end="597" title="History of Christian universalism" label="universally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="678" end="686" title="divinity" label="divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10797504" start="688" end="696" title="good and evil" label="goodness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411871" start="698" end="703" title="piety" label="piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="705" end="710" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="721" end="727" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="732" end="745" title="orthodoxy" label="right beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003236" start="756" end="767" title="Will of God" label="divine will"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036680" start="833" end="846" title="world to come" label="world to come"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421259" start="880" end="890" title="axis mundi" label="axis mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q267376" start="894" end="904" title="world tree" label="world tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="979" end="995" title="Indian religions" label="Indian religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725577" start="1027" end="1037" title="Svarga" label="Svargaloka"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="1080" end="1087" title="Reincarnation" label="rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="1137" end="1142" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="1203" end="1209" title="Moksha" label="Moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q42927" start="1225" end="1232" title="Nirvana" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354816" start="1380" end="1390" title="otherworld" label="otherworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1435" end="1447" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1449" end="1454" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="1476" end="1483" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="1496" end="1510" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="1535" end="1544" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="1755" end="1769" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1851" end="1862" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="1957" end="1970" title="Christianization" label="Christianized"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="2082" end="2089" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="2151" end="2169" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35219" start="2171" end="2180" title="Old Saxon" label="Old Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505674" start="2235" end="2252" title="Middle Low German" label="Middle Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2289" end="2302" title="Old Norse" label="Old Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="2323" end="2329" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35133" start="2397" end="2408" title="Old Frisian" label="Old Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="2473" end="2488" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35219" start="2508" end="2517" title="Old Saxon" label="Old Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505674" start="2522" end="2539" title="Middle Low German" label="Middle Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q443089" start="2560" end="2569" title="Old Dutch" label="Old Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2574" end="2579" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2610" end="2616" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210319" start="2675" end="2688" title="Linguistic reconstruction" label="reconstructed"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="2689" end="2703" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="2820" end="2839" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="3193" end="3200" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3202" end="3215" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="3250" end="3259" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="3268" end="3275" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="3358" end="3366" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2794866" start="3425" end="3436" title="thunderbolt" label="thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708714" start="3442" end="3451" title="firmament" label="firmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q25294" start="3493" end="3499" title="hammer" label="hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q660936" start="3704" end="3714" title="flat Earth" label="flat Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201175" start="3812" end="3818" title="jasper" label="jasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="3843" end="3847" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632373" start="3941" end="3946" title="Igigi" label="Igigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188536" start="4053" end="4055" title="Anu" label="An"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="4081" end="4097" title="Astronomical object" label="celestial bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="4153" end="4158" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="4178" end="4184" title="Inanna" label="Inanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="4218" end="4221" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q332188" start="4238" end="4241" title="Utu" label="Utu"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="4271" end="4275" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217420" start="4293" end="4298" title="Sin (mythology)" label="Nanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8272" start="4678" end="4695" title="Epic of Gilgamesh" label="Epic of Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q159709" start="4703" end="4712" title="Gilgamesh" label="Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q463220" start="4721" end="4727" title="Enkidu" label="Enkidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q784094" start="4873" end="4876" title="Kur" label="Kur"/>
<link wikidata="Q784094" start="4893" end="4900" title="Irkalla" label="Irkalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q154365" start="4918" end="4928" title="underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="5361" end="5367" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120735" start="5373" end="5377" title="omen" label="omen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413201" start="5569" end="5573" title="Ekur" label="Ekur"/>
<link wikidata="Q188395" start="5584" end="5590" title="Nippur" label="Nippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q214672" start="5741" end="5746" title="Enlil" label="Enlil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="5800" end="5808" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q945508" start="6018" end="6033" title="Song of Kumarbi" label="Song of Kumarbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894124" start="6035" end="6040" title="Alalu" label="Alalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188536" start="6107" end="6110" title="Anu" label="Anu"/>
<link wikidata="Q945508" start="6151" end="6158" title="Kumarbi" label="Kumarbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="6208" end="6218" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q191369" start="6294" end="6300" title="Ugarit" label="Ugarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q504771" start="6386" end="6401" title="Philo of Byblos" label="Philo of Byblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6433" end="6441" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="6442" end="6451" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q968582" start="6475" end="6488" title="Sanchuniathon" label="Sanchuniathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329536" start="6573" end="6579" title="Gatha (Zoroaster)" label="Gathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q31780" start="8398" end="8403" title="Sheol" label="Sheol"/>
<link wikidata="Q213027" start="8450" end="8455" title="Enoch (ancestor of Noah)" label="Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q133507" start="8547" end="8553" title="Elijah" label="Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="8877" end="8898" title="Yahweh" label="God of the Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q475346" start="9667" end="9689" title="Deuteronomist" label="Deuteronomistic source"/>
<link wikidata="Q475346" start="9691" end="9714" title="Deuteronomistic History" label="Deuteronomistic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q514434" start="9720" end="9735" title="Priestly source" label="Priestly source"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906600" start="9752" end="9771" title="Temple in Jerusalem" label="Temple in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="9891" end="9904" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="9984" end="10001" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201546" start="10034" end="10042" title="Diadochi" label="Diadochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="10060" end="10072" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="10294" end="10317" title="immortality of the soul" label="immortality of the soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="10371" end="10395" title="resurrection of the dead" label="resurrection of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="10942" end="10960" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="11128" end="11141" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="11374" end="11379" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="11385" end="11400" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Gospels of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="11405" end="11409" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363589" start="11429" end="11443" title="Kingdom of God" label="Kingdom of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="11466" end="11483" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Gospel of Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q19572476" start="11518" end="11535" title="Kingdom of heaven (Gospel of Matthew)" label="Kingdom of heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q51666" start="11938" end="11954" title="historical Jesus" label="historical Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="12305" end="12310" title="Judea (Roman province)" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="12744" end="12762" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="13270" end="13283" title="second temple" label="temple&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975027" start="13914" end="13933" title="moral perfectionism" label="moral perfectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51640" start="14014" end="14033" title="Sermon on the Mount" label="Sermon on the Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q840339" start="14324" end="14359" title="Rich man and Lazarus" label="Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262863" start="14376" end="14414" title="Parable of the Workers in the Vineyard" label="Parable of the Workers in the Vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269583" start="14434" end="14462" title="Parable of the Great Banquet" label="Parable of the Great Banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q262135" start="14486" end="14513" title="Parable of the Prodigal Son" label="Parable of the Prodigal Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="14542" end="14554" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920452" start="14601" end="14614" title="throne of God" label="throne of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="14635" end="14641" title="angels" label="angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="14690" end="14698" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059081" start="14833" end="14839" title="cosmos" label="cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738771" start="14871" end="14878" title="Divinization (Christian)" label="theosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463224" start="14886" end="14901" title="beatific vision" label="beatific vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576620" start="14909" end="14916" title="Godhead in Christianity" label="Godhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="14926" end="14947" title="Christian denominations" label="forms of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="15017" end="15026" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="15065" end="15089" title="resurrection of the dead" label="resurrection of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="15098" end="15103" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753578" start="15121" end="15134" title="the New Earth" label="the New Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="15141" end="15158" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrected Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686605" start="15175" end="15193" title="Ascension of Jesus" label="ascended to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456134" start="15200" end="15211" title="Session of Christ" label="he now sits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333608" start="15219" end="15236" title="Right Hand of God" label="Right Hand of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="15269" end="15282" title="Second Coming" label="Second Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363686" start="15322" end="15354" title="Entering heaven alive" label="entered Heaven while still alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q213027" start="15366" end="15371" title="Enoch (ancestor of Noah)" label="Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q133507" start="15373" end="15379" title="Elijah" label="Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="15384" end="15389" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="15428" end="15451" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholic teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="15453" end="15474" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary, mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="15502" end="15521" title="Assumption of Mary" label="assumed into Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358870" start="15540" end="15555" title="Queen of Heaven" label="Queen of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="15584" end="15592" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="15671" end="15680" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="15689" end="15696" title="Salvation in Christianity" label="Saviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363340" start="15764" end="15772" title="paradise" label="paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q567888" start="15793" end="15801" title="New Jerusalem" label="the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q527" start="15944" end="15947" title="sky" label="sky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16017" end="16024" title="Blessing#Christianity" label="blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="16241" end="16254" title="heavenly body" label="heavenly body"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="16492" end="16504" title="Holy Trinity" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q186350" start="16533" end="16539" title="God the Father" label="Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="16571" end="16577" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="16607" end="16618" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363589" start="16730" end="16747" title="Kingdom of God" label="Kingdom of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="16770" end="16779" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411408" start="16793" end="16824" title="Jewish eschatology" label="Jewish concept of the afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="16918" end="16923" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794963" start="17121" end="17134" title="immortal soul" label="immortal soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="17241" end="17265" title="resurrection of the dead" label="resurrection of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="17410" end="17421" title="immortality" label="immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="17566" end="17578" title="Resurrection of the Dead" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="17799" end="17808" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q182682" start="17842" end="17851" title="Sadducees" label="Sadducees"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="17866" end="17873" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036680" start="17901" end="17914" title="World to Come" label="World to Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479680" start="18107" end="18131" title="Noachide" label="righteous of all nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232954" start="18181" end="18198" title="Nicholas de Lange" label="Nicholas de Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="18200" end="18207" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="18679" end="18685" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="18691" end="18702" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="18707" end="18713" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q195374" start="19016" end="19033" title="Sidrat al-Muntaha" label="Sidrat al-Muntaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="19274" end="19283" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="19451" end="19463" title="Shia Islam" label="Shi&amp;#x27;ite"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="19473" end="19476" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19595" end="19600" title="Third Heaven#Islam" label="Marum"/>
<link wikidata="Q835143" start="19763" end="19769" title="Jannah" label="Jannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="19854" end="19858" title="Garden of Eden" label="Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="20159" end="20171" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987190" start="20509" end="20525" title="negative emotion" label="negative emotion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20870" end="20886" title="Divine mercy#Islam" label="God&amp;#x27;s mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="21057" end="21062" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q835143" start="21197" end="21219" title="Firdaus" label="&amp;quot;Al-Firdaws&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="21700" end="21707" title="Hadiths" label="Hadiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="21792" end="21801" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q312952" start="22196" end="22214" title="Mirza Ghulam Ahmad" label="Mirza Ghulam Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="22235" end="22244" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="23165" end="23177" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q339380" start="23273" end="23288" title="Baháʼí literature" label="Baháʼí writings"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="23398" end="23402" title="hell" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="23446" end="23467" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="24075" end="24079" title="womb" label="womb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="24351" end="24355" title="Soul (spirit)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699644" start="24577" end="24597" title="Manifestation of God (Baháʼí Faith)" label="Manifestation of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="24922" end="24931" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="25322" end="25328" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="25430" end="25439" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940634" start="25528" end="25542" title="World of Light" label="World of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753675" start="25590" end="25595" title="Tibil" label="Tibil"/>
<link wikidata="Q108914808" start="25604" end="25621" title="World of Darkness (Mandaeism)" label="World of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5704272" start="25659" end="25670" title="Hayyi Rabbi" label="Hayyi Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503273" start="25686" end="25691" title="uthra" label="uthra"/>
<link wikidata="Q110264266" start="25785" end="25793" title="Piriawis" label="Piriawis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110693369" start="25811" end="25818" title="Yardna" label="Yardena"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="25829" end="25841" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="25924" end="25931" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548412" start="25938" end="25964" title="On the Origin of the World" label="On the Origin of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667032" start="25974" end="25987" title="Seven Heavens" label="seven heavens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26017" end="26025" title="Demiurge#Gnosticism" label="Demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614157" start="26093" end="26100" title="Archon (Gnosticism)" label="Archons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5833688" start="26165" end="26182" title="Aeon (Gnosticism)" label="higher divinities"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="26201" end="26212" title="Eschatology" label="end of days"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="26413" end="26420" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="26421" end="26430" title="Confucian" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364799" start="26451" end="26455" title="Tian" label="Tian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714875" start="26732" end="26739" title="Shangdi" label="Shangdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="26823" end="26829" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364799" start="26890" end="26894" title="Tian" label="Tian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="26956" end="26968" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="26998" end="27011" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="27113" end="27118" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="27655" end="27664" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q272411" start="27810" end="27814" title="Mozi" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="27913" end="27926" title="Emperor of China" label="Son of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="28283" end="28289" title="Mohism" label="Mohism"/>
<link wikidata="Q272411" start="28560" end="28564" title="Mozi" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q272411" start="28617" end="28621" title="Mozi" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="28735" end="28746" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q216072" start="28780" end="28785" title="Xun Kuang" label="Xunzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q125445" start="29042" end="29058" title="Temple of Heaven" label="Temple of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="29298" end="29306" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993736" start="29371" end="29378" title="Saṃsāra (Buddhism)" label="samsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="29434" end="29439" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480392" start="29577" end="29584" title="rebirth (Buddhism)" label="rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16256466" start="29768" end="29781" title="Nirvana (Buddhism)" label="enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308653" start="29863" end="29881" title="Buddhist cosmology" label="Buddhist cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637847" start="30197" end="30209" title="hungry ghost" label="hungry ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637262" start="30384" end="30389" title="Asura (Buddhism)" label="asura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360289" start="30541" end="30553" title="Trāyastriṃśa" label="Trāyastriṃśa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="30577" end="30584" title="Mount Olympus" label="Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="30613" end="30621" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q732344" start="30649" end="30658" title="pure land" label="pure land"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="30913" end="30928" title="Bodhisattva" label="choose to do so"/>
<link wikidata="Q34271" start="31074" end="31081" title="Standard Tibetan" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q256585" start="31093" end="31098" title="Bardo" label="Bardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="31156" end="31164" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="31296" end="31305" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31355" end="31365" title="Brahmaloka#Buddhism" label="Brahmāloka"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707265" start="31415" end="31425" title="Mahabrahma" label="Mahābrahmā"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="31657" end="31661" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352021" start="32188" end="32192" title="Mara (demon)" label="Māra"/>
<link wikidata="Q654875" start="32418" end="32420" title="Li (unit)" label="lǐ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467542" start="32755" end="32762" title="Visakha" label="Visākhā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068293" start="32783" end="32790" title="Upasaka" label="upāsikā"/>
<link wikidata="Q654875" start="32856" end="32858" title="Li (unit)" label="lǐ"/>
<link wikidata="Q660582" start="32927" end="32927" title="Tushita" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="33035" end="33046" title="Bodhisattva" label="Bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="33249" end="33258" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Śākyamuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q193461" start="33372" end="33380" title="Maitreya" label="Maitreya"/>
<link wikidata="Q654875" start="33555" end="33557" title="Li (unit)" label="lǐ"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746495" start="33720" end="33724" title="Yāma" label="Yāma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360289" start="33783" end="33795" title="Trāyastriṃśa" label="Trāyastriṃśa"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="33843" end="33848" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068367" start="34457" end="34472" title="Four Heavenly Kings" label="Cātummahārājika"/>
<link wikidata="Q866315" start="34594" end="34594" title="Vaisravana" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q6132115" start="34724" end="34724" title="Kumbhanda" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1291498" start="34735" end="34752" title="Gandharva" label="Gandharva गन्धर्व"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="34765" end="34774" title="Naga (mythology)" label="Nāgas नाग"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011093" start="34788" end="34788" title="Yaksha" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2176806" start="34970" end="34985" title="Śūraṅgama Sūtra" label="Śūraṅgama Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024380" start="40697" end="40707" title="Ouyi Zhixu" label="Ouyi Zhixu"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="40892" end="40908" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680907" start="41589" end="41604" title="Hindu cosmology" label="Hindu cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382521" start="41659" end="41663" title="Loka" label="Loka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725577" start="41669" end="41675" title="Swarga" label="Swarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363340" start="41759" end="41767" title="paradise" label="paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q211258" start="41814" end="41818" title="Deva (Hinduism)" label="Deva"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="42277" end="42283" title="Moksha" label="Moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="42514" end="42521" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q947490" start="42525" end="42534" title="Paramatma" label="Paramatma"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="42821" end="42830" title="Vaishnava" label="Vaishnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q127570" start="42864" end="42873" title="Vaikuntha" label="Vaikuntha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813329" start="42942" end="42948" title="tattva" label="tattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q131443" start="43072" end="43079" title="Lakshmi" label="Lakshmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q746495" start="43084" end="43092" title="Narayana" label="Narayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="43113" end="43119" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771674" start="43130" end="43144" title="Nasadiya Sukta" label="Nasadiya Sukta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167085" start="44294" end="44299" title="Kural" label="Kural"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="44328" end="44332" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q312551" start="44544" end="44549" title="Bhagat Kabir" label="Kabir"/>
<link wikidata="Q203249" start="44563" end="44580" title="Guru Granth Sahib" label="Guru Granth Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q826591" start="44744" end="44756" title="Nahua people" label="Nahua people"/>
<link wikidata="Q391184" start="44769" end="44775" title="Aztec mythology" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072137" start="44777" end="44787" title="Chichimecs" label="Chichimecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q187897" start="44796" end="44803" title="Toltecs" label="Toltecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538362" start="45016" end="45032" title="Thirteen Heavens" label="Thirteen Heavens"/>
<link wikidata="Q516456" start="45047" end="45055" title="Ometeotl" label="Ometeotl"/>
<link wikidata="Q215304" start="45224" end="45237" title="creation myth" label="creation myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306159" start="45242" end="45262" title="Polynesian mythology" label="Polynesian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="45593" end="45598" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="45606" end="45619" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546879" start="45731" end="45746" title="Māori mythology" label="Māori mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777877" start="46088" end="46092" title="Maru (mythology)" label="Maru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682745" start="46101" end="46107" title="Hauora" label="Hauora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346741" start="46240" end="46247" title="Kaha&amp;#x27;i" label="Tawhaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q693587" start="46444" end="46449" title="Rehua" label="Rehua"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="46574" end="46580" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="46590" end="46596" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q40152" start="46633" end="46640" title="octopus" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183963" start="46781" end="46790" title="Tuamotus" label="Tuomotuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682578" start="47217" end="47221" title="Laka" label="Rata"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="47345" end="47354" title="Theosophy (Blavatskian)" label="Theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="47374" end="47390" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Helena Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486172" start="47495" end="47507" title="astral plane" label="astral plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="47592" end="47596" title="Soul (spirit)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q10797504" start="47611" end="47615" title="good and evil" label="good"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984547" start="47773" end="47795" title="The Summerland" label="&amp;quot;Summerland&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="47818" end="47822" title="hell" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q394352" start="47929" end="47935" title="Center of the earth" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="48189" end="48210" title="reincarnation" label="cycle of incarnations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="48284" end="48293" title="Anarchism" label="Anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q79969" start="48294" end="48306" title="Emma Goldman" label="Emma Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q296047" start="48637" end="48647" title="Sam Harris (author)" label="Sam Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337803" start="49089" end="49103" title="neuroscientist" label="neuroscientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807987" start="49109" end="49126" title="neurophilosophy" label="neurophilosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="49136" end="49150" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402730" start="49241" end="49267" title="eternal oblivion" label="cessation of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q750588" start="49372" end="49399" title="reticular activating system" label="reticular activating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="49407" end="49415" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q875267" start="49430" end="49439" title="necessity and sufficiency" label="necessary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4313500" start="49467" end="49511" title="disorders of consciousness" label="dysfunction of or damage to these structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037971" start="49554" end="49579" title="Inside the Neolithic Mind" label="Inside the Neolithic Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4509219" start="49762" end="49777" title="Inferno (Dante)" label="circles of hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q852859" start="49996" end="50027" title="altered states of consciousness" label="altered states of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q219566" start="50075" end="50096" title="near-death experience" label="near-death experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555235" start="50326" end="50338" title="life review" label="life-reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="50847" end="50854" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="50966" end="50981" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713307" start="50995" end="51003" title="Paradiso (Dante)" label="Paradiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="51024" end="51037" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="51049" end="51060" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754" start="51074" end="51087" title="Paradise Lost" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="51114" end="51121" title="Baptism" label="Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="51124" end="51137" title="Beatification" label="Beatification"/>
<link wikidata="Q44777" start="51140" end="51150" title="Indulgence" label="Indulgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522509" start="51153" end="51179" title="List of angels in theology" label="List of angels in theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="51182" end="51189" title="Penance" label="Penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q935362" start="51192" end="51202" title="Redemption (theology)" label="Redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171572" start="51680" end="51706" title="Cornell University Library" label="Cornell University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495870" start="51768" end="51804" title="University of Michigan Museum of Art" label="University of Michigan Museum of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13812" wikidata="Q28907" url="?curid=13812" title="History of Libya">
<text>Libya&#x27;s history involves its rich mix of ethnic groups, including the indigenous Berbers/Amazigh people. Amazigh have been present throughout the entire history of the country. For most of its history, Libya has been subjected to varying degrees of foreign control, from Europe, Asia, and Africa.

The history of Libya comprises six distinct periods: Ancient Libya, the Roman era, the Islamic era, Ottoman rule, Italian rule, and the Modern era.

==Prehistoric and Berber Libya==
Tens of thousands of years ago, the Sahara Desert, which now covers roughly 90% of Libya, was lush with green vegetation. It was home to lakes, forests, diverse wildlife and a temperate Mediterranean climate. Archaeological evidence indicates that the coastal plain was inhabited by Neolithic peoples from as early as 8000 BCE. These peoples were perhaps drawn by the climate, which enabled their culture to grow, subsisting on the domestication of cattle and the cultivation of crops.

Egyptian inscriptions from the Old Kingdom are the oldest available documentation of the Berber people. The inscriptions record Berber tribes raiding the Nile Delta. Rock paintings at Wadi Mathendous and the mountainous region of Jebel Acacus are the best sources of information about prehistoric Libya, and the pastoralist culture that settled there. The paintings reveal that the Libyan Sahara contained rivers, grassy plateaus and an abundance of wildlife such as giraffes, elephants and crocodiles.

The onset of the Piora Oscillation&#x27;s intense aridification resulted in the &quot;green Sahara&quot; rapidly transforming into the Sahara Desert. Dispersal in Africa from the Atlantic coast to the Siwa Oasis in Egypt seems to have followed, due to climatic changes which caused increasing desertification.

The African ancestors of the Berber people are assumed to have spread into the area by the Late Bronze Age. The earliest known name of such a tribe is that of the Garamantes, who were based in Germa, southern Libya. The Garamantes were a Saharan people of Berber origin who used an elaborate underground irrigation system; they were probably present as tribal people in the Fezzan by about 1000 BCE, and were a local power in the Sahara between 500 BCE and 500 CE. By the time of contact with the Phoenicians, the first of the Semitic civilizations to arrive in Libya from the East, the Lebu, Garamantes, Berbers and other tribes that lived in the Sahara were already well established.

==Phoenician and Greek Libya==
The Phoenicians were some of the first to establish coastal trading posts in Libya, when the merchants of Tyre (in present-day Lebanon) developed commercial relations with the various Berber tribes and made treaties with them to ensure their cooperation in the exploitation of raw materials. By the 5th century BCE, the greatest of the Phoenician colonies, Carthage, had extended its hegemony across much of North Africa, where a distinctive civilization, known as Punic, came into being. Punic settlements on the Libyan coast included Oea (later Tripoli), Libdah (later Leptis Magna) and Sabratha. These cities were in an area that was later called Tripolis, or &quot;Three Cities&quot;, from which Libya&#x27;s modern capital Tripoli takes its name.

In 630 BCE, the Ancient Greeks colonized Eastern Libya and founded the city of Cyrene. Within 200 years, four more important Greek cities were established in the area that became known as Cyrenaica: Barce (later Marj); Euhesperides (later Berenice, present-day Benghazi); Taucheira (later Arsinoe, present-day Taucheria); Balagrae (later Bayda and Beda Littoria under Italian occupation, present-day Bayda); and Apollonia (later Susa), the port of Cyrene. Together with Cyrene, they were known as the Pentapolis (Five Cities). Cyrene became one of the greatest intellectual and artistic centers of the Greek world, and was famous for its medical school, learned academies, and architecture. The Greeks of the Pentapolis resisted encroachments by the Ancient Egyptians from the East, as well as by the Carthaginians from the West.

== Achaemenid and Ptolemaic Libya ==
In 525 BCE the Persian army of Cambyses II overran Cyrenaica, which for the next two centuries remained under Persian or Egyptian rule. Alexander was greeted by the Greeks when he entered Cyrenaica in 331 BCE, and Eastern Libya again fell under the control of the Greeks, this time as part of the Ptolemaic Kingdom. Later, a federation of the Pentapolis was formed that was customarily ruled by a king drawn from the Ptolemaic royal house.

==Roman Libya==
After the fall of Carthage, the Romans did not immediately occupy Tripolitania (the region around Tripoli), but left it under control of the Berber kings of Numidia, until the coastal cities asked and obtained its protection. Ptolemy Apion, the last Greek ruler, bequeathed Cyrenaica to Rome, which formally annexed the region in 74 BCE and joined it to Crete as a Roman province. During the Roman civil wars Tripolitania (still not formally annexed) and Cyrenaica sustained Pompey and Marc Antony against respectively Caesar and Octavian. The Romans completed the conquest of the region under Augustus, occupying northern Fezzan (&quot;Fasania&quot;) with Cornelius Balbus Minor. As part of the Africa Nova province, Tripolitania was prosperous, and reached a golden age in the 2nd and 3rd centuries, when the city of Leptis Magna, home to the Severan dynasty, was at its height. On the other side, Cyrenaica&#x27;s first Christian communities were established by the time of the Emperor Claudius but was heavily devastated during the Diaspora revolt, and almost depopulated of Greeks and Jews alike, and, although repopulated by Trajan with military colonies, from then started its decadence.
Regardless, for more than 400 years Tripolitania and Cyrenaica were part of a cosmopolitan state whose citizens shared a common language, legal system, and Roman identity. Roman ruins like those of Leptis Magna and Sabratha, extant in present-day Libya, attest to the vitality of the region, where populous cities and even smaller towns enjoyed the amenities of urban life—the forum, markets, public entertainments, and baths—found in every corner of the Roman Empire. Merchants and artisans from many parts of the Roman world established themselves in North Africa, but the character of the cities of Tripolitania remained decidedly Punic and, in Cyrenaica, Greek. Tripolitania was a major exporter of olive oil, as well as a center for the trade of ivory and wild animals conveyed to the coast by the Garamantes, while Cyrenaica remained an important source of wines, drugs, and horses. The bulk of the population in the countryside consisted of Berber farmers, who in the west were thoroughly &quot;romanized&quot; in language and customs. Until the 10th century the African Romance remained in use in some Tripolitanian areas, mainly near the Tunisian border.

The decline of the Roman Empire saw the classical cities fall into ruin, a process hastened by the Vandals&#x27; destructive sweep though North Africa in the 5th century. The region&#x27;s prosperity had shrunk under Vandal domination, and the old Roman political and social order, disrupted by the Vandals, could not be restored. In outlying areas neglected by the Vandals, the inhabitants had sought the protection of tribal chieftains and, having grown accustomed to their autonomy, resisted re-assimilation into the imperial system.

When the Empire returned (now as East Romans) as part of Justinian&#x27;s reconquests of the 6th century, efforts were made to strengthen the old cities, but it was only a last gasp before they collapsed into disuse. Cyrenaica, which had remained an outpost of the Byzantine Empire during the Vandal period, also took on the characteristics of an armed camp. Unpopular Byzantine governors imposed burdensome taxation to meet military costs, while the towns and public services—including the water system—were left to decay. Byzantine rule in Africa did prolong the Roman ideal of imperial unity there for another century and a half however, and prevented the ascendancy of the Berber nomads in the coastal region. By the beginning of the 7th century, Byzantine control over the region was weak, Berber rebellions were becoming more frequent, and there was little to oppose Muslim invasion.

==Islamic Libya==
Tenuous Byzantine control over Libya was restricted to a few poorly defended coastal strongholds, and as such, the Arab horsemen who first crossed into the Pentapolis of Cyrenaica in September 643 CE encountered little resistance. Under the command of &#x27;Amr ibn al-&#x27;As, the armies of Islam conquered Cyrenaica, and renamed the Pentapolis, Barqa. They took also Tripoli, but after destroying the Roman walls of the city and getting a tribute they withdrew. In 647 an army of 40,000 Arabs, led by Abdullah ibn Saad, the foster-brother of Caliph Uthman, penetrated deep into Western Libya and took Tripoli from the Byzantines definitively. From Barqa, the Fezzan was conquered by Uqba ibn Nafi in 663 and Berber resistance was overcome. During the following centuries, Libya came under the rule of several Islamic dynasties, under various levels of autonomy from Ummayad, Abbasid and Fatimid caliphates of the time. Arab rule was easily imposed in the coastal farming areas and on the towns, which prospered again under Arab patronage. Townsmen valued the security that permitted them to practice their commerce and trade in peace, while the Punicized farmers recognized their affinity with the Semitic Arabs to whom they looked to protect their lands. In Cyrenaica, Monophysite adherents of the Coptic Church had welcomed the Muslim Arabs as liberators from Byzantine oppression. The Berber tribes of the hinterland accepted Islam, however they resisted Arab political rule.

For the next several decades, Libya was under the purview of the Umayyad Caliph of Damascus until the Abbasids overthrew the Umayyads in 750, and Libya came under the rule of Baghdad. When Caliph Harun al-Rashid appointed Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab as his governor of Ifriqiya in 800, Libya enjoyed considerable local autonomy under the Aghlabid dynasty. The Aghlabids were among the most attentive Islamic rulers of Libya; they brought about a measure of order to the region, and restored Roman irrigation systems, which brought prosperity to the area from the agricultural surplus. By the end of the 9th century, the Shiite Fatimids controlled Western Libya from their capital in Mahdia, before they ruled the entire region from their new capital of Cairo in 972 and appointed Bologhine ibn Ziri as governor. During Fatimid rule, Tripoli thrived on the trade in slaves and gold brought from the Sudan and on the sale of wool, leather, and salt shipped from its docks to Italy in exchange for wood and iron goods. Ibn Ziri&#x27;s Berber Zirid dynasty ultimately broke away from the Shiite Fatimids, and recognised the Sunni Abbasids of Baghdad as rightful Caliphs. In retaliation, the Fatimids brought about the migration of thousands from two troublesome Arab Bedouin tribes, the Banu Sulaym and Banu Hilal to North Africa. This act drastically altered the fabric of the Libyan countryside, and cemented the cultural and linguistic Arabisation of the region. Ibn Khaldun noted that the lands ravaged by Banu Hilal invaders had become completely arid desert.
Zirid rule in Tripolitania was short-lived though, and already in 1001 the Berbers of the Banu Khazrun broke away. Tripolitania remained under their control until 1146, when the region was overtaken by the Normans of Sicily. The latter appointed a governor over it called Rafi Ibn Matruh, who established a kingdom and ruled under Roger I and his son Roger II until he revolted against him in the year 1158. The inhabitants of Tripoli revolted against him one year, and after the Almohads expelled the Normans from Mahdia, he pledged allegiance to the Almohads and remained governor of Tripoli until he asked for an exemption from it and traveled to Alexandria and died there. For the next 50 years, Tripolitania was the scene of numerous battles between the Almohad rulers and insurgents of the Banu Ghaniya. Later, a general of the Almohads, Muhammad ibn Abu Hafs, ruled Libya from 1207 to 1221 before the later establishment of a Tunisian Hafsid dynasty independent from the Almohads. in the period of Hafsids the emirate of banu talis established in the city of bani walid and ruled the city until the Ottoman conquest. The Hafsids ruled Tripolitania for nearly 300 years, and established significant trade with the city-states of Europe. Hafsid rulers also encouraged art, literature, architecture and scholarship. Ahmad Zarruq was one of the most famous Islamic scholars to settle in Libya, and did so during this time. By the 16th century however, the Hafsids became increasingly caught up in the power struggle between Spain and the Ottoman Empire. After a successful invasion of Tripoli by Habsburg Spain in 1510, and its handover to the Knights of St. John, the Ottoman admiral Sinan Pasha finally took control of Libya in 1551.

==Ottoman Libya==
After a successful invasion by the Habsburgs of Spain in the early 16th century, Charles V entrusted its defense to the Knights of St. John in Malta. Lured by the piracy that spread through the Maghreb coastline, adventurers such as Barbarossa and his successors consolidated Ottoman control in the central Maghreb. The Ottoman Turks conquered Tripoli in 1551 under the command of Sinan Pasha. In the next year his successor Turgut Reis was named the Bey of Tripoli and later Pasha of Tripoli in 1556. As Pasha, he adorned and built up Tripoli, making it one of the most impressive cities along the North African coast. By 1565, administrative authority as regent in Tripoli was vested in a &quot;pasha&quot; appointed directly by the &quot;sultan&quot; in Constantinople. In the 1580s, the rulers of Fezzan gave their allegiance to the sultan, and although Ottoman authority was absent in Cyrenaica, a &quot;bey&quot; was stationed in Benghazi late in the next century to act as agent of the government in Tripoli.

In time, real power came to rest with the pasha&#x27;s corps of janissaries, a self-governing military guild, and in time the pasha&#x27;s role was reduced to that of ceremonial head of state. Mutinies and coups were frequent, and in 1611 the &quot;deys&quot; staged a coup against the pasha, and Dey Sulayman Safar was appointed as head of government. For the next hundred years, a series of &quot;deys&quot; effectively ruled Tripolitania, some for only a few weeks, and at various times the dey was also pasha-regent. The regency governed by the dey was autonomous in internal affairs and, although dependent on the sultan for fresh recruits to the corps of janissaries, his government was left to pursue a virtually independent foreign policy as well. The two most important Deys were Mehmed Saqizli (r. 1631–49) and Osman Saqizli (r. 1649–72), both also Pasha, who ruled effectively the region. The latter conquered also Cyrenaica.
Tripoli was the only city of size in Ottoman Libya (then known as Tripolitania Eyalet) at the end of the 17th century and had a population of about 30,000. The bulk of its residents were Moors, as city-dwelling Arabs were then known. Several hundred Turks and renegades formed a governing elite, a large portion of which were &quot;kouloughlis&quot; (lit. sons of servants—offspring of Turkish soldiers and Arab women); they identified with local interests and were respected by locals. Jews and Moriscos were active as merchants and craftsmen and a small number of European traders also frequented the city. European slaves and large numbers of enslaved blacks transported from Sudan were also a feature of everyday life in Tripoli. In 1551, Turgut Reis enslaved almost the entire population of the Maltese island of Gozo, some 6,300 people, sending them to Libya. The most pronounced slavery activity involved the enslavement of black Africans who were brought via trans-Saharan trade routes. Even though the slave trade was officially abolished in Tripoli in 1853, in practice it continued until the 1890s.
Lacking direction from the Ottoman government, Tripoli lapsed into a period of military anarchy during which coup followed coup and few deys survived in office more than a year. One such coup was led by Turkish officer Ahmed Karamanli. The Karamanlis ruled from 1711 until 1735 mainly in Tripolitania, but had influence in Cyrenaica and Fezzan as well by the mid 18th century. Ahmed was a Janissary and popular cavalry officer. He murdered the Ottoman Dey of Tripolitania and seized the throne in 1711. After persuading Sultan Ahmed III to recognize him as governor, Ahmed established himself as pasha and made his post hereditary. Though Tripolitania continued to pay nominal tribute to the Ottoman padishah, it otherwise acted as an independent kingdom. Ahmed greatly expanded his city&#x27;s economy, particularly through the employment of corsairs (pirates) on crucial Mediterranean shipping routes; nations that wished to protect their ships from the corsairs were forced to pay tribute to the pasha. Ahmad&#x27;s successors proved to be less capable than himself, however, the region&#x27;s delicate balance of power allowed the Karamanli to survive several dynastic crises without invasion. The Libyan Civil War of 1791–1795 occurred in those years. In 1793, Turkish officer Ali Pasha deposed Hamet Karamanli and briefly restored Tripolitania to Ottoman rule. However, Hamet&#x27;s brother Yusuf (r. 1795–1832) reestablished Tripolitania&#x27;s independence.

In the early 19th century war broke out between the United States and Tripolitania, and a series of battles ensued in what came to be known as the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War. By 1819, the various treaties of the Napoleonic Wars had forced the Barbary states to give up piracy almost entirely, and Tripolitania&#x27;s economy began to crumble. As Yusuf weakened, factions sprung up around his three sons; though Yusuf abdicated in 1832 in favor of his son Ali II, civil war soon resulted. Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II sent in troops ostensibly to restore order, but instead deposed and exiled Ali II, marking the end of both the Karamanli dynasty and an independent Tripolitania. Anyway, order was not recovered easily, and the revolt of the Libyan under Abd-El-Gelil and Gûma ben Khalifa lasted until the death of the latter in 1858.

The second period of direct Ottoman rule saw administrative changes, and what seemed as greater order in the governance of the three provinces of Libya. It would not be long before the Scramble for Africa and European colonial interests set their eyes on the marginal Turkish provinces of Libya. The Ottoman Sultan Abdulhamid II twice sent his aide-de-camp Azmzade Sadik El Mueyyed to meet Sheikh Senussi to cultivate positive relations and counter the West European scramble for Africa. Reunification came about through the unlikely route of an invasion (Italo-Turkish War, 1911–1912) and occupation starting from 1911 when Italy simultaneously turned the three regions into colonies.

==Italian Libya==


From 1912 to 1927, the territory of Libya was known as Italian North Africa. From 1927 to 1934, the territory was split into two colonies, Italian Cyrenaica and Italian Tripolitania, run by Italian governors. Some 150,000 Italians settled in Libya, constituting roughly 20% of the total population.
In 1934, Italy adopted the name &quot;Libya&quot; (used by the Greeks for all of North Africa, except Egypt) as the official name of the colony (made up of the three provinces of Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Fezzan). Idris al-Mahdi as-Senussi (later King Idris I), Emir of Cyrenaica, led Libyan resistance to Italian occupation between the two world wars.
Ilan Pappe estimates that between 1928 and 1932 the Italian military &quot;killed half the Bedouin population (directly or through disease and starvation in camps)&quot;. Italian historian Emilio Gentile sets to about 50,000 the number of victims of the repression.

In 1934, the political entity called &quot;Libya&quot; was created by governor Balbo with capital Tripoli. The Italians emphasized infrastructure improvements and public works. In particular, they hugely expanded Libyan railway and road networks from 1934 to 1940, building hundreds of kilometers of new roads and railways and encouraging the establishment of new industries and dozens of new agricultural villages.

During WW2, since June 1940 Libya was at the center of destructive fighting between the Axis and the British empire: the Allies conquered from Italy all of Libya only by February 1943.

From 1943 to 1951, Tripolitania and Cyrenaica were under British military administration, while the French controlled Fezzan. In 1944, Idris returned from exile in Cairo but declined to resume permanent residence in Cyrenaica until the removal of some aspects of foreign control in 1947. Under the terms of the 1947 peace treaty with the Allies, Italy relinquished all claims to Libya.

==Kingdom==
On 21 November 1949, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution stating that Libya should become independent before 1 January 1952. Idris represented Libya in the subsequent UN negotiations. On 24 December 1951, Libya declared its independence as the United Kingdom of Libya, a constitutional and hereditary monarchy under King Idris, Libya&#x27;s only monarch.

1951 also saw the enactment of the first Libyan Constitution. The Libyan National Assembly drafted the Constitution and passed a resolution accepting it in a meeting held in the city of Benghazi on Sunday, 6th Muharram, Hegiras 1371: 7 October 1951. Mohamed Abulas’ad El-Alem, President of the National Assembly and the two vice-presidents of the National Assembly, Omar Faiek Shennib and Abu Baker Ahmed Abu Baker executed and submitted the Constitution to King Idris following which it was published in the Official Gazette of Libya.

The enactment of the Libyan Constitution was significant in that it was the first piece of legislation to formally entrench the rights of Libyan citizens following the post-war creation of the Libyan nation state. Following on from the intense UN debates during which Idris had argued that the creation of a single Libyan state would be of benefit to the regions of Tripolitania, Fezzan, and Cyrenaica, the Libyan government was keen to formulate a constitution which contained many of the entrenched rights common to European and North American nation states. Though not creating a secular state – Article 5 proclaims Islam the religion of the State – the Libyan Constitution did formally set out rights such as equality before the law as well as equal civil and political rights, equal opportunities, and an equal responsibility for public duties and obligations, &quot;without distinction of religion, belief, race, language, wealth, kinship or political or social opinions&quot; (Article 11).

During this period, Britain was involved in extensive engineering projects in Libya and was also the country&#x27;s biggest supplier of arms. The United States also maintained the large Wheelus Air Base in Libya.

==Arab Republic and &quot;Jamahiriya&quot;==

On 1 September 1969, a small group of military officers led by 27-year-old army officer Muammar Gaddafi staged a coup d&#x27;état against King Idris, launching the Libyan Revolution. Gaddafi was referred to as the &quot;Brother Leader and Guide of the Revolution&quot; in government statements and the official Libyan press.
On the birthday of Muhammad in 1973, Gaddafi delivered a &quot;Five-Point Address&quot;. He announced the suspension of all existing laws and the implementation of Sharia. He said that the country would be purged of the &quot;politically sick&quot;. A &quot;people&#x27;s militia&quot; would &quot;protect the revolution&quot;. There would be an administrative revolution, and a cultural revolution. Gaddafi set up an extensive surveillance system. 10 to 20 percent of Libyans worked in surveillance for the Revolutionary committees, which monitored activities in government, in factories, and in the education sector. Gaddafi executed dissidents publicly and the executions were often rebroadcast on state television channels. Gaddafi employed his network of diplomats and recruits to assassinate dozens of critical refugees around the world. Amnesty International listed at least 25 assassinations between 1980 and 1987.
In 1977, Libya officially became the &quot;Great Socialist People&#x27;s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya&quot;. Gaddafi officially passed power to the General People&#x27;s Committees and henceforth claimed to be no more than a symbolic figurehead, but domestic and international critics claimed the reforms gave him virtually unlimited power. Dissidents against the new system were not tolerated, with punitive actions including capital punishment authorized by Gaddafi himself. The new &quot;jamahiriya&quot; governance structure he established was officially referred to as a form of direct democracy, though the government refused to publish election results. Later that same year, Libya and Egypt fought a four-day border war that came to be known as the Libyan-Egyptian War, both nations agreed to a ceasefire under the mediation of the Algerian president Houari Boumediène. In February 1977, Libya began to provide military supplies to Goukouni Oueddei and the People&#x27;s Armed Forces in Chad. The Chadian–Libyan conflict began in earnest when Libya&#x27;s support of rebel forces in northern Chad escalated into an invasion. Much of the country&#x27;s income from oil, which soared in the 1970s, was spent on arms purchases and on sponsoring dozens of rebels groups around the world. An airstrike failed to kill Gaddafi in 1986. Libya was accused in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland and the 1989 bombing of UTA Flight 772 over Chad and Niger; Libya was finally put under United Nations sanctions in 1992. Gaddafi financed various other groups from anti-nuclear movements to Australian trade unions.

From 1977 onward, per capita income in the country rose to more than US$11,000, the fifth-highest in Africa, while the Human Development Index became the highest in Africa and greater than that of Saudi Arabia. This was achieved without borrowing any foreign loans, keeping Libya debt-free. In addition, the country&#x27;s literacy rate rose from 10% to 90%, life expectancy rose from 57 to 77 years, employment opportunities were established for migrant workers, and welfare systems were introduced that allowed access to free education, free healthcare, and financial assistance for housing. The Great Manmade River was also built to allow free access to fresh water across large parts of the country. In addition, financial support was provided for university scholarships and employment programs.

Gaddafi doubled the minimum wage, introduced statutory price controls, and implemented compulsory rent reductions of between 30 and 40%. Gaddafi also wanted to combat the strict social restrictions that had been imposed on women by the previous regime, establishing the Revolutionary Women&#x27;s Formation to encourage reform. In 1970, a law was introduced affirming equality of the sexes and insisting on wage parity. In 1971, Gaddafi sponsored the creation of a Libyan General Women&#x27;s Federation. In 1972, a law was passed criminalizing the marriage of any females under the age of sixteen and ensuring that a woman&#x27;s consent was a necessary prerequisite for a marriage.

Gaddafi assumed the honorific title of &quot;King of Kings of Africa&quot; in 2008 as part of his campaign for a United States of Africa. By the early 2010s, in addition to attempting to assume a leadership role in the African Union, Libya was also viewed as having formed closer ties with Italy, one of its former colonial rulers, than any other country in the European Union. The eastern parts of the country have been &quot;ruined&quot; due to Gaddafi&#x27;s economic theories, according to &quot;The Economist&quot;.

==2011 uprising and the First Civil War==
After popular movements overturned the rulers of Tunisia and Egypt, its immediate neighbors to the west and east, Libya experienced a full-scale revolt beginning on 17 February 2011. By 20 February, the unrest had spread to Tripoli. In the early hours of 21 February 2011, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, oldest son of Muammar Gaddafi, spoke on Libyan television of his fears that the country would fragment and be replaced by &quot;15 Islamic fundamentalist emirates&quot; if the uprising engulfed the entire state. He admitted that &quot;mistakes had been made&quot; in quelling recent protests and announced plans for a constitutional convention, but warned that the country&#x27;s economic wealth and recent prosperity was at risk and warned of &quot;rivers of blood&quot; if the protests continued.

On 27 February 2011, the National Transitional Council was established under the stewardship of Mustafa Abdul Jalil, Gaddafi&#x27;s former justice minister, to administer the areas of Libya under rebel control. This marked the first serious effort to organize the broad-based opposition to the Gaddafi regime. While the council was based in Benghazi, it claimed Tripoli as its capital. Hafiz Ghoga, a human rights lawyer, later assumed the role of spokesman for the council. On 10 March 2011, France became the first state to officially recognise the council as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people.

By early March 2011, some parts of Libya had tipped out of Gaddafi&#x27;s control, coming under the control of a coalition of opposition forces, including soldiers who decided to support the rebels. Eastern Libya, centered on the port city of Benghazi, was said to be firmly in the hands of the opposition, while Tripoli and its environs remained in dispute. Pro-Gaddafi forces were able to respond militarily to rebel pushes in Western Libya and launched a counterattack along the coast toward Benghazi, the &quot;de facto&quot; centre of the uprising. The town of Zawiya, from Tripoli, was bombarded by Air Force planes and Army tanks and seized by Jamahiriya troops, &quot;exercising a level of brutality not yet seen in the conflict&quot;.

In several public appearances, Gaddafi threatened to destroy the protest movement, and Al Jazeera and other agencies reported his government was arming pro-Gaddafi militiamen to kill protesters and defectors against the regime in Tripoli. Organs of the United Nations, including United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations Human Rights Council, condemned the crackdown as violating international law, with the latter body expelling Libya outright in an unprecedented action urged by Libya&#x27;s own delegation to the UN. The United States imposed economic sanctions against Libya, followed shortly by Australia, Canada and the United Nations Security Council, which also voted to refer Gaddafi and other government officials to the International Criminal Court for investigation.

On 17 March 2011 the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1973 with a 10–0 vote and five abstentions. The resolution sanctioned the establishment of a no-fly zone and the use of &quot;all means necessary&quot; to protect civilians within Libya.

Shortly afterwards, Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa stated that &quot;Libya has decided an immediate ceasefire and an immediate halt to all military operations&quot;.

On 19 March, the first Allied act to secure the no-fly zone began when French military jets entered Libyan airspace on a reconnaissance mission heralding attacks on enemy targets. Allied military action to enforce the ceasefire commenced the same day when a French aircraft opened fire and destroyed a vehicle on the ground. French jets also destroyed five tanks belonging to the Gaddafi regime. The United States and United Kingdom launched attacks on over 20 &quot;integrated air defense systems&quot; using more than 110 Tomahawk cruise missiles during operations Odyssey Dawn and Ellamy.

On 27 June 2011, the International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant for Gaddafi, alleging that Gaddafi had been personally involved in planning and implementing &quot;a policy of widespread and systematic attacks against civilians and demonstrators and dissidents&quot;.
By 22 August 2011, rebel fighters had entered Tripoli and occupied Green Square, which they renamed to its original name, Martyrs&#x27; Square in honour of those killed during the Italian occupation. Meanwhile, Gaddafi asserted that he was still in Libya and would not concede power to the rebels.

On 16 September 2011, the U.N. General Assembly approved a request from the National Transitional Council to accredit envoys of the country&#x27;s interim controlling body as Tripoli&#x27;s sole representatives at the UN, effectively recognising the National Transitional Council as the legitimate holder of that country&#x27;s UN seat.

The National Transitional Council had been plagued by internal divisions during its tenure as Libya&#x27;s interim governing authority. It postponed the formation of a caretaker, or &quot;interim&quot; government on several occasions during the period prior to the death of Muammar Gaddafi in his hometown of Sirte on 20 October 2011. Mustafa Abdul Jalil led the National Transitional Council and was generally considered to be the principal leadership figure. Mahmoud Jibril served as the NTC&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; head of government from 5 March 2011 through the end of the war, but he announced he would resign after Libya was declared to have been &quot;liberated&quot; from Gaddafi&#x27;s rule.

The &quot;liberation&quot; of Libya was celebrated on 23 October 2011, and Jibril announced that consultations were under way to form an interim government within one month, followed by elections for a constitutional assembly within eight months and parliamentary and presidential elections to be held within a year after that. He stepped down as expected the same day and was succeeded by Ali Tarhouni. At least 30,000 Libyans died in the civil war.

==Transition and the Second Civil War==

After the First Civil War, the National Transitional Council (NTC) has been responsible for the transition of the administration of the governing of Libya. The &quot;liberation&quot; of Libya was celebrated on 23 October 2011. Then Jibril announced that consultations were under way to form an interim government within one month, followed by elections for a constitutional assembly within eight months and parliamentary and presidential elections to be held within a year after that. He stepped down as expected the same day and was succeeded by Ali Tarhouni.

On 24 November, Tarhouni was replaced by Abdurrahim El-Keib. El-Keib formed a provisional government, filling it with independent or CNT politicians, including women.

After the fall of Gaddafi, Libya has been faced with internal struggles. A protest started against the new regime of NTC. The loyalists of Gaddafi rebelled and fought with the new Libyan army.

Because the Constitutional Declaration allowed a multi-party system, political parties, like the Democratic Party, the Party of Reform and Development, and the National Gathering for Freedom, Justice and Development appeared. The Islamist movement started. To stop it, the CNT (NTC) government denied power to parties based on religion, tribal and ethnic bases.

On 7 July 2012, Libyans voted in their first parliamentary elections since the end of Gaddafi&#x27;s rule. The election, in which more than 100 political parties registered, formed an interim 200-member national assembly. This will replace the unelected National Transitional Council, name a prime minister, and form a committee to draft a constitution. The vote was postponed several times to resolve logistical and technical problems, and to give more time to register to vote, and to investigate candidates.

On 8 August 2012, the National Transitional Council officially handed power to the wholly elected General National Congress, which is tasked with the formation of an interim government and the drafting of a new Libyan Constitution to be approved in a general referendum.

On 25 August 2012, in what &quot;appears to be the most blatant sectarian attack&quot; since the end of the civil war, unnamed organized assailants bulldozed a Sufi mosque with graves, in broad daylight in the center of the Libyan capital Tripoli. It was the second such razing of a Sufi site in two days.

On 7 October 2012, Libya&#x27;s Prime Minister-elect Mustafa A.G. Abushagur stepped down after failing a second time to win parliamentary approval for a new cabinet. On 14 October 2012, the General National Congress elected former GNC member and human rights lawyer Ali Zeidan as prime minister-designate.

Libyan Constitutional Assembly elections took place in Libya on 20 February 2014. Ali Zidan was ousted by the parliament committee and fled from Libya on 14 March 2014 after rogue oil tanker Morning Glory left the rebel port of Sidra, Libya with Libyan oil that had been confiscated by the rebels. Ali Zeidan had promised to stop the departure, but failed.

On 30 March 2014 General National Congress voted to replace itself with new House of Representatives.

Abdullah al-Thani served as the prime minister since 11 March 2014 in interim capacity. He resigned on 13 April 2014, after he and his family were victims of a &quot;traitorous attack&quot; but continued to remain prime minister since there was no replacement. Ahmed Maiteeq was elected Prime Minister of Libya in May 2014 but his election as prime minister took place under disputed circumstances, Libyan Supreme Court ruled on 9 June that Maiteeq&#x27;s appointment was illegal and Maiteeq resigned the same day.

, the parliament building was reported to have been stormed by troops loyal to General Khalifa Haftar, reportedly including the Zintan Brigade, in what the Libyan government described as an attempted coup.

House of Representatives elections were held in Libya on 25 June 2014.

On 14 July, the United States Support Mission in Libya evacuated its staff after 13 people were killed in clashes in Tripoli and Benghazi. The fighting, between government forces and rival militia groups, also forced Tripoli International Airport to close. A militia, including members of the Libya Revolutionaries Operations Room (LROR), tried to seize control of the airport from the Zintan militia, which has controlled it since Gaddafi was toppled. Both militias are believed to be on the official payroll. In addition Misrata Airport was closed, due to its dependence on Tripoli International Airport for its operations. Government spokesman, Ahmed Lamine, stated that approximately 90% of the planes stationed at Tripoli International Airport were destroyed or made inoperable in the attack, and that the government may make an appeal for international forces to assist in reestablishing security.

In December 2015, the Libyan Political Agreement was signed after talks in Skhirat, as the result of protracted negotiations between rival political camps based in Tripoli, Tobruk, and elsewhere which agreed to unite as the Government of National Accord (GNA). On 30 March 2016, Fayez Sarraj, the head of GNA, arrived in Tripoli and began working from there despite opposition from GNC.

On 4 April 2019, Khalifa Haftar, the commander of the Libyan National Army, called on his military forces to advance on Tripoli, the capital of the internationally recognized government of Libya, in the 2019–20 Western Libya campaign This was met with reproach from United Nations Secretary General António Guterres and the United Nations Security Council.

On 23 October 2020, the &quot;5+5 Joint Libyan Military Commission&quot; representing the Libyan National Army and the GNA reached a &quot;permanent ceasefire agreement in all areas of Libya&quot;. The agreement, effective immediately, required that all foreign fighters leave Libya within three months while a joint police force would patrol disputed areas. The first commercial flight between Tripoli and Benghazi took place that same day. On 10 March 2021, an interim unity government was formed, which was slated to remain in place until the next Libyan presidential election scheduled for 10 December. However, the election has been delayed several times since, effectively rendering the unity government in power indefinitely, causing tensions which threaten to reignite the war.

On September 10, 2023, catastrophic floods due to dam failures generated by Storm Daniel devastated the port city of Derna, killing nearly 7,000 and leaving over 10,000 missing. The floods were the worst natural disaster in Libya&#x27;s modern history.

== See also ==
*Arab Spring
*History of North Africa
*History of the Jews in Libya
*List of heads of state of Libya
*Military history of Libya
*Politics of Libya
* Tripoli history and timeline
* Benghazi history and timeline

==Notes==
==Bibliography==
*
*
* Tuccimei, Ercole (1999). &quot;La Banca d&#x27;Italia in Africa&quot;, Foreword by Arnaldo Mauri, Laterza, Bari.
* Pierre Schill, Réveiller l’archive d’une guerre coloniale. Photographies et écrits de Gaston Chérau, correspondant de guerre lors du conflit italo-turc pour la Libye (1911–1912), Créaphis, 2018, 480 pages and 230 photographs. .

==External links==
*History of Libya | Libya Connected (archived 20 April 2007)
*Libya in Crisis: Modern History of Libya (archived 17 March 2013) from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="0" end="5" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="86" end="93" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28907" start="307" end="323" title="History of Libya" label="history of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="521" end="527" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="671" end="684" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="768" end="777" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="917" end="930" title="animal husbandry" label="domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q177819" start="1003" end="1014" title="Old Kingdom of Egypt" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="1138" end="1152" title="Rock art" label="Rock paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565020" start="1156" end="1171" title="Wadi Mathendous" label="Wadi Mathendous"/>
<link wikidata="Q308807" start="1202" end="1214" title="Acacus Mountains" label="Jebel Acacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="1284" end="1295" title="pastoralism" label="pastoralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60259056" start="1354" end="1384" title="Neolithic Subpluvial" label="Libyan Sahara contained rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477562" start="1493" end="1510" title="Piora Oscillation" label="Piora Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790326" start="1526" end="1539" title="aridification" label="aridification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="1611" end="1624" title="Sahara Desert" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="1677" end="1687" title="Siwa Oasis" label="Siwa Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="1769" end="1784" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="1816" end="1829" title="Berber people" label="Berber people"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1878" end="1893" title="Late Bronze Age" label="Late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q839034" start="1950" end="1960" title="Garamantes" label="Garamantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117654" start="1980" end="1985" title="Germa" label="Germa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="2284" end="2293" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="2611" end="2615" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="2632" end="2639" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="2689" end="2702" title="Berber people" label="Berber tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="2862" end="2870" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="2889" end="2897" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="2970" end="2975" title="Punic" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191504" start="3076" end="3088" title="Leptis Magna" label="Leptis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q192918" start="3094" end="3102" title="Sabratha" label="Sabratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="3155" end="3163" title="Tripolis (region of Africa)" label="Tripolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3274" end="3288" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="3337" end="3343" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="3446" end="3455" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q807913" start="3457" end="3462" title="Barca (ancient city)" label="Barce"/>
<link wikidata="Q427646" start="3470" end="3474" title="Marj, Libya" label="Marj"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="3519" end="3527" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788306" start="3530" end="3539" title="Taucheira" label="Taucheira"/>
<link wikidata="Q35784" start="3658" end="3663" title="Bayda, Libya" label="Bayda"/>
<link wikidata="Q45826" start="3670" end="3679" title="Apollonia, Cyrenaica" label="Apollonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="4008" end="4021" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182483" start="4157" end="4168" title="Cambyses II" label="Cambyses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="4262" end="4271" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="4423" end="4440" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="4601" end="4609" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="4649" end="4661" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="4740" end="4747" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q886894" start="4809" end="4822" title="Ptolemy Apion" label="Ptolemy Apion"/>
<link wikidata="Q692775" start="4946" end="4962" title="Creta et Cyrenaica" label="a Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747183" start="4975" end="4991" title="Roman civil wars" label="Roman civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="5058" end="5064" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="5069" end="5080" title="Marc Antony" label="Marc Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="5102" end="5108" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="5113" end="5121" title="Octavian" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="5206" end="5212" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201102" start="5240" end="5262" title="Lucius Cornelius Balbus the Younger" label="Cornelius Balbus Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12901244" start="5279" end="5290" title="Africa Nova" label="Africa Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q191504" start="5402" end="5414" title="Leptis Magna" label="Leptis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q321219" start="5428" end="5443" title="Severan dynasty" label="Severan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="5564" end="5580" title="Claudius" label="Emperor Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254" start="5619" end="5634" title="Diaspora revolt" label="Diaspora revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192918" start="5993" end="6001" title="Sabratha" label="Sabratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q839034" start="6581" end="6591" title="Garamantes" label="Garamantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q162064" start="6848" end="6863" title="African Romance" label="African Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="7042" end="7049" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="7514" end="7525" title="Byzantine Empire" label="East Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="7538" end="7547" title="Justinian" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="8398" end="8407" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="8505" end="8509" title="Arab people" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q314781" start="8642" end="8667" title="&amp;#x27;Amr ibn al-&amp;#x27;As" label="&amp;#x27;Amr ibn al-&amp;#x27;As"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8726" end="8736" title="Cyrenaica#Christianization" label="Pentapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="8738" end="8743" title="Barqa" label="Barqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q423552" start="8894" end="8911" title="Abdullah ibn Saad" label="Abdullah ibn Saad"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="8942" end="8948" title="Uthman ibn Affan" label="Uthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="9052" end="9058" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q423772" start="9076" end="9089" title="Uqba ibn Nafi" label="Uqba ibn Nafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="9259" end="9266" title="Ummayad" label="Ummayad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="9268" end="9275" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="9280" end="9287" title="Fatimid" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="9538" end="9543" title="Punic" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="9663" end="9674" title="Monophysite" label="Monophysite"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="9692" end="9705" title="Coptic Church" label="Coptic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="9946" end="9964" title="Caliph of Damascus" label="Caliph of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="9975" end="9983" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131002" start="10069" end="10084" title="Harun al-Rashid" label="Harun al-Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q692718" start="10095" end="10116" title="Ibrahim I ibn al-Aghlab" label="Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="10136" end="10144" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="10205" end="10213" title="Aghlabid" label="Aghlabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="10494" end="10502" title="Fatimids" label="Fatimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q466054" start="10550" end="10556" title="Mahdia" label="Mahdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="10620" end="10625" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004719" start="10647" end="10665" title="Bologhine ibn Ziri" label="Bologhine ibn Ziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="10906" end="10919" title="Zirid dynasty" label="Zirid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="11150" end="11161" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="11166" end="11176" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="11329" end="11340" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827580" start="11518" end="11530" title="Banu Khazrun" label="Banu Khazrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895891" start="12224" end="12236" title="Banu Ghaniya" label="Banu Ghaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="12262" end="12270" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohads"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="12370" end="12384" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q124406392" start="12445" end="12466" title="Emirate of Banu Talis" label="emirate of banu talis"/>
<link wikidata="Q244230" start="12494" end="12504" title="Bani Walid" label="bani walid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827457" start="12748" end="12760" title="Ahmad Zarruq" label="Ahmad Zarruq"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="13027" end="13041" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Habsburg Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="13075" end="13094" title="Knights of St. John" label="Knights of St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378425" start="13116" end="13127" title="Sinan Pasha (Ottoman admiral)" label="Sinan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13221" end="13239" title="House of Habsburg#Division of the house: Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs" label="Habsburgs of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="13267" end="13276" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="13380" end="13387" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="13419" end="13429" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="13506" end="13513" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q367350" start="13611" end="13622" title="Turgut Reis" label="Turgut Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="13637" end="13640" title="Bey" label="Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141945" start="13662" end="13678" title="Pasha of Tripoli" label="Pasha of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q184951" start="13883" end="13888" title="pasha" label="pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="13927" end="13933" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="13943" end="13957" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="13987" end="13993" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="14267" end="14278" title="janissaries" label="janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821337" start="14452" end="14455" title="dey" label="dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809554" start="14992" end="15006" title="Mehmed Saqizli" label="Mehmed Saqizli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107103" start="15024" end="15037" title="Osman Saqizli" label="Osman Saqizli"/>
<link wikidata="Q44565" start="15219" end="15225" title="Eyalet" label="Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="15327" end="15332" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199283" start="15472" end="15482" title="kouloughli" label="kouloughli"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="15636" end="15644" title="Moriscos" label="Moriscos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="15758" end="15763" title="slave" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q170488" start="15958" end="15962" title="Gozo" label="Gozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="16107" end="16126" title="trans-Saharan trade" label="trans-Saharan trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292679" start="16151" end="16162" title="Slavery in Libya" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552433" start="16437" end="16441" title="1711 Karamanli coup" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825115" start="16469" end="16484" title="Ahmed Karamanli" label="Ahmed Karamanli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929987" start="16490" end="16500" title="Karamanli dynasty" label="Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q199482" start="16777" end="16786" title="Ahmed III" label="Ahmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907676" start="16950" end="16958" title="padishah" label="padishah"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="17103" end="17109" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="17123" end="17136" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553413" start="17452" end="17481" title="Libyan Civil War of 1791–1795" label="Libyan Civil War of 1791–1795"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="17516" end="17523" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134119" start="17532" end="17541" title="Trabluslu Ali Pasha" label="Ali Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622048" start="17647" end="17652" title="Yusuf Karamanli" label="Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q468293" start="17864" end="17881" title="First Barbary War" label="First Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q233505" start="17890" end="17908" title="Second Barbary War" label="Second Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="17947" end="17962" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q174791" start="18238" end="18247" title="Mahmud II" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="18751" end="18770" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="19122" end="19139" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="Italo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="19191" end="19196" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="19328" end="19348" title="Italian North Africa" label="Italian North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q666893" start="19412" end="19429" title="Italian Cyrenaica" label="Italian Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433694" start="19434" end="19454" title="Italian Tripolitania" label="Italian Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="19751" end="19760" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="19762" end="19774" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="19779" end="19785" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="19821" end="19833" title="Idris of Libya" label="King Idris I"/>
<link wikidata="Q462874" start="19927" end="19937" title="Ilan Pappe" label="Ilan Pappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056" start="20273" end="20278" title="Italo Balbo" label="Balbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20618" end="20621" title="WW2" label="WW2"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="20699" end="20703" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="20732" end="20738" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953965" start="20854" end="20885" title="British Military Administration (Libya)" label="British military administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518801" start="20897" end="20921" title="Fezzan-Ghadames (French Administration)" label="French controlled Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="20961" end="20966" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314717" start="21108" end="21125" title="Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947" label="1947 peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="21135" end="21141" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="21221" end="21240" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q31454" start="21448" end="21471" title="Kingdom of Libya" label="United Kingdom of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="21525" end="21530" title="Idris of Libya" label="Idris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164202" start="21595" end="21620" title="Constitution of Libya (1951)" label="first Libyan Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146861" start="21780" end="21787" title="Hijri year" label="Hegiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q15400950" start="21810" end="21835" title="Mohamed Abulas’ad El-Alem" label="Mohamed Abulas’ad El-Alem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574025" start="21926" end="21944" title="Omar Faiek Shennib" label="Omar Faiek Shennib"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="22018" end="22028" title="King Idris" label="King Idris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992372" start="23281" end="23297" title="Wheelus Air Base" label="Wheelus Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="23443" end="23458" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q107790" start="23519" end="23536" title="The Green Book (Muammar Gaddafi)" label="Libyan Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="23699" end="23707" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="23844" end="23850" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975622" start="24098" end="24127" title="Mukhabarat el-Jamahiriya" label="extensive surveillance system"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="24524" end="24545" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762722" start="24745" end="24776" title="General People&amp;#x27;s Committee" label="General People&amp;#x27;s Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="25181" end="25197" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="25290" end="25295" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434602" start="25354" end="25373" title="Libyan-Egyptian War" label="Libyan-Egyptian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="25400" end="25409" title="ceasefire" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q310855" start="25456" end="25473" title="Houari Boumediène" label="Houari Boumediène"/>
<link wikidata="Q548636" start="25537" end="25553" title="Goukouni Oueddei" label="Goukouni Oueddei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751369" start="25562" end="25588" title="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Forces" label="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q611071" start="25602" end="25625" title="Chadian–Libyan conflict" label="Chadian–Libyan conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q644589" start="25720" end="25728" title="Toyota war" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="25975" end="25992" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="Pan Am Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q216045" start="25998" end="26007" title="Lockerbie" label="Lockerbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="26009" end="26017" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488972" start="26042" end="26056" title="UTA Flight 772" label="UTA Flight 772"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="26062" end="26066" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="26071" end="26076" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="26354" end="26377" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="26432" end="26444" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343415" start="26515" end="26524" title="List of sovereign states by public debt" label="debt-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="26558" end="26566" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="26636" end="26660" title="Labour rights" label="employment opportunities"/>
<link wikidata="Q656821" start="26833" end="26852" title="Great Manmade River" label="Great Manmade River"/>
<link wikidata="Q115028900" start="27307" end="27343" title="Revolutionary Women&amp;#x27;s Formation" label="Revolutionary Women&amp;#x27;s Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115028900" start="27502" end="27540" title="Libyan General Women&amp;#x27;s Federation" label="Libyan General Women&amp;#x27;s Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991472" start="27835" end="27858" title="United States of Africa" label="United States of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="27941" end="27954" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="28012" end="28017" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="28084" end="28098" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="28222" end="28235" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="28335" end="28342" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="28347" end="28352" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318669" start="28451" end="28467" title="Revolution Day" label="17 February 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q208135" start="28559" end="28580" title="Saif al-Islam Gaddafi" label="Saif al-Islam Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="29107" end="29136" title="National Transitional Council" label="National Transitional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q274769" start="29178" end="29197" title="Mustafa Abdul Jalil" label="Mustafa Abdul Jalil"/>
<link wikidata="Q317245" start="29468" end="29479" title="Hafiz Ghoga" label="Hafiz Ghoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="29940" end="29948" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q221503" start="30263" end="30269" title="Zawiya, Libya" label="Zawiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347042" start="30302" end="30311" title="Libyan Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q50530217" start="30323" end="30327" title="Libyan Army (1951–2011)" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11150837" start="30348" end="30365" title="Armed Forces of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" label="Jamahiriya troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704134" start="30529" end="30539" title="Al Jazeera Media Network" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="30721" end="30753" title="United Nations Secretary General" label="United Nations Secretary General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="30754" end="30765" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q205650" start="30774" end="30809" title="United Nations Human Rights Council" label="United Nations Human Rights Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="31014" end="31032" title="economic sanctions" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="31094" end="31125" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="31199" end="31227" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q235045" start="31296" end="31311" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973" label="Resolution 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q822530" start="31400" end="31411" title="no-fly zone" label="no-fly zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q337755" start="31539" end="31552" title="Moussa Koussa" label="Moussa Koussa"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="31790" end="31804" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="32193" end="32217" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Tomahawk cruise missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q878102" start="32236" end="32248" title="Operation Odyssey Dawn" label="Odyssey Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316065" start="32253" end="32259" title="Operation Ellamy" label="Ellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="32283" end="32311" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q948881" start="32559" end="32573" title="National Liberation Army (Libya)" label="rebel fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q848472" start="32607" end="32619" title="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Square, Tripoli" label="Green Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q431888" start="33442" end="33466" title="death of Muammar Gaddafi" label="death of Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q162413" start="33486" end="33491" title="Sirte" label="Sirte"/>
<link wikidata="Q274769" start="33512" end="33531" title="Mustafa Abdul Jalil" label="Mustafa Abdul Jalil"/>
<link wikidata="Q296724" start="33638" end="33652" title="Mahmoud Jibril" label="Mahmoud Jibril"/>
<link wikidata="Q964507" start="33894" end="33904" title="Liberation Day" label="liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q59281" start="34021" end="34039" title="interim government" label="interim government"/>
<link wikidata="Q715354" start="34274" end="34286" title="Ali Tarhouni" label="Ali Tarhouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="34387" end="34402" title="Libyan civil war (2011)" label="First Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="34408" end="34437" title="National Transitional Council" label="National Transitional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q715354" start="34924" end="34936" title="Ali Tarhouni" label="Ali Tarhouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q40579" start="34980" end="34998" title="Abdurrahim El-Keib" label="Abdurrahim El-Keib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111812" start="35017" end="35039" title="cabinet of Libya" label="provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790539" start="35313" end="35339" title="Libyan Constitutional Declaration" label="Constitutional Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186280" start="35398" end="35414" title="Democratic Party (Libya)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141107" start="35420" end="35451" title="Party of Reform and Development" label="Party of Reform and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q288521" start="35461" end="35516" title="National Gathering for Freedom, Justice and Development" label="National Gathering for Freedom, Justice and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="36198" end="36227" title="National Transitional Council" label="National Transitional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="36274" end="36299" title="General National Congress" label="General National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="36435" end="36445" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="36608" end="36612" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="36687" end="36694" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q57904" start="36808" end="36830" title="Mustafa A.G. Abushagur" label="Mustafa A.G. Abushagur"/>
<link wikidata="Q57847" start="37021" end="37031" title="Ali Zeidan" label="Ali Zeidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542863" start="37062" end="37102" title="2014 Libyan Constitutional Assembly election" label="Libyan Constitutional Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980245" start="37253" end="37266" title="Morning Glory (oil tanker)" label="Morning Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q291912" start="37290" end="37302" title="Sidra, Libya" label="Sidra, Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15925685" start="37523" end="37540" title="Abdullah al-Thani" label="Abdullah al-Thani"/>
<link wikidata="Q16747415" start="37784" end="37797" title="Ahmed Maiteeq" label="Ahmed Maiteeq"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911838" start="38069" end="38098" title="May 2014 Tripoli clashes" label="reported to have been stormed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298768" start="38126" end="38140" title="Khalifa Haftar" label="Khalifa Haftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072456" start="38167" end="38181" title="Zintan Brigade" label="Zintan Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965604" start="38246" end="38280" title="2014 Libyan House of Representatives election" label="House of Representatives elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38334" end="38372" title="United States Support Mission in Libya" label="United States Support Mission in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q44588" start="38535" end="38564" title="Tripoli International Airport" label="Tripoli International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16125329" start="38611" end="38648" title="Libya Revolutionaries Operations Room" label="Libya Revolutionaries Operations Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072456" start="38704" end="38718" title="Zintan Brigade" label="Zintan militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41292" start="38841" end="38856" title="Misrata Airport" label="Misrata Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="39245" end="39271" title="Libyan Political Agreement" label="Libyan Political Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333077" start="39298" end="39305" title="Skhirat" label="Skhirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22120970" start="39447" end="39476" title="Government of National Accord" label="Government of National Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q21089561" start="39502" end="39514" title="Fayez Sarraj" label="Fayez Sarraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298768" start="39628" end="39642" title="Khalifa Haftar" label="Khalifa Haftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q61000498" start="39665" end="39685" title="Libyan National Army" label="Libyan National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q22120970" start="39759" end="39805" title="Government of National Accord" label="internationally recognized government of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q62848344" start="39814" end="39844" title="2019–20 Western Libya campaign" label="2019–20 Western Libya campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q311440" start="39910" end="39926" title="António Guterres" label="António Guterres"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="39935" end="39966" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q61000498" start="40059" end="40079" title="Libyan National Army" label="Libyan National Army"/>
<link wikidata="" start="40108" end="40159" title="Libyan peace process#Military track: permanent ceasefire" label="permanent ceasefire agreement in all areas of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742549" start="40440" end="40456" title="Government of National Unity (Libya)" label="unity government"/>
<link wikidata="Q47672285" start="40515" end="40548" title="next Libyan presidential election" label="next Libyan presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033074" start="40806" end="40817" title="dam failure" label="dam failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q122311648" start="40832" end="40844" title="Storm Daniel" label="Storm Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q211866" start="40873" end="40878" title="Derna, Libya" label="Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="41026" end="41037" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q375719" start="41039" end="41062" title="History of North Africa" label="History of North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276856" start="41064" end="41092" title="History of the Jews in Libya" label="History of the Jews in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q872126" start="41094" end="41125" title="List of heads of state of Libya" label="List of heads of state of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857605" start="41127" end="41152" title="Military history of Libya" label="Military history of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154189" start="41154" end="41171" title="Politics of Libya" label="Politics of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="41182" end="41189" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805951" start="41194" end="41202" title="Timeline of Tripoli" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q12201915" start="41214" end="41221" title="History of Benghazi" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088206" start="41226" end="41234" title="Timeline of Benghazi" label="timeline"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13813" wikidata="Q188872" url="?curid=13813" title="History of Afghanistan">
<text>The history of Afghanistan includes the complete history of the modern-day nation of Afghanistan, from prehistory up to the establishment of the Emirate of Afghanistan in 1823 and to the present time. This history is largely shared with that of Central Asia, Persia, and the Indian subcontinent.

Human habitation in Afghanistan dates back to the Middle Paleolithic era, and the country&#x27;s strategic location along the historic Silk Road has led it to being described, picturesquely, as the ‘roundabout of the ancient world’. The land has historically been home to various different peoples and has witnessed numerous military campaigns, including those by the Persians, Alexander the Great, the Maurya Empire, Arab Muslims, the Mongols, the British, the Soviet Union, and most recently by a US-led coalition. The various conquests and periods in both the Indian and Iranian cultural spheres made the area a center for, Buddhism, Hinduism, Zoroastrianism and later Islam throughout history.

The Durrani Empire is considered to be the foundational polity of the modern nation state of Afghanistan, with Ahmad Shah Durrani being credited as its Father of the Nation. However, Dost Mohammad Khan is sometimes considered to be the founder of the first modern Afghan state. Following the Durrani Empire&#x27;s decline and the death of Ahmad Shah Durrani and Timur Shah, it was divided into multiple smaller independent kingdoms, including but not limited to Herat, Kandahar and Kabul. Afghanistan would be reunited in the 19th century after seven decades of civil war from 1793 to 1863, with wars of unification led by Dost Mohammad Khan from 1823 to 1863, where he conquered the independent principalities of Afghanistan under the Emirate of Kabul. Dost Mohammad died in 1863, days after his last campaign to unite Afghanistan, and Afghanistan was consequently thrown back into civil war with fighting amongst his successors. During this time, Afghanistan became a buffer state in the Great Game between the British Raj in South Asia and the Russian Empire. The British Raj attempted to subjugate Afghanistan but was repelled in the First Anglo-Afghan War. However, the Second Anglo-Afghan War saw a British victory and the successful establishment of British political influence over Afghanistan. Following the Third Anglo-Afghan War in 1919, Afghanistan became free of foreign political hegemony, and emerged as the independent Kingdom of Afghanistan in June 1926 under Amanullah Khan. This monarchy lasted almost half a century, until Zahir Shah was overthrown in 1973, following which the Republic of Afghanistan was established.

Since the late 1970s, Afghanistan&#x27;s history has been dominated by extensive warfare, including coups, invasions, insurgencies, and civil wars. The conflict began in 1978 when a communist revolution established a socialist state, and subsequent infighting prompted the Soviet Union to invade Afghanistan in 1979. Mujahideen fought against the Soviets in the Soviet–Afghan War and continued fighting amongst themselves following the Soviets&#x27; withdrawal in 1989. The Islamic fundamentalist Taliban controlled most of the country by 1996, but their Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan received little international recognition before its overthrow in the 2001 US invasion of Afghanistan. The Taliban returned to power in 2021 after capturing Kabul and overthrowing the government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, thus bringing an end to the 2001–2021 war. Although initially claiming it would form an inclusive government for the country, in September 2021 the Taliban re-established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan with an interim government made up entirely of Taliban members. The Taliban government remains internationally unrecognized.

==Prehistory==
Excavations of prehistoric sites by Louis Dupree and others at Darra-e Kur in 1966 where 800 stone implements were recovered along with a fragment of Neanderthal right temporal bone, suggest that early humans were living in what is now Afghanistan at least 52,000 years ago. A cave called Kara Kamar contained Upper Paleolithic blades Carbon-14 dated at 34,000 years old. Farming communities in Afghanistan were among the earliest in the world. Artifacts indicate that the indigenous people were small farmers and herdsmen, very probably grouped into tribes, with small local kingdoms rising and falling through the ages. Urbanization may have begun as early as 3000 BCE. Gandhara is the name of an ancient kingdom from the Vedic period and its capital city located between the Hindu Kush and Sulaiman Mountains (mountains of Solomon), although Kandahar in modern times and the ancient Gandhara are not geographically identical.

Early inhabitants, around 3000 BCE were likely to have been connected through culture and trade to neighboring civilizations like Jiroft and Tappeh Sialk and the Indus Valley Civilisation. Urban civilization may have begun as early as 3000 BCE and it is possible that the early city of Mundigak (near Kandahar) was a part of the ancient Helmand culture. The first known people were the Indo-Iranians, but their date of arrival in the region has been estimated widely from as early as about 3000 BCE to 1500 BCE. (For further detail see Indo-Iranians.)

=== Indus Valley Civilisation (c. 3300 to 1300 BCE) ===
The Indus Valley Civilisation (IVC) spanned from parts of Afghanistan to modern-day Pakistan and north-western India. An Indus valley site has been found on the Oxus River at Shortugai in Afghanistan, which is the northernmost site of the Indus Valley Civilisation.

=== Bactria–Margiana (c. 2200 – 1700 BCE) ===

The Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex, also known as the Oxus civilisation, became prominent between about 2200 and 1700 BCE. The city of Balkh (Bakhlo in Bactrian) in northern Afghanistan was founded around this time (c. 2000–1500 BCE).

== Ancient and Classical period (c. 1500 – 255 BCE) ==

=== Gandhara Kingdom (c. 1500 – 535 BCE) ===


The Gandhara region centered around the Peshawar Valley and Swat river valley, though the cultural influence of &quot;Greater Gandhara&quot; extended across the Indus river to the Taxila region in Pothohar Plateau and westwards into the Kabul and Bamyan valleys in Afghanistan, and northwards up to the Karakoram range.

During the 6th century BCE, Gandhāra was an important imperial power in north-west South Asia, with the valley of Kaśmīra being part of the kingdom, while the other states of the Punjab region, such as the Kekayas, Madrakas, Uśīnaras, and Shivis being under Gāndhārī suzerainty. The Gāndhārī king Pukkusāti, who reigned around 550 BCE, engaged in expansionist ventures which brought him into conflict with the king Pradyota of the rising power of Avanti. Pukkusāti was successful in this struggle with Pradyota.

By the later 6th century BCE, the founder of the Persian Achaemenid Empire, Cyrus, soon after his conquests of Media, Lydia, and Babylonia, marched into Gandhara and annexed it into his empire. The scholar Kaikhosru Danjibuoy Sethna advanced that Cyrus had conquered only the trans-Indus borderlands around Peshawar which had belonged to Gandhāra while Pukkusāti remained a powerful king who maintained his rule over the rest of Gandhāra and the western Punjab.

=== Kamboja Kingdom (c. 700 – 200 BCE) ===
The Kambojas were an ancient southeastern Iranian peoples who lived in the southern region of modern Afghanistan. They were mentioned by a number of Indo-Aryan inscriptions and literature, being first attested during the later part of the Vedic period. The ancient Indian emperor Ashoka mentioned the Kambojas between 268–232 BCE in his Major Rock Edicts. The people known in Classical sources as Aspasioi, Aśvaka and Assakenoi, were likely tribes of the Kamboja people. The region south of the Hindu Kush that was inhabited by the Kambojas went under the rule of many different groups over the centuries, starting with the Achaemenid Persians.

The descendants of the Kambojas have mostly been assimilated into various newer groups. However, some tribes possibly remain today that still retain the names of their ancestors. There are some theories and speculation about the possible descendants of the Kamboja people. The Yusufzai Pashtuns are said to be related to the Aspasioi or Aśvaka people from the Kamboja age. The Kom/Kamoz people of Nuristan retain their Kamboj name. The Ashkun of Nuristan also retain the name of Aśvakas. The Yashkun Shina dards are another group that retain the name of the Kamboja Aśvakans. The Kamboj of Punjab are another group that still retain the name however have integrated into new identity. The country of Cambodia derives its name from the Kamboja.

=== Achaemenid Empire ===

The area of modern Afghanistan fell to the Achaemenid Persians after it was conquered by Darius I of Persia. The land was divided into several provinces called satrapies, which were each ruled by a governor, or satrap. These ancient satrapies included: Aria: The region of Aria was separated by mountain ranges from the Paropamisadae in the east, Parthia in the west and Margiana and Hyrcania in the north, while a desert separated it from Carmania and Drangiana in the south. It is described in a very detailed manner by Ptolemy and Strabo and corresponds, according to that, almost to the Herat Province of today&#x27;s Afghanistan; Arachosia, corresponds to the modern-day Kandahar, Lashkargah, and Quetta. Arachosia bordered Drangiana to the west, Paropamisadae (i.e. Gandhara) to the north and to the east, and Gedrosia to the south. The inhabitants of Arachosia were Iranian peoples, referred to as Arachosians or Arachoti. It is assumed that they were called &quot;Pactyans&quot; by ethnicity, and that name may have been in reference to the ethnic &quot;Paṣtun&quot; (Pashtun) tribes.

Bactria was the area north of the Hindu Kush, west of the Pamirs and south of the Tian Shan, with the Amu Darya flowing west through the center (Balkh); Sattagydia was the easternmost regions of the Achaemenid Empire, part of its Seventh tax district according to Herodotus, along with Gandārae, Dadicae and Aparytae. It is believed to have been situated east of the Sulaiman Mountains up to the Indus River in the basin around Bannu. (Ghazni); and Gandhara which corresponds to modern day Kabul, Jalalabad, and Peshawar.

=== Alexander the Great and the Seleucids ===


Alexander the Great invaded the area of modern Afghanistan in 330 BCE after defeating Darius III of Persia a year earlier at the Battle of Gaugamela. His army faced strong resistance in the region&#x27;s ancient tribal areas where Alexander is supposedly said to have commented that the land is &quot;easy to march into, but difficult to march out of&quot;. He first conquered Bactria in northern Afghanistan between 329–327 BCE, and married Roxana of Bactria. He then conducted the Cophen campaign to the south near the Kabul valley, where his army fought against the Aspasioi and Assakenoi peoples. Although his expedition through Afghanistan was brief, Alexander left behind a Greek cultural influence that lasted several centuries. He founded and built many cities in the region, all named &quot;Alexandria&quot;, including: Alexandria Ariana (modern-day Herat); Alexandria Arachosia (modern Kandahar); Alexandria in the Caucasus (near Bagram); and finally, Alexandria Eschate (near Khujand), in the far north. After Alexander&#x27;s death, his loosely connected Macedonian empire was divided. Seleucus, a Macedonian officer during Alexander&#x27;s campaign, declared himself ruler of his own Seleucid Empire, which also included present-day Afghanistan. The Hellenistic city of Ai-Khanoum was later founded in northern Afghanistan, likely by the Seleucid ruler Antiochus, the son of Seleucus in about 280 BCE.

=== Maurya Empire ===

The southern half of Afghanistan fell to the Maurya Empire, which was led by Chandragupta Maurya. The Mauryas further entrenched Buddhism, but also other religions such as Hinduism to the region, and were planning to capture more territory of Central Asia until they faced Seleucid forces, who ruled in northern Afghanistan. Seleucus I is said to have reached a peace treaty with Chandragupta by giving control of the territory south of the Hindu Kush to the Mauryas upon intermarriage and 500 elephants.

The most famous Mauryan emperor was Ashoka who reigned around 268–232 BCE, and whose inscriptions such the Major and Minor Rock Edicts have been found in eastern and southern Afghanistan (for example in Kandahar). Supposedly also referred to by the name Piyadasi, he encouraged the propagation of Buddhism throughout the ancient world. In one of his edicts Ashoka states that the Hellenistic kingdoms to the north and west received his envoys and followed Buddhism:

==Hellenistic and Later periods (c. 255 BCE – 565 CE)==

===Greco-Bactrian Kingdom===

The Greco-Bactrian Kingdom was a Hellenistic kingdom, founded when Diodotus I, the satrap of Bactria (and probably the surrounding provinces) seceded from the Seleucid Empire around 255 to 250 BCE. Diodotus&#x27; dynasty was soon overthrown by Euthydemus I sometime around 230–220 BCE. After successfully repelling a Seleucid invasion, Euthydemus&#x27; son, Demetrius I of Bactria, started an invasion of the Indian subcontinent between 190 and 180 BCE.

The Greco-Bactrian Kingdom was known for its high level of Hellenistic sophistication and possessed many wealthy cities. The main cities of the kingdom were Bactra and Ai-Khanoum in northern Afghanistan. The Greco-Bactrians continued to dominate Central Asia until about 130 BCE, when the son of Eucratides I, named Heliocles I, was defeated and driven out of Bactria by the Yuezhi tribes from the east. After the collapse of Greek rule, the Yuezhi now had complete control of Bactria. It is thought that Eucratides&#x27; dynasty continued to rule in Kabul and Alexandria of the Caucasus until about 70 BCE when King Hermaeus was also defeated by the Yuezhi. It is possible that Hermaeus was the last Greek ruler in Afghanistan, or perhaps it was one of the later Indo-Greek rulers.

===Indo-Greek Kingdom===

The Indo-Greek kingdom was founded when the Greco-Bactrian king Demetrius I invaded north-western India in the early 2nd century BCE. One of Demetrius I&#x27;s successors, Menander I Soter, brought the Indo-Greek Kingdom (now isolated from the rest of the Hellenistic world after the fall of Bactria) to its height between 165 and 130 BCE. He expanded the kingdom from Afghanistan and Pakistan to even larger proportions than Demetrius. After Menander&#x27;s death, the Indo-Greeks steadily declined and the last Indo-Greek kings, either Strato II or Strato III, were defeated in c. 10 CE. The Indo-Greek Kingdom was succeeded by the Indo-Scythians.

===Indo-Scythians===

The Indo-Scythians were descended from the Saka (Scythians) who migrated from southern Siberia to Pakistan and Arachosia from the middle of the 2nd century BCE to the 1st century BCE. They displaced the Indo-Greeks and ruled a kingdom that stretched from Gandhara to Mathura. One of the most important Indo-Scythian rulers was Azes I, who ruled between about 48–25 BCE. The power of the Saka rulers started to decline in the 2nd century CE after the Scythians were defeated by the south Indian Emperor Gautamiputra Satakarni of the Satavahana dynasty. Later the Saka kingdom was completely destroyed by Chandragupta II of the Gupta Empire from eastern India in the 4th century.

===Indo-Parthian Kingdom===
The Indo-Parthian Kingdom was ruled by the Gondopharid dynasty, named after its eponymous first ruler Gondophares. They ruled parts of present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan, and northwestern India, during or slightly before the 1st century CE. For most of their history, the leading Gondopharid kings held Taxila (in the present Punjab province of Pakistan) as their residence, but during their last few years of existence the capital shifted between Kabul and Peshawar. These kings have traditionally been referred to as Indo-Parthians, as their coinage was often inspired by the Arsacid dynasty, but they probably belonged to a wider groups of Iranic tribes who lived east of Parthia proper, and there is no evidence that all the kings who assumed the title &quot;Gondophares&quot;, which means &quot;Holder of Glory&quot;, were even related. Christian writings claim that the Apostle Saint Thomas – an architect and skilled carpenter – had a long sojourn in the court of king Gondophares, had built a palace for the king at Taxila and had also ordained leaders for the Church before leaving for the Indus Valley in a chariot, for sailing out to eventually reach Malabar Coast.

===Kushan Empire===
The Kushan Empire expanded out of Bactria (in Central Asia) into the northwest of the subcontinent under the leadership of their first emperor, Kujula Kadphises, about the middle of the 1st century CE. They came from an Indo-European language-speaking Central Asian tribe called the Yuezhi, a branch of which was known as the Kushans. By the time of his grandson, Kanishka the Great, the empire spread to encompass much of Afghanistan, and then the northern parts of the Indian subcontinent at least as far as Saketa and Sarnath near Varanasi (Benares). The Kushans inherited the Hellenistic culture of Bactria and their pantheon included a diverse group of deities, some Greek and some native Iranian. Emperor Kanishka was a great patron of Buddhism; however, and as the Kushans expanded southward, the deities of their later coinage came to reflect its new Hindu majority. They played an important role in the establishment of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent and its spread to Central Asia and China. Historian Vincent Smith said about Kanishka:

The empire linked the Indian Ocean maritime trade with the commerce of the Silk Road through the Indus valley, encouraging long-distance trade, particularly between China and Rome. The Kushans brought new trends to the budding and blossoming Gandhara art, which reached its peak during Kushan Rule. By the 3rd century, their empire in India was disintegrating and their last known great emperor was Vasudeva I.

=== Sasanian Empire ===
The Sasanians ended the rule of the Kushans Empire. Officially known as the Empire of Iranians, the Sasanian Empire was the last Persian Empire before the rise of Islam. Named after the House of Sasan, it ruled from about 224 to 651 CE. In the east around 325 CE, Shapur II regained the upper hand against the Kushano-Sasanian Kingdom and took control of large territories in areas now known as Afghanistan and Pakistan. Much of modern-day Afghanistan became part of the Sasanian Empire, since Shapur I extended his authority eastwards into Afghanistan and the previously autonomous Kushans were obliged to accept his suzerainty.

From around 370 CE, however, towards the end of the reign of Shapur II, the Sasanians lost the control of Bactria and Afghanistan to invaders from the north. These were the Kidarites, the Hephthalites, the Alchon Huns, and the Nezak Huns. These invaders initially issued coins based on Sasanian designs.
===Huna people===
The Hunas were nomadic peoples who were of Central Asian origin. Four of the Huna peoples conquered and ruled Afghanistan: the Kidarites, Alchon Huns, Hephthalites, and the Nezak Huns.

====Kidarites====

The Kidarites were a nomadic clan, the first of the four Huna people to live in Afghanistan. They are supposed to have originated in Western China and arrived in Bactria with the great migrations of the second half of the 4th century.

====Alchon Huns====

The Alchon Huns (&quot;Alchono&quot; in Bactrian) were one of the four Huna people that ruled in Afghanistan. A group of Central Asian tribes, they rose to power around 400 CE. The first major ruler was Khingila, who emerged and took control of the routes across the Hindu Kush from the Kidarites. Coins of the Alchons rulers Khingila and Mehama were found at the Buddhist monastery of Mes Aynak, southeast of Kabul, confirming the Alchon presence in this area around 450–500 CE. Alchon ruler Toramana later overran the northern region of Pakistan and Northern India, and successfully occupied areas as far as Eran and greatly weakened the Gupta Empire. Mihirakula, the son of Toramana, a Saivite Hindu, then ruled from his capital of Sagala in modern Pakistan. Ancient Buddhist writers describe Mihirakula&#x27;s merciless persecution of Buddhists and destruction of monasteries, though the description is disputed as far as the authenticity is concerned. The Huns were finally defeated by the Indian kings Yashodharman of Malwa and Narasimhagupta in the 6th century. Some of them were driven out of India and others were assimilated in the Indian society.

====Hephthalites====
The Hephthalites (&quot;Ebodalo&quot; in Bactrian), also known as the White Huns and one of the four Huna people to live in Afghanistan, were a nomadic confederation in Central Asia during the late antiquity period. The Hephthalites established themselves in modern-day Afghanistan by the first half of the 5th century, and were of either Turkic or Iranian ethnic origins. As they rose to prominence, the Hephthalites displaced the Kidarites and the Alchon Huns, and soon came into conflict with the Sasanian Empire, whom they defeated on a number of occasions. Buddhism was common in the region, and it is likely that the Buddhas of Bamiyan were constructed around this time. The Chinese Buddhist monk Xuanzang visited Bamiyan and ancient Kapisa (modern Parwan province) between 629 and 645 CE, and described the Buddhas of Bamiyan. However during the time of Song Yun, who visited the chief of the Hephthalite nomads at his summer residence in Badakhshan and later in Gandhara, observed that they had no belief in the Buddhist law and served a large number of divinities.&quot; The 6th-century Roman historian Procopius of Caesarea (Book I. ch. 3) related the Huns of Europe with the Hephthalites or &quot;White Huns&quot; who subjugated the Sasanians and invaded northwestern India, stating that they were of the same stock, &quot;in fact as well as in name&quot;, although he contrasted the Western Huns with the Hephthalites, in that the Hephthalites were sedentary and white-skinned, and possessed &quot;not ugly&quot; features.

====Nezak Huns====

The Nezaks were the last of the four Huna people that ruled in Afghanistan south of the Hindu Kush from about 484 to 665 CE. They rose to power and took control of the Zabulistan region after the defeat and death of the Sassanian Emperor Peroz I in 484 CE by the Hephthalites.

==Middle Ages (c. 565–1504 CE)==

From the Middle Ages to around 1750 the eastern regions of Afghanistan such as Kabulistan and Zabulistan (now Kabul, Kandahar and Ghazni) were recognized as being part of Indian subcontinent (&quot;Al-Hind&quot;). Its western parts were included in the regions called Khorasan, Tokharistan and Sistan. Two of the four main capitals of Khorasan (i.e. Balkh and Herat) are now located in Afghanistan. The countries of Kabul, Kandahar and Ghazni formed the frontier region between Khorasan and the Indus. This land, inhabited by the Afghan tribes (i.e. ancestors of Pashtuns), was called Afghanistan, which loosely covered a wide area between the Hindu Kush and the Indus River, principally around the Sulaiman Mountains. The earliest record of the name &quot;Afghan&quot; (as &quot;Abgân&quot;) being mentioned is by Shapur I of the Sasanian Empire during the 3rd century CE which is later recorded in the form of &quot;Avagānā&quot; by the Vedic astronomer Varāhamihira in his 6th century CE Brihat-samhita. It was used to refer to a common legendary ancestor known as &quot;Afghana&quot;, grandson of King Saul of Israel. Xuanzang, the Chinese pilgrim who visited the Afghanistan area several times between 630 and 644 CE also speaks about them. Ancestors of many of today&#x27;s Turkic-speaking Afghans settled in the Hindu Kush area and began to assimilate much of the culture and language of the Pashtun tribes already present there. Among these were the Khalaj people which are known today as Ghilzai.

===Kabul Shahi===
The Kabul Shahi dynasties (also called Turk Shahi) ruled the Kabul Valley and Gandhara from the decline of the Kushan Empire in the 3rd century to the early 9th century. The Shahis are generally split up into two eras: the Buddhist Shahis and the Hindu Shahis, with the change-over thought to have occurred sometime around 870. The kingdom was known as the Kabul Shahan or Ratbelshahan from 565 to 670, when the capitals were located in Kapisa and Kabul, and later Udabhandapura, also known as Hund for its new capital.

The Hindu Shahis under ruler Jayapala, is known for his struggles in defending his kingdom against the Ghaznavids in the modern-day eastern Afghanistan region. Jayapala saw a danger in the consolidation of the Ghaznavids and invaded their capital city of Ghazni both in the reign of Sabuktigin and in that of his son Mahmud, which initiated the Muslim Ghaznavid and Hindu Shahi struggles. Sabuktigin, however, defeated him, and he was forced to pay an indemnity. Jayapala defaulted on the payment and took to the battlefield once more. Jayapala however, lost control of the entire region between the Kabul Valley and Indus River.

Before his struggle began Jaipal had raised a large army of Punjabi Hindus. When Jaipal went to the Punjab region, his army was raised to 100,000 horsemen and an innumerable host of foot soldiers. According to Firishta:

However, the army was hopeless in battle against the western forces, particularly against the young Mahmud of Ghazni. In the year 1001, soon after Sultan Mahmud came to power and was occupied with the Qarakhanids north of the Hindu Kush, Jaipal attacked Ghazni once more and suffered yet another defeat by the powerful Ghaznavid forces, near present-day Peshawar. After the Battle of Peshawar, he committed suicide because his subjects thought he had brought disaster and disgrace to the Shahi dynasty.

Jayapala was succeeded by his son Anandapala, who along with other succeeding generations of the Shahiya dynasty took part in various campaigns against the advancing Ghaznavids but were unsuccessful. The Hindu rulers eventually exiled themselves to the Kashmir Sivalik Hills.
===Arab conquest===
In 642 CE, Rashidun Arabs had conquered most of West Asia from the Sasanians and Byzantines, and from the western city of Herat they introduced the religion of Islam as they entered new cities. Afghanistan at that period had a number of different independent rulers, depending on the area. Ancestors of Abū Ḥanīfa, including his father, were from the Kabul region.

The early Arab forces did not fully explore Afghanistan due to attacks by the mountain tribes. Much of the eastern parts of the country remained independent, as part of the Hindu Shahi kingdoms of Kabul and Gandhara, which lasted that way until the forces of the Muslim Saffarid dynasty followed by the Ghaznavids conquered them.

===Ghaznavid Empire===
The Ghaznavid dynasty ruled from the city of Ghazni in eastern Afghanistan. From 997 to his death in 1030, Mahmud of Ghazni turned the former provincial city of Ghazni into the wealthy capital of an extensive empire which covered most of today&#x27;s Afghanistan, eastern and central Iran, Pakistan, parts of India, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. Mahmud of Ghazni (Mahmude Ghaznavi in local pronunciation) consolidated the conquests of his predecessors and the city of Ghazni became a great cultural centre as well as a base for frequent forays into the Indian subcontinent. The Nasher Khans became princes of the Kharoti until the Soviet invasion.

===Ghurids===
The Ghurids defeated the Ghaznavid dynasty in 1148, but the Ghaznavid Sultans continued to live in Ghazni as the &#x27;Nasher&#x27; until the early 20th century. The Ghurids were of Tajik origin and their empire was established by three brothers from the Ghor province of Afghanistan, namely Qutb al-Din, Sayf al-Din, Baha al-Din, all of whom fought against the Ghaznavid emperor Bahram Shah of Ghazni but were not successful and killed in the process. Initially Ala al-Din Husayn, the son of Baha al-Din defeated the Ghazanavid ruler Bahram Shah and to take revenge of his father and uncle&#x27;s death ordered the city to be sacked. The Ghorids or Ghurids lost the northern territory of Transoxiana and northern Great Korasan especially their capital Ghor province due to the invasion of Seljucks but Sultan Ala al-Din&#x27;s successors consolidated their power in India by defeating the remainder of Ghaznavid rulers. At their largest extent they ruled east of Iran, much of the Indian subcontinent like Pakistan, and north and central part of modern India.

===Mongol conquest===

The Mongols invaded Afghanistan in 1221 having defeated the Khwarazmian armies. The Mongols invasion had long-term consequences with many parts of Afghanistan never recovering from the devastation. The towns and villages suffered much more than the nomads who were able to avoid attack. The destruction of irrigation systems maintained by the sedentary people led to the shift of the weight of the country towards the hills. The city of Balkh was destroyed and even 100 years later Ibn Battuta described it as a city still in ruins. While the Mongols were pursuing the forces of Jalal al-Din Mangburni they besieged the city of Bamyan. In the course of the siege a defender&#x27;s arrow killed Genghis Khan&#x27;s grandson Mutukan. The Mongols razed the city and massacred its inhabitants in revenge, with its former site known as the City of Screams. Herat, located in a fertile valley, was destroyed as well but was rebuilt under the local Kart dynasty. After the Mongol Empire splintered, Herat eventually became part of the Ilkhanate while Balkh and the strip of land from Kabul through Ghazni to Kandahar went to the Chagatai Khanate. The Afghan tribal areas south of the Hindu Kush were usually either allied with the Khalji dynasty of northern India or independent.

===Timurid Empire===
Timur (Tamerlane) incorporated much of the area into his own vast Timurid Empire. The city of Herat became one of the capitals of his empire, and his grandson Pir Muhammad held the seat of Kandahar. Timur rebuilt most of Afghanistan&#x27;s infrastructure which was destroyed by his early ancestor. The area was progressing under his rule. Timurid rule began declining in the early 16th century with the rise of a new ruler in Kabul, Babur.
Timur, a descendant of Genghis Khan, created a vast new empire across Russia and Persia which he ruled from his capital in Samarkand in present-day Uzbekistan. Timur captured Herat in 1381 and his son, Shah Rukh moved the capital of the Timurid empire to Herat in 1405. The Timurids, a Turkic people, brought the Turkic nomadic culture of Central Asia within the orbit of Persian civilisation, establishing Herat as one of the most cultured and refined cities in the world. This fusion of Central Asian and Persian culture was a major legacy for the future Afghanistan. Under the rule of Shah Rukh the city served as the focal point of the Timurid Renaissance, whose glory matched Florence of the Italian Renaissance as the center of a cultural rebirth. A century later, the emperor Babur, a descendant of Timur, visited Herat and wrote, &quot;the whole habitable world had not such a town as Herat.&quot; For the next 300 years the eastern Afghan tribes periodically invaded India creating vast Indo-Afghan empires. In 1500 CE, Babur was driven out of his home in the Ferghana valley. By the 16th century western Afghanistan again reverted to Persian rule under the Safavid dynasty.

==Modern era (1504–1973)==

=== Mughals, Uzbeks, and Safavids ===
In 1504, Babur, a descendant of Timur, arrived from present-day Uzbekistan and moved to the city of Kabul. He began exploring new territories in the region, with Kabul serving as his military headquarters. Instead of looking towards the powerful Safavids towards the Persian west, Babur was more focused on the Indian subcontinent. In 1526, he left with his army to capture the seat of the Delhi Sultanate, which at that point was possessed by the Afghan Lodi dynasty of India. After defeating Ibrahim Lodi and his army, Babur turned (Old) Delhi into the capital of his newly established Mughal Empire.

From the 16th century to the 17th century CE, Afghanistan was divided into three major areas. The north was ruled by the Khanate of Bukhara, the west was under the rule of the Iranian Shia Safavids, and the eastern section was under the Sunni Mughals of northern India, who under Akbar established in Kabul one of the original twelve subahs (imperial top-level provinces), bordering Lahore, Multan and Kashmir (added to Kabul in 1586, later split-off) and short-lived Balkh Subah and Badakhshan Subah (only 1646–47). The Kandahar region in the south served as a buffer zone between the Mughals (who shortly established a Qandahar subah 1638–1648) and Persia&#x27;s Safavids, with the native Afghans often switching support from one side to the other. Babur explored a number of cities in the region before his campaign into India. In the city of Kandahar, his personal epigraphy can be found in the Chil Zena rock mountain. Like in the rest of the territories that used to make part of the Indian Mughal Empire, Afghanistan holds tombs, palaces, and forts built by the Mughals.

===Hotak dynasty===

In 1704, the Safavid Shah Husayn appointed George XI (&quot;Gurgīn Khān&quot;), a ruthless Georgian subject, to govern their easternmost territories in the Greater Kandahar region. One of Gurgīn&#x27;s main objectives was to crush the rebellions started by native Afghans. Under his rule the revolts were successfully suppressed and he ruled Kandahar with uncompromising severity. He began imprisoning and executing the native Afghans, especially those suspected in having taken part in the rebellions. One of those arrested and imprisoned was Mirwais Hotak who belonged to an influential family in Kandahar. Mirwais was sent as a prisoner to the Persian court in Isfahan, but the charges against him were dismissed by the king, so he was sent back to his native land as a free man.

In April 1709, Mirwais along with his militia under Saydal Khan Naseri revolted. The uprising began when George XI and his escort were killed after a banquet that had been prepared by Mirwais at his house outside the city. Around four days later, an army of well-trained Georgian troops arrived in the city after hearing of Gurgīn&#x27;s death, but Mirwais and his Afghan forces successfully held the city against the troops. Between 1710 and 1713, the Afghan forces defeated several large Persian armies that were dispatched from Isfahan by the Safavids, which included Qizilbash and Georgian/Circassian troops.


Southern Afghanistan was made into an independent local Pashtun kingdom. Refusing the title of king, Mirwais was called &quot;Prince of Qandahár and general of the national troops&quot; by his Afghan countrymen. He died of natural causes in November 1715 and was succeeded by his brother Abdul Aziz Hotak. Aziz was killed about two years later by Mirwais&#x27; son Mahmud Hotak, allegedly for planning to give Kandahar&#x27;s sovereignty back to Persia. Mahmud led an Afghan army into Persia in 1722 and defeated the Safavids at the Battle of Gulnabad. The Afghans captured Isfahan (Safavid capital) and Mahmud briefly became the new Persian Shah. He was known after that as Shah Mahmud.

Mahmud began a short-lived reign of terror against his Persian subjects who defied his rule from the very start, and he was eventually murdered in 1725 by his own cousin, Shah Ashraf Hotak. Some sources say he died of madness
. Ashraf became the new Afghan Shah of Persia soon after Mahmud&#x27;s death, while the home region of Afghanistan was ruled by Mahmud&#x27;s younger brother Shah Hussain Hotak. Ashraf was able to secure peace with the Ottoman Empire in 1727 (&quot;See&quot; &quot;Treaty of Hamedan&quot;), winning against a superior Ottoman army during the Ottoman–Hotaki War, but the Russian Empire took advantage of the continuing political unrest and civil strife to seize former Persian territories for themselves, limiting the amount of territory under Shah Mahmud&#x27;s control.

The short lived Hotaki dynasty was a troubled and violent one from the very start as internecine conflict made it difficult for them to establish permanent control. The dynasty lived under great turmoil due to bloody succession feuds that made their hold on power tenuous. There was a massacre of thousands of civilians in Isfahan; including more than three thousand religious scholars, nobles, and members of the Safavid family. The vast majority of the Persians rejected the Afghan regime which they considered to have been usurping power from the very start. Hotaki rule continued in Afghanistan until 1738 when Shah Hussain was defeated and banished by Nader Shah of Persia.

The Hotakis were eventually removed from power in 1729, after a very short lived reign. They were defeated in the October 1729 by the Iranian military commander Nader Shah, head of the Afsharids, at the Battle of Damghan. After several military campaigns against the Afghans, he effectively reduced the Hotakis&#x27; power to only southern Afghanistan. The last ruler of the Hotaki dynasty, Shah Hussain, ruled southern Afghanistan until 1738 when the Afsharids and the Abdali Pashtuns defeated him at the long Siege of Kandahar.

===Durrani Empire===
Nader Shah and his Afsharid army arrived in the town of Kandahar in 1738 and defeated Hussain Hotak subsequently absorbing all of Afghanistan in his empire and renaming Kandahar as Naderabad. Around this time, a young teenager Ahmad Shah joined Nader Shah&#x27;s army for his invasion of India.

Nadir Shah was assassinated on 19 June 1747 by several of his Persian officers, and the Afsharid empire fell to pieces. At the same time the 25-year-old Ahmad Khan was busy in Afghanistan calling for a loya jirga (&quot;grand assembly&quot;) to select a leader among his people. The Afghans gathered near Kandahar in October 1747 and chose Ahmad Shah from among the challengers, making him their new head of state. After the inauguration or coronation, he became known as Ahmad Shah Durrani. He adopted the title &quot;padshah durr-i dawran&quot; (&#x27;King, &quot;pearl of the age&quot;) and the Abdali tribe became known as the Durrani tribe after this. Ahmad Shah not only represented the Durranis but he also united all the Pashtun tribes. By 1751, Ahmad Shah Durrani and his Afghan army conquered the entire present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan, and for a short time, subjugated large swathes of the Khorasan and Kohistan provinces of Iran, along with Delhi in India. He defeated the Maratha Empire in 1761 at the Third Battle of Panipat.

In October 1772, Ahmad Shah retired to his home in Kandahar where he died peacefully and was buried at a site that is now adjacent to the Shrine of the Cloak. He was succeeded by his son, Timur Shah Durrani, who transferred the capital of their Afghan Empire from Kandahar to Kabul. Timur died in 1793 and his son Zaman Shah Durrani took over the reign.

Zaman Shah and his brothers had a weak hold on the legacy left to them by their famous ancestor. They sorted out their differences through a &quot;round robin of expulsions, blindings and executions,&quot; which resulted in the deterioration of the Afghan hold over far-flung territories, such as Attock and Kashmir. Durrani&#x27;s other grandson, Shuja Shah Durrani, fled the wrath of his brother and sought refuge with the Sikhs. Durrani invaded the region of Punjab three times, during his invasions he destroyed a holy shrine of the Sikhs – the Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar in 1757.

The Sikhs, under Ranjit Singh, eventually wrested a large part of the Durrani Kingdom (present-day Pakistan, but not including Sindh) from the Afghans while they were in civil war.

===Barakzai dynasty and British influence===


The Emir Dost Mohammad Khan (1793–1863) gained control in Kabul in 1826 after toppling his brother, Sultan Mohammad Khan, and founded () the Barakzai dynasty. In 1837, the Afghan army descended through the Khyber Pass on Sikh forces at Jamrud killed the Sikh general Hari Singh Nalwa but could not capture the fort. Rivalry between the expanding British and Russian Empires in what became known as the &quot;Great Game&quot; significantly influenced Afghanistan during the 19th century. British concern over Russian advances in Central Asia and over Russia&#x27;s growing influence in West Asia and in Persia in particular culminated in two Anglo-Afghan wars and in the Siege of Herat (1837–1838), in which the Persians, trying to retake Afghanistan and throw out the British, sent armies into the country and fought the British mostly around and in the city of Herat. The first Anglo-Afghan War (1839–1842) resulted in the destruction of a British army; causing great panic throughout British India and the dispatch of a second British invasion army. Following the British defeat in the First Anglo-Afghan War, where they tried to re-establish the Durrani Kingdom as a de facto vassal, Dost Mohammad could focus on reuniting Afghanistan, which was divided following the Durrani-Barakzai civil wars. Dost Mohammad began his conquest while only ruling the major cities of Kabul, Ghazni, Jalalabad, and Bamyan. By the time of his death in 1863, Dost Mohammad had reunited most of Afghanistan. Following Dost Mohammad&#x27;s death, a civil war broke out amongst his sons, leading to Sher Ali succeeding and beginning his rule. The Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878–1880) resulted from the refusal by Emir Sher Ali (reigned 1863 to 1866 and from 1868 to 1879) to accept a British diplomatic mission in Kabul. In the wake of this conflict Shir Ali&#x27;s nephew, Emir Abdur Rahman, known as the &quot;Iron Emir&quot;,
came to the Afghan throne. During his reign (1880–1901), the British and Russians officially established the boundaries of what would become modern Afghanistan. The British retained effective control over Kabul&#x27;s foreign affairs. Abdur Rahman&#x27;s reforms of the army, legal system and structure of government gave Afghanistan a degree of unity and stability which it had not before known. This, however, came at the cost of strong centralisation, of harsh punishments for crime and corruption, and of a certain degree of international isolation.

Habibullah Khan, Abdur Rahman&#x27;s son, came to the throne in 1901 and kept Afghanistan neutral during World War I, despite encouragement by Central Powers of anti-British feelings and of Afghan rebellion along the borders of India. His policy of neutrality was not universally popular within the country, and Habibullah was assassinated in 1919, possibly by family members opposed to British influence. His third son, Amanullah (), regained control of Afghanistan&#x27;s foreign policy after launching the Third Anglo-Afghan War (May to August 1919) with an attack on India. During the ensuing conflict the war-weary British relinquished their control over Afghan foreign affairs by signing the Treaty of Rawalpindi in August 1919. In commemoration of this event Afghans celebrate 19 August as their Independence Day.

===Reforms of Amanullah Khan and civil war===
King Amanullah Khan moved to end his country&#x27;s traditional isolation in the years following the Third Anglo-Afghan war. After quelling the Khost rebellion in 1925, he established diplomatic relations with most major countries and, following a 1927 tour of Europe and Turkey (during which he noted the modernization and secularization advanced by Atatürk), introduced several reforms intended to modernize Afghanistan. A key force behind these reforms was Mahmud Tarzi, Amanullah Khan&#x27;s Foreign Minister and father-in-law — and an ardent supporter of the education of women. He fought for Article 68 of Afghanistan&#x27;s first constitution (declared through a Loya Jirga), which made elementary education compulsory. Some of the reforms that were actually put in place, such as the abolition of the traditional Muslim veil for women and the opening of a number of co-educational schools, quickly alienated many tribal and religious leaders, which led to the revolt of the Shinwari in November 1928, marking the beginning of the Afghan Civil War (1928–1929). Although the Shinwari revolt was quelled, a concurrent Saqqawist uprising in the north eventually managed to depose Amanullah, leading to Habibullāh Kalakāni taking control of Kabul.

===Reigns of Nadir Khan and Zahir Khan===

Mohammed Nadir Khan became King of Afghanistan on 15 October 1929 after he took control of Afghanistan by defeating the Habibullah Kalakani. He then executed him on 1 November of same year. He began consolidating power and regenerating the country. He abandoned the reforms of Amanullah Khan in favour of a more gradual approach to modernisation. In 1933, however, he was assassinated in a revenge killing by a student from Kabul.

Mohammad Zahir Shah, Nadir Khan&#x27;s 19-year-old son, succeeded to the throne and reigned from 1933 to 1973. The Afghan tribal revolts of 1944–1947 saw Zahir Shah&#x27;s reign being challenged by Zadran, Safi and Mangal tribesmen led by Mazrak Zadran and Salemai among others. Until 1946 Zahir Shah ruled with the assistance of his uncle Mohammad Hashim Khan, who held the post of prime minister and continued the policies of Nadir Khan. In 1946, another of Zahir Shah&#x27;s uncles, Shah Mahmud Khan, became prime minister and began an experiment allowing greater political freedom, but reversed the policy when it went further than he expected. In 1953, he was replaced as prime minister by Mohammed Daoud Khan, the king&#x27;s cousin and brother-in-law. Daoud looked for a closer relationship with the Soviet Union and a more distant one towards Pakistan. However, disputes with Pakistan led to an economic crisis and he was asked to resign in 1963. From 1963 until 1973, Zahir Shah took a more active role.

In 1964, King Zahir Shah promulgated a liberal constitution providing for a bicameral legislature to which the king appointed one-third of the deputies. The people elected another third, and the remainder were selected indirectly by provincial assemblies. Although Zahir&#x27;s &quot;experiment in democracy&quot; produced few lasting reforms, it permitted the growth of parties on both the left and the right. This included the communist People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), which had close ideological ties to the Soviet Union. In 1967, the PDPA split into two major rival factions: the Khalq (Masses) was headed by Nur Muhammad Taraki and Hafizullah Amin who were supported by elements within the military, and the Parcham (Banner) led by Babrak Karmal.

==Contemporary era (1973–present)==
===Republic of Afghanistan and the end of the monarchy===
Amid corruption charges and malfeasance against the royal family and the poor economic conditions created by the severe 1971–72 drought, former prime minister Mohammad Daoud Khan seized power in a non-violent coup on July 17, 1973, while Zahir Shah was receiving treatment for eye problems and therapy for lumbago in Italy. Daoud abolished the monarchy, abrogated the 1964 constitution, and declared Afghanistan a republic with himself as its first president and prime minister. His attempts to carry out badly needed economic and social reforms were met with little success, and the new constitution promulgated in February 1977 failed to quell chronic political instability.

As disillusionment set in, in 1978 a prominent member of the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), Mir Akbar Khyber (or &quot;Kaibar&quot;), was killed by the government. The leaders of PDPA apparently feared that Daoud was planning to exterminate them all, especially since most of them were arrested by the government shortly after. Nonetheless, Hafizullah Amin and a number of military wing officers of the PDPA&#x27;s Khalq faction managed to remain at large and organize a military coup.

===Democratic Republic and Soviet war (1978–1989)===


On 28 April 1978, the PDPA, led by Nur Muhammad Taraki, Babrak Karmal and Amin Taha overthrew the government of Mohammad Daoud, who was assassinated along with all his family members in a bloody military coup. The coup became known as the Saur Revolution. On 1 May, Taraki became head of state, head of government and General Secretary of the PDPA. The country was then renamed the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA), and the PDPA regime lasted, in some form or another, until April 1992.

In March 1979, Hafizullah Amin took over as prime minister, retaining the position of field marshal and becoming vice-president of the Supreme Defence Council. Taraki remained General Secretary, Chairman of the Revolutionary Council and in control of the Army. On 14 September, Amin overthrew Taraki, who was killed. Amin stated that &quot;the Afghans recognize only crude force.&quot; Afghanistan expert Amin Saikal writes: &quot;As his powers grew, so apparently did his craving for personal dictatorship ... and his vision of the revolutionary process based on terror.&quot;

Once it was in power, the PDPA implemented a Marxist–Leninist agenda. It moved to replace religious and traditional laws with secular and Marxist–Leninist ones. Men were obliged to cut their beards, women could not wear chadors, and mosques were declared off limits. The PDPA made a number of reforms on women&#x27;s rights, banning forced marriages and giving state recognition of women&#x27;s right to vote. A prominent example was Anahita Ratebzad, who was a major Marxist leader and a member of the Revolutionary Council. Ratebzad wrote the famous &quot;New Kabul Times&quot; editorial (May 28, 1978) which declared: &quot;Privileges which women, by right, must have are equal education, job security, health services, and free time to rear a healthy generation for building the future of the country ... Educating and enlightening women is now the subject of close government attention.&quot; The PDPA also carried out socialist land reforms and moved to promote state atheism. They also prohibited usury. The PDPA invited the Soviet Union to assist in modernizing its economic infrastructure (predominantly its exploration and mining of rare minerals and natural gas). The Soviet Union also sent contractors to build roads, hospitals and schools and to drill water wells; they also trained and equipped the Afghan Armed Forces. Upon the PDPA&#x27;s ascension to power, and the establishment of the DRA, the Soviet Union promised monetary aid amounting to at least $1.262 billion.

At the same time, the PDPA imprisoned, tortured or murdered thousands of members of the traditional elite, the religious establishment, and the intelligentsia. The government launched a campaign of violent repression, killing some 10,000 to 27,000 people and imprisoning 14,000 to 20,000 more, mostly at Pul-e-Charkhi prison. In December 1978 the PDPA leadership signed an agreement with the Soviet Union which would allow military support for the PDPA in Afghanistan if needed. The majority of people in the cities including Kabul either welcomed or were ambivalent to these policies. However, the Marxist–Leninist and secular nature of the government as well as its heavy dependence on the Soviet Union made it unpopular with a majority of the Afghan population. Repressions plunged large parts of the country, especially the rural areas, into open revolt against the new Marxist–Leninist government. By spring 1979 unrests had reached 24 out of 28 Afghan provinces including major urban areas. Over half of the Afghan army would either desert or join the insurrection. Most of the government&#x27;s new policies clashed directly with the traditional Afghan understanding of Islam, making religion one of the only forces capable of unifying the tribally and ethnically divided population against the unpopular new government, and ushering in the advent of Islamist participation in Afghan politics.

To bolster the Parcham faction, the Soviet Union decided to intervene on December 27, 1979, when the Red Army invaded its southern neighbor. Over 100,000 Soviet troops took part in the invasion, which was backed by another 100,000 Afghan military men and supporters of the Parcham faction. In the meantime, Hafizullah Amin was killed and replaced by Babrak Karmal.

The Carter administration started providing limited assistance to rebels before the Soviet invasion. After the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, the U.S. began arming the Afghan mujahideen, thanks in large part to the efforts of Charlie Wilson and CIA officer Gust Avrakotos. Early reports estimated that $6–20 billion had been spent by the U.S. and Saudi Arabia but more recent reports state that the U.S. and Saudi Arabia provided as much as up to $40 billion in cash and weapons, which included over two thousand FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missiles, for building up Islamic groups against the Soviet Union. The U.S. handled most of its support through Pakistan&#x27;s ISI.

Scholars such as W. Michael Reisman, Charles Norchi and Mohammed Kakar, believe that the Afghans were victims of a genocide which was committed against them by the Soviet Union. Soviet forces and their proxies killed between 562,000 and 2 million Afghans and Russian soldiers also engaged in abductions and rapes of Afghan women. About 6 million fled as Afghan refugees to Pakistan and Iran, and from there over 38,000 made it to the United States and many more to the Europe. The Afghan refugees in Iran and Pakistan brought with them verifiable stories of murder, collective rape, torture and depopulation of civilians by the Soviet forces. Faced with mounting international pressure and great number of casualties on both sides, the Soviets withdrew in 1989. Their withdrawal from Afghanistan was seen as an ideological victory in the United States, which had backed some Mujahideen factions through three U.S. presidential administrations to counter Soviet influence in the vicinity of the oil-rich Persian Gulf. The USSR continued to support Afghan leader Mohammad Najibullah (former head of the Afghan secret service, &quot;KHAD&quot;) until 1992.

===Foreign interference and civil war (1989–1996)===
Pakistan&#x27;s spy agency Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), headed by Hamid Gul at the advice of the US and its allies, was interested in a trans-national Islamic revolution which would cover Pakistan, Afghanistan and Central Asia. For this purpose the ISI masterminded an attack on Jalalabad in March 1989, for the Mujahideen to establish their own government in Afghanistan, but this failed in three months.

With the crumbling of the Najibullah regime early in 1992, Afghanistan fell into further disarray and civil war. A U.N.-supported attempt to have the mujahideen parties and armies form a coalition government shattered. Mujahideen did not abide by the mutual pledges and Ahmad Shah Masoud&#x27;s forces, because of his proximity to Kabul, captured the capital before a mujahideen government was established. So the elected prime minister and warlord Gulbuddin Hekmatyar started war on his president and Massoud&#x27;s forces entrenched in Kabul. This ignited another civil war, because the other mujahideen parties would not settle for Hekmatyar ruling alone or sharing actual power with him. Within weeks, the still frail unity of the other mujahideen forces also evaporated, and six militias were fighting each other in and around Kabul.

Sibghatuallah Mojaddedi was elected as Afghanistan&#x27;s elected interim president for two months; then, professor Burhanuddin Rabbani, a well known Kabul university professor and the leader of Jamiat-e-Islami party of Mujahiddin who fought against Russians during the occupation was chosen by all of the Jahadi leaders except Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. Rabbani reigned as the official and elected president of Afghanistan by Shurai Mujahiddin Peshawer (Peshawer Mujahiddin Council) from 1992 until 2001 when he officially handed over the presidency post to Hamid Karzai the next US appointed interim president. During Rabbani&#x27;s presidency some parts of the country including a few provinces in the north such as Mazar e-Sharif, Jawzjan, Faryab, Shuburghan and some parts of Baghlan provinces were ruled by general Abdul Rashid Dostum.
During the first five years of Rabbani&#x27;s disputed term, before the emergence of the Taliban, the eastern and western provinces and some of the northern provinces such as Badakhshan, Takhar, Kunduz, the main parts of Baghlan Province, and some parts of Kandahar and other southern provinces were under the control of the central government. The central government could not assert control over other parts of the southern provinces, however, in large measure because of Rabbani&#x27;s Tajik ethnicity. During the 9 year presidency of Burhanuddin Rabani, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar was directed, funded and supplied by the Pakistani army. Afghanistan analyst Amin Saikal concludes in his book &quot;Modern Afghanistan: A History of Struggle and Survival&quot;:

There was no time for the interim government to create working government departments, police units or a system of justice and accountability. Saudi Arabia and Iran also armed and directed Afghan militias. A publication by the George Washington University describes:

 According to Human Rights Watch, numerous Iranian agents were assisting the Shia Hezb-i Wahdat forces of Abdul Ali Mazari, as Iran was attempting to maximize Wahdat&#x27;s military power and influence. Saudi Arabia was trying to strengthen the Wahhabite Abdul Rasul Sayyaf and his Ittihad-i Islami faction. Atrocities were committed by individuals of the different factions while Kabul descended into lawlessness and chaos as described in reports by Human Rights Watch and the Afghanistan Justice Project. Again, Human Rights Watch writes:

 The main forces involved during that period in Kabul, northern, central and eastern Afghanistan were the Hezb-i Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar directed by Pakistan, the Hezb-i Wahdat of Abdul Ali Mazari directed by Iran, the Ittehad-i Islami of Abdul Rasul Sayyaf supported by Saudi Arabia, the Junbish-i Milli of Abdul Rashid Dostum backed by Uzbekisten, the Harakat-i Islami of Hussain Anwari and the Shura-i Nazar operating as the regular Islamic State forces (as agreed upon in the Peshawar Accords) under the Defence Ministry of Ahmad Shah Massoud.

Meanwhile, the southern city of Kandahar was a centre of lawlessness, crime and atrocities fuelled by complex Pashtun tribal rivalries. In 1994, the Taliban (a movement originating from Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-run religious schools for Afghan refugees in Pakistan) also developed in Afghanistan as a politico-religious force, reportedly in opposition to the tyranny of the local governor. Mullah Omar started his movement with fewer than 50 armed madrasa students in his hometown of Kandahar. As Gulbuddin Hekmatyar remained unsuccessful in conquering Kabul, Pakistan started supporting the Taliban. Many analysts like Amin Saikal describe the Taliban as developing into a proxy force for Pakistan&#x27;s regional interests. In 1994 the Taliban took power in several provinces in southern and central Afghanistan.

In 1995 the Hezb-i Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the Iranian-backed Hezb-i Wahdat as well as Rashid Dostum&#x27;s Junbish forces were defeated militarily in the capital Kabul by forces of the interim government under Massoud who subsequently tried to initiate a nationwide political process with the goal of national consolidation and democratic elections, also inviting the Taliban to join the process. The Taliban declined.

===Taliban and the Northern Alliance (1996–2001)===


The Taliban started shelling Kabul in early 1995 but were defeated by forces of the Islamic State government under Ahmad Shah Massoud. Amnesty International, referring to the Taliban offensive, wrote in a 1995 report:

On September 26, 1996, as the Taliban, with military support by Pakistan and financial support by Saudi Arabia, prepared for another major offensive, Massoud ordered a full retreat from Kabul. The Taliban seized Kabul on September 27, 1996, and established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. They imposed on the parts of Afghanistan under their control their political and judicial interpretation of Islam, issuing edicts forbidding women from working outside the home, attending school or leaving their homes unless accompanied by a male relative. Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) said:

After the fall of Kabul to the Taliban on September 27, 1996, Ahmad Shah Massoud and Abdul Rashid Dostum, two former enemies, created the Northern Alliance (United Front) against the Taliban, who were preparing offensives against the remaining areas under the control of Massoud and Dostum. The Northern Alliance included beside the dominantly Tajik forces of Massoud and the Uzbek forces of Dostum, Hazara factions and Pashtun forces under the leadership of commanders such as Abdul Haq, Haji Abdul Qadir, Qari Baba or diplomat Abdul Rahim Ghafoorzai. From the Taliban conquest in 1996 until November 2001 the Northern Alliance controlled roughly 30% of Afghanistan&#x27;s population in provinces such as Badakhshan, Kapisa, Takhar and parts of Parwan, Kunar, Nuristan, Laghman, Samangan, Kunduz, Ghōr and Bamyan.

According to a 55-page report by the United Nations, the Taliban, while trying to consolidate control over northern and western Afghanistan, committed systematic massacres against civilians. UN officials stated that there had been &quot;15 massacres&quot; between 1996 and 2001. They also said, that &quot;[t]hese have been highly systematic and they all lead back to the [Taliban] Ministry of Defense or to Mullah Omar himself.&quot; The Taliban especially targeted people of Shia religious or Hazara ethnic background. Upon taking Mazar-i-Sharif in 1998, about 4,000 civilians were executed by the Taliban and many more reported torture. Among those killed in Mazari Sharif were several Iranian diplomats. Others were kidnapped by the Taliban, touching off a hostage crisis that nearly escalated to a full-scale war, with 150,000 Iranian soldiers massed on the Afghan border at one time. It was later admitted that the diplomats were killed by the Taliban, and their bodies were returned to Iran.

The documents also reveal the role of Arab and Pakistani support troops in these killings. Osama bin Laden&#x27;s so-called 055 Brigade was responsible for mass-killings of Afghan civilians.&lt;ref name=&quot;Ahmed Rashid/The Telegraph&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The report by the United Nations quotes eyewitnesses in many villages describing Arab fighters carrying long knives used for slitting throats and skinning people.

Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf – then as Chief of Army Staff – was responsible for sending thousands of Pakistanis to fight alongside the Taliban and Bin Laden against the forces of Massoud. In total there were believed to be 28,000 Pakistani nationals fighting inside Afghanistan. 20,000 were regular Pakistani soldiers either from the Frontier Corps or army and an estimated 8,000 were militants recruited in madrasas filling regular Taliban ranks. The estimated 25,000 Taliban regular force thus comprised more than 8,000 Pakistani nationals. A 1998 document by the U.S. State Department confirms that &quot;20–40 percent of [regular] Taliban soldiers are Pakistani.&quot; The document further states that the parents of those Pakistani nationals &quot;know nothing regarding their child&#x27;s military involvement with the Taliban until their bodies are brought back to Pakistan.&quot; A further 3,000 fighter of the regular Taliban army were Arab and Central Asian militants. From 1996 to 2001 the Al-Qaeda of Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri became a state within the Taliban state. Bin Laden sent Arab recruits to join the fight against the Northern Alliance. Of roughly 45,000 Pakistani, Taliban and Al-Qaeda soldiers fighting against the forces of Massoud only 14,000 were Afghan.

According to Human Rights Watch in 1997 Taliban soldiers were summarily executed in and around Mazar-i Sharif by Dostum&#x27;s Junbish forces. Dostum was defeated by the Taliban in 1998 with the fall of Mazar-i-Sharif. Massoud remained the only leader of the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan.

In the areas under his control Ahmad Shah Massoud set up democratic institutions and signed the Women&#x27;s Rights Charter. Human Rights Watch cites no human rights crimes for the forces under direct control of Massoud for the period from October 1996 until the assassination of Massoud in September 2001. As a consequence many civilians fled to the area of Ahmad Shah Massoud. National Geographic concluded in its documentary &quot;Inside the Taliban&quot;:

The Taliban repeatedly offered Massoud a position of power to make him stop his resistance. Massoud declined for he did not fight to obtain a position of power. He said in one interview:

and

Massoud wanted to convince the Taliban to join a political process leading towards democratic elections in a foreseeable future. Massoud stated that:

In early 2001 Massoud employed a new strategy of local military pressure and global political appeals. Resentment was increasingly gathering against Taliban rule from the bottom of Afghan society including the Pashtun areas. Massoud publicized their cause &quot;popular consensus, general elections and democracy&quot; worldwide. At the same time he was very wary not to revive the failed Kabul government of the early 1990s. Already in 1999 he started the training of police forces which he trained specifically to keep order and protect the civilian population in case the Northern Alliance would be successful.

In early 2001 Massoud addressed the European Parliament in Brussels asking the international community to provide humanitarian help to the people of Afghanistan. He stated that the Taliban and Al-Qaeda had introduced &quot;a very wrong perception of Islam&quot; and that without the support of Pakistan the Taliban would not be able to sustain their military campaign for up to a year.

=== NATO&#x27;s presence, the Emergency Loya Jirga, the Taliban&#x27;s takeover and the Panjshir uprising===

On 9 September 2001, Ahmad Shah Massoud was assassinated by two Arab suicide attackers inside Afghanistan. Two days later about 3,000 people became victims of the September 11 attacks in the United States, when Afghan-based Al-Qaeda suicide bombers hijacked planes and flew them into four targets in the Northeastern United States. Then US President George W. Bush accused Osama bin Laden and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed as the faces behind the attacks. When the Taliban refused to hand over bin Laden to US authorities and to disband al-Qaeda bases in Afghanistan, Operation Enduring Freedom was launched in which teams of American and British special forces worked with commanders of the Northern Alliance against the Taliban. At the same time the US-led forces were bombing Taliban and al-Qaeda targets everywhere inside Afghanistan with cruise missiles. These actions led to the fall of Mazar-i-Sharif in the north followed by all the other cities, as the Taliban and al-Qaeda crossed over the porous Durand Line border into Pakistan. In December 2001, after the Taliban government was toppled and the new Afghan government under Hamid Karzai was formed, the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was established by the UN Security Council to help assist the Karzai administration and provide basic security to the Afghan people. The majority of Afghans supported the American invasion of their country.
While the Taliban began regrouping inside Pakistan, the rebuilding of war-torn Afghanistan kicked off in 2002 (see also War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)). The Afghan nation was able to build democratic structures over the years by the creation of an emergency loya jirga to set up the modern Afghan government, and some progress was made in key areas such as governance, economy, health, education, transport, and agriculture. NATO had been training the Afghan armed forces as well its national police. ISAF and Afghan troops led many offensives against the Taliban but failed to fully defeat them. By 2009, a Taliban-led shadow government began to form in many parts of the country complete with their own version of mediation court. After U.S. President Barack Obama announced the deployment of another 30,000 soldiers in 2010 for a period of two years, &quot;Der Spiegel&quot; published images of the US soldiers who killed unarmed Afghan civilians.

In 2009, the United States resettled 328 refugees from Afghanistan. Over five million Afghan refugees were repatriated in the last decade, including many who were forcefully deported from NATO countries. This large return of Afghans may have helped the nation&#x27;s economy but the country still remains one of the poorest in the world due to the decades of war, lack of foreign investment, ongoing government corruption and the Pakistani-backed Taliban insurgency. The United States also accuses neighboring Iran of providing small level of support to the Taliban insurgents. According to a report by the United Nations, the Taliban and other militants were responsible for 76% of civilian casualties in 2009, 75% in 2010 and 80% in 2011. A report titled &quot;Body Count&quot; concluded that 106,000–170,000 civilians had been killed as a result of the fighting in Afghanistan at the hands of all parties to the conflict.

In October 2008 U.S. Defense Secretary Gates had asserted that a political settlement with the Taliban was the endgame for the Afghanistan war. &quot;There has to be ultimately – and I&#x27;ll underscore ultimately – reconciliation as part of a political outcome to this,&quot; Gates stated. By 2010 peace efforts began. In early January, Taliban commanders held secret exploratory talks with a United Nations special envoy to discuss peace terms. Regional commanders on the Taliban&#x27;s leadership council, the Quetta Shura, sought a meeting with the UN special representative in Afghanistan, Kai Eide, and it took place in Dubai on January 8. It was the first such meeting between the UN and senior members of the Taliban. On 26 January 2010, at a major conference in London which brought together some 70 countries and organizations, Afghan President Hamid Karzai said he intends to reach out to the Taliban leadership (including Mullah Omar, Sirajuddin Haqqani and Gulbuddin Hekmatyar). Supported by NATO, Karzai called on the group&#x27;s leadership to take part in a loya jirga meeting to initiate peace talks. These steps have resulted in an intensification of bombings, assassinations and ambushes. Some Afghan groups (including the former intelligence chief Amrullah Saleh and opposition leader Dr. Abdullah Abdullah) believe that Karzai plans to appease the insurgents&#x27; senior leadership at the cost of the democratic constitution, the democratic process and progress in the field of human rights especially women&#x27;s rights. Dr. Abdullah stated:

Afghan President Hamid Karzai told world leaders during the London conference that he intends to reach out to the top echelons of the Taliban within a few weeks with a peace initiative. Karzai set the framework for dialogue with Taliban leaders when he called on the group&#x27;s leadership to take part in a &quot;loya jirga&quot; – or large assembly of elders – to initiate peace talks. Karzai also asked for creation of a new peacemaking organization, to be called the National Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Reintegration. Karzai&#x27;s top adviser on the reconciliation process with the insurgents said that the country must learn to forgive the Taliban. In March 2010, the Karzai government held preliminary talks with Hezb-i-Islami, who presented a plan which included the withdrawal of all foreign troops by the end of 2010. The Taliban declined to participate, saying &quot;The Islamic Emirate has a clear position. We have said this many, many times. There will be no talks when there are foreign troops on Afghanistan&#x27;s soil killing innocent Afghans on daily basis.&quot; In June 2010 the Afghan Peace Jirga 2010 took place. In September 2010 General David Petraeus commented on the progress of peace talks to date, stating, &quot;The prospect for reconciliation with senior Taliban leaders certainly looms out there...and there have been approaches at (a) very senior level that hold some promise.&quot;

After the May 2011 death of Osama bin Laden in Pakistan, many prominent Afghan figures began being assassinated, including Mohammed Daud Daud, Ahmed Wali Karzai, Jan Mohammad Khan, Ghulam Haider Hamidi, Burhanuddin Rabbani and others. Also in the same year, the Pakistani-Afghan border skirmishes intensified and many large scale attacks by the Pakistani-based Haqqani network took place across Afghanistan. This led to the United States warning Pakistan of a possible military action against the Haqqanis in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas. The U.S. blamed Pakistan&#x27;s government, mainly Pakistani Army and its ISI spy network as the masterminds behind all of this.


The U.S. ambassador to Pakistan, Cameron Munter, told Radio Pakistan that &quot;The attack that took place in Kabul a few days ago, that was the work of the Haqqani network. There is evidence linking the Haqqani Network to the Pakistan government. This is something that must stop.&quot; Other top U.S. officials such as Hillary Clinton and Leon Panetta made similar statements. On October 16, 2011, &quot;Operation Knife Edge&quot; was launched by NATO and Afghan forces against the Haqqani network in south-eastern Afghanistan. Afghan Defense Minister, Abdul Rahim Wardak, explained that the operation will &quot;help eliminate the insurgents before they struck in areas along the troubled frontier&quot;. In November 2011, NATO forces attacked Pakistani soldiers in the Pakistan border region. In 2014, Ashraf Ghani was elected to be the president of Afghanistan. 

In 2021, the United States forces and allies withdrew from Afghanistan, which allowed the Taliban to intensify their insurgency. On 15 August 2021, as the Taliban entered Kabul, President Ghani fled to Tajikistan, and the U.S.-backed Afghan government collapsed. Anti-Taliban forces formed the National Resistance Front of Afghanistan and launched an uprising from the Panjshir Valley.

On 7 September 2021 Taliban announced an interim government headed by Mohammad Hassan Akhund, although the government remained unrecognized internationally.

Western countries have suspended most humanitarian aid to Afghanistan following the Taliban&#x27;s takeover of the country in August 2021. The United States has frozen about $9 billion in assets belonging to the Afghan central bank, blocking the Taliban from accessing billions of dollars held in U.S. bank accounts. In October 2021, more than half of Afghanistan&#x27;s 39 million people faced an acute food shortage. On 11 November 2021, the &quot;Human Rights Watch&quot; reported that Afghanistan is facing widespread famine due to collapsed economy and broken banking system. The UN World Food Program has also issued multiple warnings of worsening food insecurity.

In October 2023, the Pakistani government ordered the expulsion of Afghans from Pakistan. Iran also decided to deport Afghan refugees back to Afghanistan. Taliban authorities condemned the deportations of Afghans as an &quot;inhuman act.&quot; In December 2023, speaking about the situation in Afghanistan, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that 30% of the Afghan population was facing acute food insecurity, adding that &quot;Close to 1 million children are severely malnourished and 2.3 million are suffering from moderate acute malnutrition.&quot;

==See also==
* Fall of Kabul (2021)
* Invasions of Afghanistan
* List of Pashtun empires and dynasties
* List of heads of state of Afghanistan
* Politics of Afghanistan
* Timeline of Kabul
* Timeline of Herat

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* Internet Archive copy
* 

==Further reading==

* Adamec, Ludwig W. &quot;Historical dictionary of Afghanistan&quot; (Scarecrow Press, 2011).
* Adamec, Ludwig W. &quot;Historical dictionary of Afghan wars, revolutions, and insurgencies&quot; (Scarecrow Press, 2005).
* Adamec, Ludwig W. &quot;Afghanistan&#x27;s foreign affairs to the mid-twentieth century: relations with the USSR, Germany, and Britain&quot; (University of Arizona Press, 1974).
* Banting, Erinn. &quot;Afghanistan the People&quot;. Crabtree Publishing Company, 2003. .
* Barfield, Thomas. &quot;Afghanistan: A Cultural and Political History&quot; (Princeton U.P. 2010) excerpt and text search 
* Bleaney, C. H; María Ángeles Gallego. &quot;Afghanistan: a bibliography &quot;. Brill, 2006. .
* Caroe, Olaf (1958). &quot;The Pathans: 500 B.C.–A.D. 1957 &quot;. Oxford in Asia Historical Reprints. Oxford University Press, 1983. .
* Clements, Frank. &quot;Conflict in Afghanistan: a historical encyclopedia &quot;. ABC-CLIO, 2003. .
* Dupree, Louis. &quot;Afghanistan&quot;. Princeton University Press, 1973. .
* Dupree, Nancy Hatch. &quot;An Historical Guide to Afghanistan &quot;. 2nd Edition. Revised and Enlarged. Afghan Air Authority, Afghan Tourist Organization, 1977.
* Ewans, Martin. &quot;Afghanistan – a new history&quot; (Routledge, 2013).
* Fowler, Corinne. &quot;Chasing tales: travel writing, journalism and the history of British ideas about Afghanistan &quot;. Rodopi, 2007. Amsterdam and New York. .
* Griffiths, John C. (1981). &quot;Afghanistan: a history of conflict &quot;. Carlton Books, 2001. .
* Gommans, Jos J. L. &quot;The rise of the Indo-Afghan empire, c. 1710–1780&quot;. Brill, 1995. .
* Gregorian, Vartan. &quot;The emergence of modern Afghanistan: politics of reform and modernization, 1880–1946&quot;. Stanford University Press, 1969. 
* Habibi, Abdul Hai. &quot;Afghanistan: An Abridged History&quot;. Fenestra Books, 2003. .
* Harmatta, János. &quot;History of Civilizations of Central Asia: The development of sedentary and nomadic civilizations, 700 B.C. to A.D. 250&quot;. Motilal Banarsidass Publ., 1999. .
* Hiebert, Fredrik Talmage. &quot;Afghanistan: hidden treasures from the National Museum, Kabul&quot;. National Geographic Society, 2008. .
* Hill, John E. 2003. &quot;Annotated Translation of the Chapter on the Western Regions according to the &quot;Hou Hanshu&quot;.&quot; 2nd Draft Edition.
* Holt, Frank. &quot;Into the Land of Bones: Alexander the Great in Afghanistan&quot;. University of California Press, 2006. .
* Hopkins, B. D. 2008. &quot;The Making of Modern Afghanistan &quot;. Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. .
* Jabeen, Mussarat, Prof Dr Muhammad Saleem Mazhar, and Naheed S. Goraya. &quot;US Afghan Relations: A Historical Perspective of Events of 9/11.&quot; &quot;South Asian Studies&quot; 25.1 (2020). 
* Kakar, M. Hassan. &quot;A Political and Diplomatic History of Afghanistan, 1863–1901&quot; (Brill, 2006)online 
* Leake, Elisabeth. &quot;Afghan Crucible: The Soviet Invasion and the Making of Modern Afghanistan&quot; (Oxford University Press. 2022) online book review
* Malleson, George Bruce (1878). &quot;History of Afghanistan, from the Earliest Period to the Outbreak of the War of 1878 &quot;. Elibron Classic Replica Edition. Adamant Media Corporation, 2005. .
* Olson, Gillia M. &quot;Afghanistan&quot;. Capstone Press, 2005. .
* Omrani, Bijan &amp; Leeming, Matthew &quot;Afghanistan: A Companion and Guide &quot;. Odyssey Publications, 2nd Edition, 2011. .
* Reddy, L. R. &quot;Inside Afghanistan: end of the Taliban era? &quot;. APH Publishing, 2002. .
* Romano, Amy. &quot;A Historical Atlas of Afghanistan &quot;. The Rosen Publishing Group, 2003. .
* Runion, Meredith L. &quot;The history of Afghanistan &quot;. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2007. .
* Saikal, Amin, A.G. Ravan Farhadi, and Kirill Nourzhanov. &quot;Modern Afghanistan: a history of struggle and survival&quot; (IB Tauris, 2012).
* Shahrani, M Nazif, ed. &quot;Modern Afghanistan: The Impact of 40 Years of War&quot; (Indiana UP, 2018)
* Siddique, Abubakar. &quot;The Pashtun Question The Unresolved Key to the Future of Pakistan and Afghanistan&quot; (Hurst, 2014)
* Tanner, Stephen. &quot;Afghanistan: a military history from Alexander the Great to the war against the Taliban&quot; (Da Capo Press, 2009).
* Wahab, Shaista; Barry Youngerman. &quot;A brief history of Afghanistan&quot;. Infobase Publishing, 2007. 
* Vogelsang, Willem. &quot;The Afghans &quot;. Wiley-Blackwell, 2002. Oxford, UK &amp; Massachusetts, US. .
===Primary sources===
* &quot;Durand&#x27;s Curse: A Line Across the Pathan Heart&quot; by Rajiv Dogra, Publisher: Rupa Publications India
* Green, Nile, ed. &quot;Afghan History Through Afghan Eyes&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2016) online edition for libraries: 
* Elliot, Henry Miers. &quot;The history of India, as told by its own historians: The Muhammadan period&quot;. Elibron.com, 1952. Volume 8. 
* Elphinstone, Mountstuart. 1819. &quot;An account of the kingdom of Caubul, and its dependencies in Persia, Tartary, and India: Comprising a view of the Afghaun nation, and a history of the Dooraunee monarchy&quot;. Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, and J. Murry, 1819.
* Hill, John E. 2004. &quot;The Peoples of the West from the Weilue&quot; 魏略 &quot;by Yu Huan&quot; 魚豢&quot;: A Third Century Chinese Account Composed between 239 and 265 CE.&quot; Draft annotated English translation.
* Levi, Peter. 1972. &quot;The light garden of the angel king: journeys in Afghanistan&quot;. Collins, 1972. .
* Wood, John (1872). &quot;A Journey to the Source of the River Oxus&quot;. New Edition, edited by his son, with an essay on the &quot;Geography of the Valley of the Oxus&quot; by Henry Yule. John Murray, London. Gregg Division McGraw-Hill, 1971, .

==External links==
* A Country Study: Afghanistan – Library of Congress Country Studies
* Video on Afghan-Soviet War from the Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
* Encyclopædia Britannica – History of Afghanistan
* UNESCO Sites in Afghanistan – Travel and Gears 
* Afghanistan (Southern Khorasan / Arachosia)
* Afghanistan&#x27;s Importance From the Perspective of the History by Abdul Hai Habibi
* An Historical Guide to Kabul by Nancy Hatch Dupree
* Afghanistan Online – History of Afghanistan 
* British Museum Lecture: An Introduction to the History of Afghanistan by Bijan Omrani 
* Ten Myths about Afghanistan &quot;The Guardian&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188872" start="4" end="26" title="History of Afghanistan" label="history of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335260" start="145" end="167" title="Emirate of Afghanistan" label="Emirate of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="245" end="257" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="259" end="265" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="275" end="294" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771648" start="297" end="328" title="Ancient history of Afghanistan" label="Human habitation in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="347" end="365" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991280" start="394" end="412" title="Geostrategy" label="strategic location"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="432" end="441" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184566" start="599" end="640" title="Invasions of Afghanistan" label="has witnessed numerous military campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="661" end="673" title="Persian Empire" label="the Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="675" end="694" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="700" end="713" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509966" start="715" end="727" title="Muslim conquests of Afghanistan" label="Arab Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q431177" start="733" end="740" title="Mongol invasion of the Khwarazmian Empire" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="746" end="753" title="European influence in Afghanistan#The Great Game" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="759" end="771" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="794" end="812" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="a US-led coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="860" end="866" title="Greater India" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026380" start="871" end="878" title="Iranian diaspora" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381780" start="924" end="932" title="Buddhism in Afghanistan" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q853314" start="934" end="942" title="Hinduism in Afghanistan" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="944" end="958" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084127" start="969" end="974" title="Islam in Afghanistan" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="1000" end="1014" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="1073" end="1085" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="1107" end="1125" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918497" start="1148" end="1168" title="Father of the Nation" label="Father of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q32027" start="1179" end="1197" title="Dost Mohammad Khan" label="Dost Mohammad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335260" start="1253" end="1272" title="Emirate of Afghanistan" label="modern Afghan state"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="1358" end="1368" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662997" start="1458" end="1463" title="Herat (1793–1863)" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q28669042" start="1465" end="1473" title="Principality of Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335260" start="1478" end="1483" title="Emirate of Afghanistan" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q32027" start="1619" end="1637" title="Dost Mohammad Khan" label="Dost Mohammad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108315270" start="1789" end="1827" title="Herat campaign of 1862–1863" label="his last campaign to unite Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108695974" start="1862" end="1888" title="Afghan Civil War (1863–1869)" label="thrown back into civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q587252" start="1966" end="1978" title="buffer state" label="buffer state"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="1986" end="1996" title="Great Game" label="Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2009" end="2020" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2043" end="2057" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q989092" start="2134" end="2156" title="First Anglo-Afghan War" label="First Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q233507" start="2171" end="2194" title="Second Anglo-Afghan War" label="Second Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259237" start="2313" end="2335" title="Third Anglo-Afghan War" label="Third Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138904" start="2431" end="2453" title="Kingdom of Afghanistan" label="Kingdom of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q153620" start="2473" end="2487" title="Amanullah Khan" label="Amanullah Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152265" start="2539" end="2549" title="Mohammad Zahir Shah" label="Zahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q30070166" start="2554" end="2572" title="1973 Afghan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="overthrown in 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415128" start="2594" end="2617" title="Republic of Afghanistan (1973–1978)" label="Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519107" start="2736" end="2782" title="Afghan conflict" label="coups, invasions, insurgencies, and civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="2818" end="2838" title="Saur Revolution" label="communist revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="2853" end="2868" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="2909" end="2943" title="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan" label="Soviet Union to invade Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="2953" end="2963" title="Mujahideen" label="Mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="2998" end="3015" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405009" start="3020" end="3029" title="Afghan Civil War (1989–1992)" label="continued"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980081" start="3030" end="3038" title="Afghan Civil War (1992–1996)" label="fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302518" start="3039" end="3057" title="Afghan Civil War (1996–2001)" label="amongst themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q509561" start="3072" end="3104" title="Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="Soviets&amp;#x27; withdrawal in 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140370" start="3110" end="3132" title="Islamic fundamentalism" label="Islamic fundamentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="3133" end="3140" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q427941" start="3191" end="3221" title="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (1996–2001)" label="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="3297" end="3323" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="US invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108102583" start="3369" end="3384" title="Fall of Kabul (2021)" label="capturing Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q30747910" start="3424" end="3455" title="Islamic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Islamic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="3485" end="3498" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="2001–2021 war"/>
<link wikidata="Q59281" start="3671" end="3689" title="interim government" label="interim government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918328" start="3840" end="3852" title="Louis Dupree (professor)" label="Louis Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224217" start="3867" end="3878" title="Darra-e Kur" label="Darra-e Kur"/>
<link wikidata="Q16313" start="3972" end="3985" title="temporal bone" label="temporal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="4114" end="4131" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="4139" end="4148" title="Carbon-14" label="Carbon-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="4277" end="4294" title="indigenous people" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="4476" end="4484" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="4582" end="4592" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q784189" start="4597" end="4615" title="Sulaiman Mountains" label="Sulaiman Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="4630" end="4637" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q720007" start="4864" end="4870" title="Jiroft" label="Jiroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581555" start="4875" end="4887" title="Tappeh Sialk" label="Tappeh Sialk"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="4896" end="4921" title="Indus Valley Civilisation" label="Indus Valley Civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935822" start="5020" end="5028" title="Mundigak" label="Mundigak"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="5035" end="5043" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q86663922" start="5071" end="5086" title="Helmand culture" label="Helmand culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453813" start="5120" end="5133" title="Indo-Iranians" label="Indo-Iranians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453813" start="5270" end="5283" title="Indo-Iranians" label="Indo-Iranians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="5347" end="5372" title="Indus Valley Civilisation" label="Indus Valley Civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="5504" end="5514" title="Oxus River" label="Oxus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550221" start="5518" end="5527" title="Shortugai" label="Shortugai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054850" start="5661" end="5700" title="Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex" label="Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q182159" start="5801" end="5806" title="Balkh" label="Balkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q756651" start="5818" end="5826" title="Bactrian language" label="Bactrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="6009" end="6024" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara region"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595864" start="6045" end="6060" title="Peshawar Valley" label="Peshawar Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372276" start="6065" end="6069" title="Swat River" label="Swat"/>
<link wikidata="Q156093" start="6185" end="6191" title="Taxila" label="Taxila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790133" start="6202" end="6218" title="Pothohar Plateau" label="Pothohar Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8515" start="6242" end="6247" title="Kabul River" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q214495" start="6252" end="6258" title="Bamyan" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469" start="6308" end="6317" title="Karakoram" label="Karakoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361576" start="6430" end="6447" title="Kashmir Valley" label="valley of Kaśmīra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385336" start="6532" end="6538" title="Kekaya" label="Kekaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728457" start="6541" end="6546" title="Madra" label="Madra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901990" start="6551" end="6558" title="Uśīnara" label="Uśīnara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499399" start="6565" end="6570" title="Shivi" label="Shivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30635996" start="6623" end="6632" title="Pushkarasarin" label="Pukkusāti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620921" start="6741" end="6749" title="Pradyota" label="Pradyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827705" start="6773" end="6779" title="Avanti (region)" label="Avanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="6888" end="6895" title="Persians" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="6896" end="6913" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="6915" end="6920" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8735" start="6950" end="6955" title="Medes" label="Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="6957" end="6962" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="6968" end="6977" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116768" start="7045" end="7071" title="K. D. Sethna" label="Kaikhosru Danjibuoy Sethna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="7387" end="7402" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="7494" end="7504" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="7584" end="7596" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="7625" end="7631" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833410" start="7752" end="7758" title="Aśvaka" label="Aśvaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="7840" end="7850" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="7969" end="7988" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822975" start="8268" end="8276" title="Yusufzai" label="Yusufzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="8277" end="8285" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833410" start="8328" end="8334" title="Aśvaka" label="Aśvaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428018" start="8368" end="8371" title="Kom people (Afghanistan)" label="Kom"/>
<link wikidata="Q167485" start="8388" end="8396" title="Nuristan Province" label="Nuristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29379" start="8427" end="8433" title="Askunu language" label="Ashkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969342" start="8483" end="8490" title="Yashkuns" label="Yashkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524034" start="8491" end="8496" title="Shina people" label="Shina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356379" start="8571" end="8577" title="Kamboj" label="Kamboj"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="8581" end="8587" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="8691" end="8699" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961626" start="8700" end="8716" title="Names of Cambodia" label="derives its name"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="8806" end="8825" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="8852" end="8870" title="Darius I of Persia" label="Darius I of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="8923" end="8932" title="satrapy" label="satrapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="8974" end="8980" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q654243" start="9016" end="9020" title="Aria (satrapy)" label="Aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327635" start="9083" end="9096" title="Paropamisadae" label="Paropamisadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="9110" end="9117" title="Parthia (satrapy)" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154974" start="9134" end="9142" title="Margiana" label="Margiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q48726" start="9147" end="9155" title="Hyrcania" label="Hyrcania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734044" start="9203" end="9211" title="Carmania (satrapy)" label="Carmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074810" start="9216" end="9225" title="Drangiana" label="Drangiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="9285" end="9292" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="9297" end="9303" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182844" start="9354" end="9368" title="Herat Province" label="Herat Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q624638" start="9398" end="9407" title="Arachosia" label="Arachosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="9439" end="9447" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q476800" start="9449" end="9459" title="Lashkargah" label="Lashkargah"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="9465" end="9471" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074810" start="9492" end="9501" title="Drangiana" label="Drangiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327635" start="9515" end="9528" title="Paropamisadae" label="Paropamisadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="9535" end="9543" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348342" start="9579" end="9587" title="Gedrosia" label="Gedrosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="9636" end="9651" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="9819" end="9837" title="Pashtuns" label="&amp;quot;Paṣtun&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918404" start="9848" end="9854" title="Pashtun tribes" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="9857" end="9864" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182159" start="10002" end="10007" title="Balkh" label="Balkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149207" start="10010" end="10020" title="Sattagydia" label="Sattagydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="10293" end="10299" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="10306" end="10314" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="10347" end="10352" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q183303" start="10354" end="10363" title="Jalalabad" label="Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="10369" end="10377" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="10428" end="10447" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q102865" start="10514" end="10534" title="Darius III of Persia" label="Darius III of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179670" start="10557" end="10576" title="Battle of Gaugamela" label="Battle of Gaugamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q190055" start="10870" end="10887" title="Roxana of Bactria" label="Roxana of Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168559" start="10911" end="10926" title="Cophen campaign" label="Cophen campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833410" start="10997" end="11005" title="Aśvaka" label="Aspasioi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720950" start="11257" end="11274" title="Alexandria Ariana" label="Alexandria Ariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="11287" end="11292" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092639" start="11295" end="11315" title="Alexandria Arachosia" label="Alexandria Arachosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="11324" end="11332" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005166" start="11335" end="11361" title="Alexandria in the Caucasus" label="Alexandria in the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q814388" start="11368" end="11374" title="Bagram" label="Bagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280882" start="11390" end="11408" title="Alexandria Eschate" label="Alexandria Eschate"/>
<link wikidata="Q373808" start="11415" end="11422" title="Khujand" label="Khujand"/>
<link wikidata="Q184176" start="11526" end="11534" title="Seleucus I Nicator" label="Seleucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q576065" start="11538" end="11548" title="Ancient Macedonians" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="11625" end="11640" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q857845" start="11711" end="11721" title="Ai-Khanoum" label="Ai-Khanoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q211488" start="11794" end="11803" title="Antiochus I Soter" label="Antiochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="11912" end="11925" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188541" start="11944" end="11963" title="Chandragupta Maurya" label="Chandragupta Maurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="11996" end="12004" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="12039" end="12047" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q625298" start="12229" end="12241" title="peace treaty" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="12409" end="12415" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q779933" start="12480" end="12507" title="Edicts of Ashoka" label="Major and Minor Rock Edicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="12753" end="12773" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q488880" start="12931" end="12953" title="Greco-Bactrian Kingdom" label="Greco-Bactrian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="12960" end="12971" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q335032" start="12994" end="13004" title="Diodotus I" label="Diodotus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="13010" end="13016" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="13020" end="13027" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="13086" end="13101" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q362604" start="13171" end="13183" title="Euthydemus I" label="Euthydemus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q347916" start="13285" end="13307" title="Demetrius I of Bactria" label="Demetrius I of Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="13336" end="13355" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q182159" start="13539" end="13545" title="Balkh" label="Bactra"/>
<link wikidata="Q857845" start="13550" end="13560" title="Ai-Khanoum" label="Ai-Khanoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q381819" start="13678" end="13690" title="Eucratides I" label="Eucratides I"/>
<link wikidata="Q180766" start="13698" end="13709" title="Heliocles I" label="Heliocles I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13715" end="13749" title="Heliocles I#Yuezhi invasion" label="defeated and driven out of Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q467985" start="13757" end="13770" title="Yuezhi" label="Yuezhi tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="13933" end="13938" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005166" start="13943" end="13969" title="Alexandria of the Caucasus" label="Alexandria of the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610219" start="13999" end="14007" title="King Hermaeus" label="Hermaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q347916" start="14256" end="14267" title="Demetrius I of Bactria" label="Demetrius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q347878" start="14364" end="14380" title="Menander I" label="Menander I Soter"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="14394" end="14412" title="Indo-Greek Kingdom" label="Indo-Greek Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="14577" end="14585" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="14662" end="14673" title="Indo-Greeks" label="Indo-Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387135" start="14730" end="14739" title="Strato II" label="Strato II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19999387" start="14743" end="14753" title="Strato III" label="Strato III"/>
<link wikidata="Q240123" start="14826" end="14840" title="Indo-Scythians" label="Indo-Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q240123" start="14869" end="14883" title="Indo-Scythians" label="Indo-Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="14908" end="14912" title="Sakas" label="Saka"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="14914" end="14923" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="14952" end="14959" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="14963" end="14971" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q624638" start="14976" end="14985" title="Arachosia" label="Arachosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="15120" end="15128" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="15132" end="15139" title="Mathura, Uttar Pradesh" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q793703" start="15192" end="15198" title="Azes I" label="Azes I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276014" start="15367" end="15389" title="Gautamiputra Satakarni" label="Gautamiputra Satakarni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="15397" end="15415" title="Satavahana dynasty" label="Satavahana dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q844536" start="15468" end="15483" title="Chandragupta II" label="Chandragupta II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="15491" end="15503" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255614" start="15576" end="15597" title="Indo-Parthian Kingdom" label="Indo-Parthian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397542" start="15674" end="15685" title="Gondophares" label="Gondophares"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="15732" end="15740" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="15759" end="15764" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q156093" start="15874" end="15880" title="Taxila" label="Taxila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478" start="15897" end="15903" title="Punjab, Pakistan" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="16019" end="16024" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="16029" end="16037" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="16149" end="16156" title="Arsacid dynasty of Parthia" label="Arsacid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="16214" end="16220" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="16246" end="16253" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="16455" end="16467" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Saint Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397542" start="16547" end="16558" title="Gondophares" label="Gondophares"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="16670" end="16682" title="Indus Valley" label="Indus Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="16733" end="16746" title="Malabar Coast" label="Malabar Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="16773" end="16786" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q560157" start="16913" end="16929" title="Kujula Kadphises" label="Kujula Kadphises"/>
<link wikidata="Q467985" start="17052" end="17058" title="Yuezhi" label="Yuezhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312544" start="17133" end="17151" title="Kanishka the Great" label="Kanishka the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402904" start="17279" end="17285" title="Saketa" label="Saketa"/>
<link wikidata="Q324394" start="17290" end="17297" title="Sarnath" label="Sarnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="17303" end="17311" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376141" start="17390" end="17398" title="Pantheon (religion)" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526510" start="17786" end="17799" title="Vincent Arthur Smith" label="Vincent Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="17897" end="17906" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="17997" end="18001" title="Roman Empire" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008014" start="18064" end="18076" title="Gandhara art" label="Gandhara art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282366" start="18221" end="18231" title="Vasudeva I" label="Vasudeva I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="18262" end="18271" title="Sasanians" label="Sasanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="18294" end="18308" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushans Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="18421" end="18426" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257805" start="18453" end="18458" title="Sasan" label="Sasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q234860" start="18522" end="18531" title="Shapur II" label="Shapur II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661685" start="18568" end="18592" title="Kushano-Sasanian Kingdom" label="Kushano-Sasanian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="18698" end="18709" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191455" start="18752" end="18760" title="Shapur I" label="Shapur I"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="18841" end="18848" title="Kushans" label="Kushans"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="18876" end="18886" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q234860" start="18950" end="18959" title="Shapur II" label="Shapur II"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="18995" end="19002" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q26996" start="19062" end="19071" title="Kidarites" label="Kidarites"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="19077" end="19089" title="Hephthalites" label="Hephthalites"/>
<link wikidata="Q21050766" start="19095" end="19106" title="Alchon Huns" label="Alchon Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325571" start="19116" end="19126" title="Nezak Huns" label="Nezak Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="19175" end="19183" title="Sasanian" label="Sasanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="19215" end="19220" title="Hunas" label="Hunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26996" start="19338" end="19347" title="Kidarites" label="Kidarites"/>
<link wikidata="Q21050766" start="19349" end="19360" title="Alchon Huns" label="Alchon Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="19362" end="19374" title="Hephthalites" label="Hephthalites"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325571" start="19384" end="19394" title="Nezak Huns" label="Nezak Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q26996" start="19420" end="19429" title="Kidarites" label="Kidarites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="19473" end="19484" title="Huna people" label="Huna people"/>
<link wikidata="Q756651" start="19713" end="19721" title="Bactrian language" label="Bactrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="19744" end="19755" title="Huna people" label="Huna people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401705" start="19876" end="19884" title="Khingila I" label="Khingila"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="19940" end="19950" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q43375791" start="20012" end="20018" title="Mehama" label="Mehama"/>
<link wikidata="Q721468" start="20059" end="20068" title="Mes Aynak" label="Mes Aynak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="20083" end="20088" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588669" start="20166" end="20174" title="Toramana" label="Toramana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347967" start="20283" end="20287" title="Eran" label="Eran"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="20313" end="20325" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573564" start="20327" end="20337" title="Mihirakula" label="Mihirakula"/>
<link wikidata="Q234953" start="20362" end="20369" title="Saivite" label="Saivite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069204" start="20408" end="20414" title="Sagala" label="Sagala"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="20425" end="20433" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262907" start="20681" end="20693" title="Yashodharman" label="Yashodharman"/>
<link wikidata="Q756651" start="20894" end="20902" title="Bactrian language" label="Bactrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="20954" end="20965" title="Huna people" label="Huna people"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="21192" end="21198" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="21202" end="21209" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26996" start="21285" end="21294" title="Kidarites" label="Kidarites"/>
<link wikidata="Q21050766" start="21303" end="21314" title="Alchon Huns" label="Alchon Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q484458" start="21476" end="21494" title="Buddhas of Bamiyan" label="Buddhas of Bamiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="21556" end="21564" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q214495" start="21573" end="21580" title="Bamyan" label="Bamiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412614" start="21585" end="21599" title="Kingdom of Kapisa" label="ancient Kapisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188157" start="21608" end="21623" title="Parwan Province" label="Parwan province"/>
<link wikidata="Q354548" start="21714" end="21722" title="Song Yun" label="Song Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="21753" end="21764" title="Hephthalite" label="Hephthalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q32056" start="21799" end="21809" title="Badakhshan" label="Badakhshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="21823" end="21831" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="22446" end="22457" title="Huna people" label="Huna people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="22497" end="22507" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q139125" start="22577" end="22587" title="Zabulistan" label="Zabulistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310233" start="22647" end="22654" title="Peroz I" label="Peroz I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="22730" end="22741" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475472" start="22800" end="22810" title="Kabulistan" label="Kabulistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q139125" start="22815" end="22825" title="Zabulistan" label="Zabulistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="22831" end="22836" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="22838" end="22846" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="22851" end="22857" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="22892" end="22911" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="22989" end="22997" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461501" start="22999" end="23010" title="Tokharistan" label="Tokharistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q757169" start="23015" end="23021" title="Sistan" label="Sistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182159" start="23071" end="23076" title="Balkh" label="Balkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="23081" end="23086" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355821" start="23175" end="23183" title="frontier" label="frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q383029" start="23251" end="23264" title="Afghan (ethnonym)" label="Afghan tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="23284" end="23292" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011324" start="23306" end="23317" title="Name of Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="23365" end="23375" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="23384" end="23395" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q784189" start="23420" end="23438" title="Sulaiman Mountains" label="Sulaiman Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q383029" start="23478" end="23484" title="Afghan (ethnonym)" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191455" start="23536" end="23544" title="Shapur I" label="Shapur I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="23552" end="23567" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q858348" start="23677" end="23689" title="Varāhamihira" label="Varāhamihira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538261" start="23712" end="23726" title="Bṛhat Saṃhitā" label="Brihat-samhita"/>
<link wikidata="Q28730" start="23822" end="23841" title="Saul" label="King Saul of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="24001" end="24016" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="24040" end="24050" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602816" start="24069" end="24079" title="Pashtunization" label="assimilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748844" start="24092" end="24099" title="Afghan culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977219" start="24179" end="24192" title="Khalaj people" label="Khalaj people"/>
<link wikidata="Q205377" start="24218" end="24225" title="Ghilzai" label="Ghilzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="24307" end="24319" title="Kabul Valley" label="Kabul Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="24324" end="24332" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="24357" end="24370" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q173816" start="24683" end="24689" title="Kapisa Province" label="Kapisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695597" start="24711" end="24724" title="Hund, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="Udabhandapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568049" start="24796" end="24804" title="Jayapala" label="Jayapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="24870" end="24880" title="Ghaznavids" label="Ghaznavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="25022" end="25028" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q32853" start="25050" end="25060" title="Sabuktigin" label="Sabuktigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="25084" end="25090" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="25367" end="25379" title="Kabul" label="Kabul Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="25384" end="25395" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="25498" end="25511" title="Punjab region" label="Punjab region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319050" start="25608" end="25616" title="Firishta" label="Firishta"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="25820" end="25830" title="Qarakhanid" label="Qarakhanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="25845" end="25855" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872019" start="25864" end="25879" title="Battle of Peshawar (1001)" label="attacked Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="25973" end="25981" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872019" start="25993" end="26011" title="Battle of Peshawar (1001)" label="Battle of Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="26157" end="26167" title="Anandapala" label="Anandapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="26376" end="26383" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q613624" start="26384" end="26397" title="Sivalik Hills" label="Sivalik Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q180465" start="26430" end="26438" title="Rashidun" label="Rashidun"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="26541" end="26546" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190896" start="26722" end="26732" title="Abū Ḥanīfa" label="Abū Ḥanīfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="26992" end="27000" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q45310" start="27055" end="27071" title="Saffarid dynasty" label="Saffarid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="27088" end="27098" title="Ghaznavids" label="Ghaznavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="27184" end="27190" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="27202" end="27213" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="27246" end="27262" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="27300" end="27306" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="27390" end="27401" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="27423" end="27427" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="27429" end="27437" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="27455" end="27467" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="27469" end="27479" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="27485" end="27495" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="27497" end="27513" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966837" start="27729" end="27735" title="Nasher clan" label="Nasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740588" start="27764" end="27771" title="Kharoti" label="Kharoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q199443" start="27818" end="27825" title="Ghurids" label="Ghurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="27884" end="27890" title="Sultan" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966837" start="27933" end="27939" title="Nasher (tribe)" label="Nasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="27996" end="28001" title="Tajiks" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q186392" start="28069" end="28082" title="Ghor Province" label="Ghor province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702602" start="28277" end="28294" title="Ala al-Din Husayn" label="Ala al-Din Husayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q141094" start="28349" end="28360" title="Bahram-Shah of Ghazna" label="Bahram Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="28778" end="28782" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="28796" end="28815" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="28821" end="28829" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="28868" end="28873" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q182159" start="29336" end="29341" title="Balkh" label="Balkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="29381" end="29392" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q559416" start="29478" end="29500" title="Jalal al-Din Mangburni" label="Jalal al-Din Mangburni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944215" start="29622" end="29629" title="Mutukan" label="Mutukan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461875" start="29734" end="29749" title="Shahr-e Gholghola" label="City of Screams"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="29751" end="29756" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734616" start="29841" end="29853" title="Kart dynasty" label="Kart dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="29927" end="29936" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q487829" start="30021" end="30037" title="Chagatai Khanate" label="Chagatai Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q919071" start="30123" end="30137" title="Khalji dynasty" label="Khalji dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="30194" end="30199" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q484195" start="30260" end="30274" title="Timurid Empire" label="Timurid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389106" start="30353" end="30365" title="Pir Muhammad bin Jahangir Mirza" label="Pir Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="30383" end="30391" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="30627" end="30632" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q553204" start="30836" end="30845" title="Shah Rukh" label="Shah Rukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424763" start="31274" end="31293" title="Timurid Renaissance" label="Timurid Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="31315" end="31323" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="31331" end="31350" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="31894" end="31899" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="31917" end="31922" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="32196" end="32215" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="32275" end="32290" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11709" start="32340" end="32352" title="Lodi dynasty" label="Lodi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q381754" start="32379" end="32391" title="Ibrahim Lodi" label="Ibrahim Lodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="32473" end="32486" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q577668" start="32610" end="32628" title="Khanate of Bukhara" label="Khanate of Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="32673" end="32677" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161205" start="32678" end="32685" title="Safavid dynasty" label="Safavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="32726" end="32731" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772949" start="32823" end="32828" title="subah" label="subah"/>
<link wikidata="Q117350524" start="32891" end="32898" title="Kashmir Subah" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q182159" start="32957" end="32968" title="Balkh Subah" label="Balkh Subah"/>
<link wikidata="Q32056" start="32973" end="32989" title="Badakhshan Subah" label="Badakhshan Subah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054581" start="33051" end="33062" title="buffer zone" label="buffer zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223863" start="33388" end="33397" title="Chil Zena" label="Chil Zena"/>
<link wikidata="Q446965" start="33615" end="33621" title="Sultan Husayn" label="Husayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992314" start="33632" end="33641" title="George XI of Kartli" label="George XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973" start="33680" end="33688" title="Georgians" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q558242" start="34133" end="34146" title="Mirwais Hotak" label="Mirwais Hotak"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="34188" end="34196" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="34253" end="34260" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="34458" end="34466" title="rebellion" label="uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q626066" start="34523" end="34530" title="banquet" label="banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q60269" start="34944" end="34953" title="Qizilbash" label="Qizilbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665277" start="35276" end="35292" title="Abdul Aziz Hotak" label="Abdul Aziz Hotak"/>
<link wikidata="Q31494" start="35353" end="35365" title="Mahmud Hotak" label="Mahmud Hotak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296937" start="35521" end="35539" title="Battle of Gulnabad" label="Battle of Gulnabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="35562" end="35569" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184299" start="35630" end="35634" title="Shah" label="Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q562502" start="35853" end="35865" title="Ashraf Hotak" label="Ashraf Hotak"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011324" start="36006" end="36017" title="Name of Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918583" start="36066" end="36079" title="Hussain Hotak" label="Hussain Hotak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="36122" end="36136" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18089561" start="36168" end="36185" title="Treaty of Hamedan" label="Treaty of Hamedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748377" start="36245" end="36263" title="Ottoman–Hotaki War (1722–1727)" label="Ottoman–Hotaki War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="36273" end="36287" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="37132" end="37142" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="37316" end="37326" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q388739" start="37340" end="37349" title="Afsharid dynasty" label="Afsharids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888384" start="37358" end="37375" title="Battle of Damghan (1729)" label="Battle of Damghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433670" start="37625" end="37631" title="Durrani" label="Abdali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510145" start="37666" end="37683" title="Siege of Kandahar" label="Siege of Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="37707" end="37717" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q388739" start="37726" end="37734" title="Afsharid dynasty" label="Afsharid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918583" start="37793" end="37806" title="Hussain Hotak" label="Hussain Hotak"/>
<link wikidata="Q21042286" start="37888" end="37897" title="Naderabad, Kandahar" label="Naderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="37934" end="37944" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957844" start="37983" end="38000" title="Nader Shah&amp;#x27;s invasion of India" label="invasion of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192317" start="38205" end="38215" title="loya jirga" label="loya jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="38403" end="38416" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="38444" end="38454" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="38475" end="38493" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433670" start="38634" end="38641" title="Durrani" label="Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918404" start="38732" end="38746" title="Pashtun tribes" label="Pashtun tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="38958" end="38963" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="38990" end="39004" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259218" start="39020" end="39043" title="Third Battle of Panipat" label="Third Battle of Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q104764538" start="39184" end="39203" title="Shrine of the Cloak" label="Shrine of the Cloak"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="39234" end="39252" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="39291" end="39304" title="Durrani Empire" label="Afghan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q145401" start="39360" end="39378" title="Zaman Shah Durrani" label="Zaman Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973073" start="39698" end="39704" title="Attock" label="Attock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="39709" end="39716" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q457944" start="39749" end="39767" title="Shuja Shah Durrani" label="Shuja Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="39950" end="39965" title="Harmandir Sahib" label="Harmandir Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="39969" end="39977" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q332620" start="40005" end="40017" title="Ranjit Singh" label="Ranjit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="40058" end="40073" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="40115" end="40120" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q32027" start="40226" end="40244" title="Dost Mohammad Khan" label="Dost Mohammad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24288419" start="40317" end="40337" title="Sultan Mohammad Khan" label="Sultan Mohammad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q807249" start="40358" end="40374" title="Barakzai dynasty" label="Barakzai dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="40423" end="40434" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q142571" start="40453" end="40459" title="Jamrud" label="Jamrud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631373" start="40484" end="40500" title="Hari Singh Nalwa" label="Hari Singh Nalwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="40563" end="40570" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="40575" end="40589" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="40625" end="40635" title="Great Game" label="Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510082" start="40887" end="40901" title="Siege of Herat (1837–1838)" label="Siege of Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="41079" end="41084" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q989092" start="41090" end="41112" title="first Anglo-Afghan War" label="first Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q108532624" start="41141" end="41170" title="1842 retreat from Kabul" label="destruction of a British army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="41203" end="41216" title="Company rule in India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="41366" end="41381" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="41588" end="41593" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="41595" end="41601" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q183303" start="41603" end="41612" title="Jalalabad" label="Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q214495" start="41618" end="41624" title="Bamyan" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108695974" start="41746" end="41767" title="Afghan Civil War (1863–1869)" label="a civil war broke out"/>
<link wikidata="Q40427" start="41797" end="41805" title="Sher Ali Khan" label="Sher Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q233507" start="41845" end="41868" title="Second Anglo-Afghan War" label="Second Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q31649" start="42076" end="42088" title="Abdur Rahman Khan" label="Abdur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="42331" end="42336" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q334869" start="42681" end="42696" title="Habibullah Khan" label="Habibullah Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988262" start="42807" end="42838" title="Niedermayer–Hentig Expedition" label="encouragement by Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q153620" start="43102" end="43111" title="Amanullah Khan" label="Amanullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259237" start="43190" end="43212" title="Third Anglo-Afghan War" label="Third Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456454" start="43379" end="43399" title="Treaty of Rawalpindi" label="Treaty of Rawalpindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689078" start="43484" end="43500" title="Afghan Independence Day" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q153620" start="43554" end="43568" title="Amanullah Khan" label="Amanullah Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402599" start="43693" end="43708" title="Khost rebellion (1924–1925)" label="Khost rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="43900" end="43907" title="Atatürk" label="Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q153640" start="44009" end="44021" title="Mahmud Tarzi" label="Mahmud Tarzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192317" start="44219" end="44229" title="Loya Jirga" label="Loya Jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918563" start="44531" end="44539" title="Shinwari" label="Shinwari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952572" start="44587" end="44615" title="Afghan Civil War (1928–1929)" label="Afghan Civil War (1928–1929)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63255391" start="44672" end="44681" title="Saqqawists" label="Saqqawist"/>
<link wikidata="Q473247" start="44755" end="44774" title="Habibullāh Kalakāni" label="Habibullāh Kalakāni"/>
<link wikidata="Q355610" start="44844" end="44863" title="Mohammed Nadir Khan" label="Mohammed Nadir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q473247" start="44964" end="44983" title="Kalakani" label="Habibullah Kalakani"/>
<link wikidata="Q152265" start="45276" end="45295" title="Mohammad Zahir Shah" label="Mohammad Zahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q66310588" start="45391" end="45425" title="Afghan tribal revolts of 1944–1947" label="Afghan tribal revolts of 1944–1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q84219158" start="45515" end="45528" title="Mazrak Zadran" label="Mazrak Zadran"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799245" start="45533" end="45540" title="Salemai" label="Salemai"/>
<link wikidata="Q137752" start="45616" end="45636" title="Mohammad Hashim Khan" label="Mohammad Hashim Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380164" start="45762" end="45778" title="Shah Mahmud Khan" label="Shah Mahmud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="45971" end="45990" title="Mohammed Daoud Khan" label="Mohammed Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="46729" end="46774" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="46896" end="46901" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="46925" end="46944" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Nur Muhammad Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="46949" end="46964" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="47025" end="47032" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="47049" end="47062" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="47318" end="47337" title="Mohammad Daoud Khan" label="Mohammad Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q852163" start="47465" end="47472" title="lumbago" label="lumbago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="47898" end="47943" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134733" start="47952" end="47968" title="Mir Akbar Khyber" label="Mir Akbar Khyber"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="48201" end="48216" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="48275" end="48280" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="48437" end="48456" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Nur Muhammad Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="48641" end="48656" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="48682" end="48695" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="48697" end="48715" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417129" start="48720" end="48737" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party" label="General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="48784" end="48818" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="48913" end="48928" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="48984" end="48997" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="49522" end="49538" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q463843" start="49697" end="49703" title="chador" label="chador"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="49781" end="49800" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q465835" start="49911" end="49927" title="Anahita Ratebzad" label="Anahita Ratebzad"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="50411" end="50422" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q864936" start="50445" end="50458" title="state atheism" label="state atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="50481" end="50486" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="50656" end="50668" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642246" start="50790" end="50809" title="Afghan Armed Forces" label="Afghan Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798487" start="51268" end="51288" title="Pul-e-Charkhi prison" label="Pul-e-Charkhi prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084127" start="52117" end="52146" title="Islam in Afghanistan" label="Afghan understanding of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="52322" end="52330" title="Islamist" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="52381" end="52388" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="52467" end="52475" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642246" start="52597" end="52612" title="Military of Afghanistan" label="Afghan military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="52736" end="52757" title="Presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="Carter administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585785" start="52784" end="52804" title="Operation Cyclone" label="assistance to rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="52903" end="52920" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q333430" start="52961" end="52975" title="Charlie Wilson (Texas politician)" label="Charlie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="52980" end="52983" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q438659" start="52992" end="53006" title="Gust Avrakotos" label="Gust Avrakotos"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="53082" end="53094" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223697" start="53248" end="53262" title="FIM-92 Stinger" label="FIM-92 Stinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="53263" end="53285" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="53406" end="53409" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="ISI"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="53527" end="53535" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500929" start="53766" end="53781" title="Afghan refugees" label="Afghan refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689219" start="53785" end="53793" title="Afghans in Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689221" start="53798" end="53802" title="Afghans in Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689053" start="53846" end="53859" title="Afghan Americans" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="54415" end="54427" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="54433" end="54437" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q207728" start="54473" end="54492" title="Mohammad Najibullah" label="Mohammad Najibullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q384928" start="54542" end="54546" title="KHAD" label="KHAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="54620" end="54628" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="54647" end="54674" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419166" start="54692" end="54701" title="Hamid Gul" label="Hamid Gul"/>
<link wikidata="Q183303" start="54905" end="54914" title="Jalalabad" label="Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="55183" end="55193" title="mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="55482" end="55501" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q380474" start="55873" end="55896" title="Sibghatullah Mojaddedi" label="Sibghatuallah Mojaddedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188667" start="55989" end="56008" title="Burhanuddin Rabbani" label="Burhanuddin Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="56201" end="56220" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43944" start="56426" end="56438" title="Hamid Karzai" label="Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="56688" end="56707" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746323" start="57364" end="57375" title="Amin Saikal" label="Amin Saikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="57610" end="57622" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="57694" end="57722" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="57812" end="57816" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135114" start="57817" end="57830" title="Hezb-i Wahdat" label="Hezb-i Wahdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q138123" start="57841" end="57857" title="Abdul Ali Mazari" label="Abdul Ali Mazari"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="57980" end="57989" title="Wahhabite" label="Wahhabite"/>
<link wikidata="Q545955" start="57990" end="58008" title="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf" label="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q840809" start="58017" end="58033" title="Ittihad-i Islami" label="Ittihad-i Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q948574" start="58383" end="58396" title="Hezb-i Islami" label="Hezb-i Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="58400" end="58419" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135114" start="58446" end="58459" title="Hezb-i Wahdat" label="Hezb-i Wahdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q138123" start="58463" end="58479" title="Abdul Ali Mazari" label="Abdul Ali Mazari"/>
<link wikidata="Q840809" start="58502" end="58518" title="Ittehad-i Islami" label="Ittehad-i Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q545955" start="58522" end="58540" title="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf" label="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189989" start="58572" end="58587" title="Junbish-i Milli" label="Junbish-i Milli"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="58591" end="58610" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083533" start="58637" end="58653" title="Harakat-i Islami" label="Harakat-i Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482666" start="58680" end="58693" title="Shura-i Nazar" label="Shura-i Nazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200029" start="58811" end="58829" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="Ahmad Shah Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="58864" end="58872" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="58981" end="58988" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133587" start="59018" end="59038" title="Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam" label="Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q193968" start="59218" end="59229" title="Mullah Omar" label="Mullah Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="59276" end="59283" title="madrasa" label="madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746323" start="59448" end="59459" title="Amin Saikal" label="Amin Saikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q200029" start="60241" end="60259" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="Ahmad Shah Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q427941" start="60606" end="60636" title="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (1996–2001)" label="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871359" start="60942" end="60959" title="Battle of Kabul (1992–1996)" label="the fall of Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q200029" start="60998" end="61016" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="Ahmad Shah Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="61021" end="61040" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q309368" start="61074" end="61091" title="Northern Alliance" label="Northern Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="61280" end="61285" title="Tajik people" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="61312" end="61317" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="61336" end="61342" title="Hazara people" label="Hazara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="61356" end="61363" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtun"/>
<link wikidata="Q634160" start="61414" end="61423" title="Abdul Haq (Afghan leader)" label="Abdul Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q167139" start="61430" end="61441" title="Abdul Qadir (Afghan leader)" label="Abdul Qadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665621" start="61465" end="61487" title="Abdul Rahim Ghafoorzai" label="Abdul Rahim Ghafoorzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q165376" start="61642" end="61652" title="Badakhshan Province" label="Badakhshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173816" start="61654" end="61660" title="Kapisa Province" label="Kapisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q186395" start="61662" end="61668" title="Takhar Province" label="Takhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188157" start="61682" end="61688" title="Parwan Province" label="Parwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188147" start="61690" end="61695" title="Kunar Province" label="Kunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167485" start="61697" end="61705" title="Nuristan Province" label="Nuristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185442" start="61707" end="61714" title="Laghman Province" label="Laghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q183015" start="61716" end="61724" title="Samangan Province" label="Samangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186418" start="61726" end="61732" title="Kunduz Province" label="Kunduz"/>
<link wikidata="Q186392" start="61734" end="61738" title="Ghōr Province" label="Ghōr"/>
<link wikidata="Q171382" start="61743" end="61749" title="Bamyan Province" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="61789" end="61803" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q193968" start="62160" end="62171" title="Mullah Omar" label="Mullah Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="62321" end="62329" title="civilian" label="civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="62383" end="62390" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593711" start="62428" end="62458" title="1998 killing of Iranian diplomats in Afghanistan" label="were several Iranian diplomats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="62843" end="62858" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076828" start="62876" end="62887" title="055 Brigade" label="055 Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q40495" start="63194" end="63210" title="Pervez Musharraf" label="Pervez Musharraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4366858" start="63517" end="63531" title="Frontier Corps" label="Frontier Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="63591" end="63598" title="madrasa" label="madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="63749" end="63770" title="U.S. State Department" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="64184" end="64192" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q186316" start="64216" end="64233" title="Ayman al-Zawahiri" label="Ayman al-Zawahiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q125549897" start="65034" end="65058" title="Assassination of Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="assassination of Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q200029" start="65130" end="65148" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="Ahmad Shah Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="65150" end="65169" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="66227" end="66246" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="66250" end="66258" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q200029" start="66709" end="66727" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="Ahmad Shah Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="66757" end="66771" title="suicide attack" label="suicide attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="66851" end="66871" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="66992" end="67018" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="67038" end="67052" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q319068" start="67081" end="67103" title="Khalid Sheikh Mohammed" label="Khalid Sheikh Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="67249" end="67275" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="Operation Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="67524" end="67538" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889318" start="67566" end="67588" title="fall of Mazar-i-Sharif" label="fall of Mazar-i-Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="67681" end="67687" title="porosity" label="porous"/>
<link wikidata="Q288292" start="67688" end="67699" title="Durand Line" label="Durand Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241098" start="67793" end="67829" title="Presidency of Hamid Karzai" label="Afghan government under Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="67846" end="67885" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="International Security Assistance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="67916" end="67935" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241098" start="67955" end="67976" title="Presidency of Hamid Karzai" label="Karzai administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075999" start="68011" end="68024" title="Demography of Afghanistan" label="Afghan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="68220" end="68250" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600750" start="68348" end="68368" title="2002 loya jirga" label="emergency loya jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642246" start="68552" end="68571" title="Military of Afghanistan" label="Afghan armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8568" start="68584" end="68599" title="Afghan National Police" label="national police"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689084" start="68610" end="68623" title="Afghan National Army" label="Afghan troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="68854" end="68866" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="68960" end="68971" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145252" start="69002" end="69049" title="Maywand District murders" label="US soldiers who killed unarmed Afghan civilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182703" start="69138" end="69153" title="Afghan diaspora" label="Afghan refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331684" start="69159" end="69170" title="repatriation" label="repatriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="69226" end="69234" title="deportation" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="69240" end="69244" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752743" start="69499" end="69517" title="Taliban insurgency" label="Taliban insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="69562" end="69566" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740122" start="70492" end="70504" title="Quetta Shura" label="Quetta Shura"/>
<link wikidata="Q460322" start="70574" end="70582" title="Kai Eide" label="Kai Eide"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="70605" end="70610" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q383145" start="70728" end="70756" title="International Conference on Afghanistan, London (2010)" label="a major conference in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140706" start="70817" end="70833" title="President of Afghanistan" label="Afghan President"/>
<link wikidata="Q193968" start="70913" end="70924" title="Mullah Omar" label="Mullah Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246940" start="70926" end="70944" title="Sirajuddin Haqqani" label="Sirajuddin Haqqani"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="70949" end="70968" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192317" start="71053" end="71063" title="loya jirga" label="loya jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q477828" start="71247" end="71261" title="Amrullah Saleh" label="Amrullah Saleh"/>
<link wikidata="Q317556" start="71288" end="71305" title="Abdullah Abdullah" label="Abdullah Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192317" start="71866" end="71871" title="jirga" label="jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262124" start="72641" end="72693" title="Afghan Peace Jirga 2010" label="In June 2010 the Afghan Peace Jirga 2010 took place."/>
<link wikidata="Q28591" start="72720" end="72734" title="David Petraeus" label="David Petraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19085" start="72994" end="73018" title="death of Osama bin Laden" label="death of Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q558211" start="73098" end="73116" title="Mohammed Daud Daud" label="Mohammed Daud Daud"/>
<link wikidata="Q400858" start="73118" end="73135" title="Ahmed Wali Karzai" label="Ahmed Wali Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q768142" start="73137" end="73154" title="Jan Mohammad Khan" label="Jan Mohammad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q971952" start="73156" end="73176" title="Ghulam Haider Hamidi" label="Ghulam Haider Hamidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188667" start="73178" end="73197" title="Burhanuddin Rabbani" label="Burhanuddin Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072719" start="73237" end="73271" title="Afghanistan–Pakistan skirmishes" label="Pakistani-Afghan border skirmishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q972587" start="73336" end="73351" title="Haqqani network" label="Haqqani network"/>
<link wikidata="Q208270" start="73488" end="73523" title="Federally Administered Tribal Areas" label="Federally Administered Tribal Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078095" start="73576" end="73590" title="Pakistani Army" label="Pakistani Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="73599" end="73602" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="ISI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837656" start="73660" end="73687" title="United States Ambassador to Pakistan" label="U.S. ambassador to Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054872" start="73689" end="73703" title="Cameron Munter" label="Cameron Munter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="73977" end="73992" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q244631" start="73997" end="74009" title="Leon Panetta" label="Leon Panetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982461" start="74186" end="74209" title="Ministry of Defense (Afghanistan)" label="Afghan Defense Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q317373" start="74211" end="74229" title="Abdul Rahim Wardak" label="Abdul Rahim Wardak"/>
<link wikidata="Q543279" start="74382" end="74421" title="2011 NATO attack in Pakistan" label="NATO forces attacked Pakistani soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q172388" start="74462" end="74474" title="Ashraf Ghani" label="Ashraf Ghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q625549" start="74479" end="74486" title="Afghan presidential election, 2014" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q105694892" start="74538" end="74578" title="Withdrawal of United States troops from Afghanistan (2021)" label="United States forces and allies withdrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q107461898" start="74615" end="74652" title="2021 Taliban offensive" label="Taliban to intensify their insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q108102583" start="74680" end="74701" title="Fall of Kabul (2021)" label="Taliban entered Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q172388" start="74703" end="74718" title="Ashraf Ghani" label="President Ghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="74727" end="74737" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127745" start="74819" end="74859" title="National Resistance Front of Afghanistan" label="National Resistance Front of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108137226" start="74876" end="74884" title="Republican insurgency in Afghanistan" label="uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q974525" start="74894" end="74909" title="Panjshir Valley" label="Panjshir Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q108444479" start="74982" end="75004" title="Mohammad Hassan Akhund" label="Mohammad Hassan Akhund"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704012" start="75231" end="75254" title="Afghan frozen assets" label="frozen about $9 billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156372" start="75282" end="75301" title="Da Afghanistan Bank" label="Afghan central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="75592" end="75598" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="75655" end="75676" title="World Food Programme" label="UN World Food Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q123084902" start="75796" end="75830" title="expulsion of Afghans from Pakistan" label="expulsion of Afghans from Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500929" start="75860" end="75875" title="Afghan refugees" label="Afghan refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="76049" end="76052" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196017" start="76070" end="76096" title="Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus" label="Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075999" start="76118" end="76135" title="Demographics of Afghanistan" label="Afghan population"/>
<link wikidata="Q108102583" start="76328" end="76348" title="Fall of Kabul (2021)" label="Fall of Kabul (2021)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184566" start="76351" end="76375" title="Invasions of Afghanistan" label="Invasions of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25539862" start="76378" end="76415" title="List of Pashtun empires and dynasties" label="List of Pashtun empires and dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186111" start="76418" end="76455" title="List of heads of state of Afghanistan" label="List of heads of state of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108907486" start="76458" end="76481" title="Politics of Afghanistan" label="Politics of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805775" start="76484" end="76501" title="Timeline of Kabul" label="Timeline of Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071090" start="76504" end="76521" title="Timeline of Herat" label="Timeline of Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540307" start="77323" end="77334" title="Olaf Caroe" label="Caroe, Olaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918328" start="77562" end="77575" title="Louis Dupree (professor)" label="Dupree, Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111125" start="77640" end="77659" title="Nancy Hatch Dupree" label="Dupree, Nancy Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q62559883" start="78147" end="78165" title="Jos Gommans" label="Gommans, Jos J. L."/>
<link wikidata="Q3365444" start="78398" end="78415" title="Abdul Hai Habibi" label="Habibi, Abdul Hai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034062" start="78489" end="78504" title="János Harmatta" label="Harmatta, János"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537354" start="79662" end="79684" title="George Bruce Malleson" label="Malleson, George Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q910933" start="81503" end="81527" title="Mountstuart Elphinstone" label="Elphinstone, Mountstuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823132" start="82420" end="82455" title="Library of Congress Country Studies" label="Library of Congress Country Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365444" start="82757" end="82773" title="Abdul Hai Habibi" label="Abdul Hai Habibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111125" start="82808" end="82826" title="Nancy Hatch Dupree" label="Nancy Hatch Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="82999" end="83011" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13814" wikidata="Q1204808" url="?curid=13814" title="History of modern Greece">
<text>The history of modern Greece covers the history of Greece from the recognition by the Great Powers — the United Kingdom, France and Russia — of its independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1828 to the present day.

==Background==

The Byzantine Empire had ruled most of the Greek-speaking world since late Antiquity, but experienced a decline as a result of Muslim Arab and Seljuk Turkish invasions and was fatally weakened by the sacking of Constantinople by the Latin Crusaders in 1204. The establishment of Catholic Latin states on Greek soil, and the struggles of the Orthodox Byzantine Greeks against them, led to the emergence of a distinct Greek national identity. The Byzantine Empire was restored by the Palaiologos dynasty in 1261, but it was a shadow of its former self, and constant civil wars and foreign attacks in the 14th century brought about its terminal decline. As a result, most of Greece gradually became part of the Ottoman Empire in the late 14th and early 15th centuries, culminating in the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, the conquest of the Duchy of Athens in 1458, and of the Despotate of the Morea in 1460.

Ottoman control was largely absent in the mountainous interior of Greece, and many fled there, often becoming brigands. Otherwise, only the islands of the Aegean and a few coastal fortresses on the mainland, under Venetian and Genoese rule, remained free from Ottoman rule, but by the mid-16th century, the Ottomans had conquered most of them as well. Rhodes fell in 1522, Cyprus in 1571, and the Venetians retained Crete until 1670. The Ionian Islands were only briefly ruled by the Ottomans (Kefalonia from 1479 to 1481 and from 1485 to 1500), and remained primarily under the rule of Venice.

The first large-scale insurrection against Ottoman rule was the Orlov Revolt of the early 1770s, but it was brutally repressed. The same time, however, also marks the start of the Modern Greek Enlightenment, as Greeks who studied in Western Europe brought knowledge and ideas back to their homeland, and as Greek merchants and shipowners increased their wealth. As a result, especially in the aftermath of the French Revolution, liberal and nationalist ideas began to spread across the Greek lands.

In 1821, the Greeks rose up against the Ottoman Empire. Initial successes were followed by infighting, which almost caused the Greek struggle to collapse; nevertheless, the prolongation of the fight forced the Great Powers (Britain, Russia and France) to recognize the claims of the Greek rebels to separate statehood (Treaty of London) and intervene against the Ottomans at the Battle of Navarino. Greece was initially to be an autonomous state under Ottoman suzerainty, but by 1832, in the Treaty of Constantinople, it was recognized as a fully independent kingdom. In the meantime, the 3rd National Assembly of the Greek insurgents called upon Ioannis Kapodistrias, a former foreign minister of Russia, to take over the governance of the fledgling state in 1827.

==Administration of Ioannis Kapodistrias==
On his arrival, Kapodistrias launched a major reform and modernisation programme that covered all areas. He re-established military unity by bringing an end to the second phase of the civil war; re-organised the military, which was then able to reconquer territory lost to the Ottoman military during the civil wars; and introduced the first modern quarantine system in Greece, which brought diseases such as typhoid fever, cholera and dysentery under control for the first time since the start of the War of Independence.

Kapodistrias also negotiated with the Great Powers and the Ottoman Empire to establish the borders and degree of independence of the Greek state; signed the peace treaty that ended the War of Independence with the Ottomans; introduced the &quot;phoenix&quot;, the first modern Greek currency; organised local administration; and, in an effort to raise the living standards of the population, introduced the cultivation of the potato into Greece.

Furthermore, he tried to undermine the authority of the traditional clans (or dynasties) that he considered the useless legacy of a bygone and obsolete era. However, he underestimated the political and military strength of the &quot;capetanei&quot; (καπεταναίοι – captains) who had led the revolt against Ottoman Empire in 1821, and who had expected a leadership role in the post-revolution Government. When a dispute between the captains of Laconia and the appointed governor of the province escalated into an armed conflict, he called in Russian troops to restore order, because much of the army was controlled by captains who had been part of the rebellion.

George Finlay&#x27;s 1861 &quot;History of Greek Revolution&quot; records that by 1831 Kapodistrias&#x27;s government had become hated, chiefly by the independent Maniots, but also by the Roumeliotes and the rich and influential merchant families of Hydra, Spetses and Psara. The customs dues of the inhabitants of Hydra were the chief source of revenue for these municipalities, and they refused to hand these over to Kapodistrias. It appears that Kapodistrias had refused to convene the National Assembly and was ruling as a despot, possibly influenced by his Russian experiences. The municipality of Hydra instructed Admiral Miaoulis and Alexandros Mavrokordatos to go to Poros and seize the Hellenic Navy&#x27;s fleet there. This Miaoulis did so with the intention of preventing a blockade of the islands, so for a time it seemed as if the National Assembly would be called.

Kapodistrias called on the British and French residents to support him in putting down the rebellion, but this they refused to do. Nonetheless, an Admiral Rikord (or Ricord) took his ships north to Poros. Colonel (later General) Kallergis took a half-trained force of Greek Army regulars and a force of irregulars in support. With less than 200 men, Miaoulis was unable to make much of a fight; Fort Heidek on Bourtzi Island was overrun by the regulars and the brig &quot;Spetses&quot; (once Laskarina Bouboulina&#x27;s &quot;Agamemnon&quot;) sunk by Ricord&#x27;s force. Encircled by the Russians in the harbor and Kallergis&#x27; force on land, Poros surrendered. Miaoulis was forced to set charges in the flagship &quot;Hellas&quot; and the corvette &quot;Hydra&quot; to blow them up when he and his handful of followers returned to Hydra. Kallergis&#x27; men were enraged by the loss of the ships and sacked Poros, carrying off plunder to Nauplion.

The loss of the best ships in the fleet crippled the Hellenic Navy for many years, but it also weakened Kapodistrias&#x27; position. He did finally call the National Assembly, but his other actions triggered more opposition and that led to his downfall.

==Assassination of Kapodistrias and the creation of the Kingdom of Greece==


In 1831, Kapodistrias ordered the imprisonment of Petrobey Mavromichalis, the Bey of the Mani Peninsula, one of the wildest and most rebellious parts of Greece. This was a mortal offence to the Mavromichalis family, and on 9 October 1831 (27 September in the Julian Calendar) Kapodistrias was assassinated by Petros&#x27; brother Konstantis and son Georgios on the steps of the church of Saint Spyridon in Nafplio.

Ioannis Kapodistrias was succeeded as Governor by his younger brother, Augustinos Kapodistrias. Augustinos ruled only for six months, during which the country was very much plunged into chaos. Under the protocol signed at the London Conference of 1832 on 7 May 1832 between Bavaria and the protecting Powers, Greece was defined as an independent kingdom, free of Ottoman control, with the Arta-Volos line as its northern frontier. The protocol also dealt with the way in which a Regency was to be managed until Otto of Bavaria reached his majority to assume the throne of Greece. The Ottoman Empire was indemnified in the sum of 40,000,000 piastres for the loss of territory in the new kingdom.

==Reign of King Otto, 1833–1863==

Otto&#x27;s reign would prove troubled, but he managed to hang on for 30 years before he and his wife, Queen Amalia, left the same way they came, aboard a British warship. During the early years of his reign, a group of Bavarian regents ruled in his name, and they made themselves very unpopular by trying to impose German ideas of rigid hierarchical government on the Greeks, while keeping most significant state offices away from them. Nevertheless, they laid the foundations of a Greek administration, army, justice system and education system. Otto was sincere in his desire to give Greece good government, but he suffered from two great handicaps: his Roman Catholic faith and his childless marriage to Queen Amalia. This meant he could neither be crowned as King of Greece under the Orthodox rite nor establish a dynasty.

Otto came of age in 1835 and assumed the reins of government, but Bavarians remained as heads of the government until 1837. Otto thereafter appointed Greek ministers, although Bavarian officials still ran much of the army. At this time, Greece still had no legislature and no constitution. Discontent at the continued &quot;Bavarocracy&quot; grew until the 3 September 1843 Revolution broke out in Athens. Otto agreed to grant a constitution and convened a National Assembly that met in November of the same year. The Greek Constitution of 1844 then created a bicameral parliament consisting of an Assembly (&quot;Vouli&quot;) and a Senate (&quot;Gerousia&quot;). Power then passed into the hands of a group of Greek politicians, most of whom who had been commanders in the War of Independence against the Ottomans.

Greek politics in the 19th century was dominated by the &quot;national question&quot;. The majority of Greeks continued to live under Ottoman rule, and Greeks dreamed of liberating them all and reconstituting a state embracing all the Greek lands, with Constantinople as its capital. This was called the Great Idea (&quot;Megali Idea&quot;), and it was sustained by almost continuous rebellions against Ottoman rule in Greek-speaking territories, particularly Crete, Thessaly and Macedonia.

When the Crimean War broke out in 1854, Greece saw an opportunity to gain Ottoman-controlled territory that had large Greek populations. Greece, an Orthodox nation, had considerable support in Russia, but the Russian government decided it was too dangerous to help Greece expand its holdings. When the Russians attacked the Ottoman forces, Greece invaded Thessaly and Epirus. To block further Greek moves, the British and French occupied the main Greek port at Piraeus from April 1854 to February 1857. The Greeks, gambling on a Russian victory, incited the large-scale Epirus Revolt of 1854 as well as uprisings in Crete. The revolts failed and Greece made no gains during the Crimean War, which Russia lost.

A new generation of Greek politicians was growing increasingly intolerant of King Otto&#x27;s continuing interference in government. In 1862, the King dismissed his prime minister, the former admiral Konstantinos Kanaris, the most prominent politician of the period. This provoked a military rebellion, forcing Otto to accept the inevitable and leave the country.

The Greeks then asked Britain to send Queen Victoria&#x27;s son Prince Alfred as their new king, but this was vetoed by the other Powers. Instead, a young Danish Prince became King George I. George was a very popular choice as a constitutional monarch, and he agreed that his sons would be raised in the Greek Orthodox faith. As a reward to the Greeks for adopting a pro-British King, Britain ceded the Ionian Islands to Greece.

==Reign of King George I, 1864–1913==
At the urging of Britain and King George, Greece adopted the much more democratic Greek Constitution of 1864. The powers of the King were reduced, the Senate was abolished, and the franchise was extended to all adult males. Approval voting was used in elections, with one urn for each candidate divided into &quot;yes&quot; and &quot;no&quot; portions into which voters dropped lead beads. Nevertheless, Greek politics remained heavily dynastic, as it has always been. Family names such as Zaimis, Rallis and Trikoupis occurred repeatedly as prime ministers.

Although parties were centered around the individual leaders, often bearing their names, two broad political tendencies existed: the liberals, led first by Charilaos Trikoupis and later by Eleftherios Venizelos, and the conservatives, led initially by Theodoros Deligiannis and later by Thrasivoulos Zaimis. Trikoupis and Deligiannis dominated Greek politics in the later 19th century, alternating in office. Trikoupis favoured co-operation with Great Britain in foreign affairs, the creation of infrastructure and an indigenous industry, raising protective tariffs and progressive social legislation, while the more populist Deligiannis depended on the promotion of Greek nationalism and the &quot;Megali Idea&quot;.

Greece remained a very poor country throughout the 19th century. The country lacked raw materials, infrastructure and capital. Agriculture was mostly at the subsistence level, and the only important export commodities were currants, raisins and tobacco. Some Greeks grew rich as merchants and shipowners, and Piraeus became a major port, but little of this wealth found its way to the Greek peasantry. Greece remained hopelessly in debt to London finance houses.

By the 1890s, Greece was virtually bankrupt. Poverty was rife in the rural areas and the islands, and was eased only by large-scale emigration to the United States. There was little education in the rural areas. Nevertheless, there was progress in building communications and infrastructure, and fine public buildings were erected in Athens. The capital staged the revival of the Olympic Games in 1896, which proved a great success.
The parliamentary process developed greatly in Greece during the reign of George I. Initially, the royal prerogative in choosing his prime minister remained and contributed to governmental instability, until the introduction of the &quot;dedilomeni&quot; principle of parliamentary confidence in 1875 by the reformist Charilaos Trikoupis. Clientelism and frequent electoral upheavals however remained the norm in Greek politics, and frustrated the country&#x27;s development.

Corruption and Trikoupis&#x27; increased spending (to create necessary infrastructure such as the Corinth Canal) overtaxed the weak Greek economy, forcing the declaration of public insolvency in 1893 and to accept the imposition of an International Financial Control authority to pay off the country&#x27;s creditors.

Another political issue in 19th-century Greece was the Greek language question. The Greek people spoke a form of Greek called Demotic. Many of the educated elite saw this as a peasant dialect and were determined to restore the glories of Ancient Greek. Government documents and newspapers were consequently published in &quot;Katharevousa&quot; (purified) Greek, a form that few ordinary Greeks could read. Liberals favoured recognising Demotic as the national language, but conservatives and the Orthodox Church resisted all such efforts, to the extent that when the New Testament was translated into Demotic in 1901, riots erupted in Athens and the government fell (the &quot;Evangeliaka&quot;). This issue would continue to plague Greek politics until the 1970s.
All Greeks were united, however, in their determination to liberate the Greek-speaking provinces of the Ottoman Empire. Especially in Crete, the Cretan Revolt (1866–1869) raised nationalist fervour. When war broke out between Russian and the Ottomans in the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878), Greek popular sentiment rallied to Russia&#x27;s side, but Greece was too poor and too concerned about British intervention to enter the war officially. Nevertheless, in 1881, Thessaly and small parts of Epirus were ceded to Greece as part of the Treaty of Berlin.

Greeks in Crete continued to stage regular revolts, and in 1897, the Greek government under Theodoros Deligiannis, bowing to popular pressure, declared war on the Ottomans. In the ensuing Greco-Turkish War of 1897, the badly trained and equipped Greek army was defeated by the Ottomans. Through the intervention of the Great Powers however, Greece lost only a little territory along the border to Turkey, while Crete was established as an autonomous state under Prince George of Greece as the Cretan State.
Nationalist sentiment among Greeks in the Ottoman Empire continued to grow, and by the 1890s there were constant disturbances in Macedonia. Here, the Greeks were in competition not only with the Ottomans, but also with the Bulgarians, in an armed propaganda struggle for the hearts and minds of the ethnically mixed local population, the so-called &quot;Macedonian Struggle&quot;.

In July 1908, the Young Turk Revolution broke out in the Ottoman Empire. Taking advantage of the Ottoman internal turmoil, Austria-Hungary annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina and Bulgaria declared its independence from the Ottoman Empire. On Crete, the local population, led by a young politician named Eleftherios Venizelos, declared &quot;Enosis&quot;, union with Greece, provoking another crisis. The fact that the Greek government, led by Dimitrios Rallis, proved unable to likewise take advantage of the situation and bring Crete into the fold, rankled many Greeks, especially young military officers. These formed a secret society, the &quot;Military League&quot;, with the purpose of emulating their Ottoman colleagues to seek governmental reforms.

The resulting Goudi coup on 15 August 1909 marked a watershed in modern Greek history: as the military conspirators were inexperienced in politics, they asked Venizelos, who had impeccable liberal credentials, to come to Greece as their political adviser. Venizelos quickly established himself as a powerful political figure, and his allies won the August 1910 elections. Venizelos became prime minister in October 1910, ushering a period of 25 years where his personality would dominate Greek politics.

Venizelos initiated a major reform program, including a new and more liberal constitution and reforms in the spheres of public administration, education and economy. French and British military missions were invited for the army and navy respectively, and arms purchases were made. In the meantime, the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s weaknesses were revealed by the ongoing Italo-Turkish War in Libya.

===Balkan Wars===
Through the spring of 1912, a series of bilateral agreements between the Christian Balkan states (Greece, Bulgaria, Montenegro and Serbia) formed the Balkan League, which in October 1912 declared war on the Ottoman Empire. In the First Balkan War, the Ottomans were defeated on all fronts, and the four allies rushed to grab as much territory as they could. The Greeks occupied Thessaloniki just ahead of the Bulgarians, and also took much of Epirus with Ioannina, as well as Crete and the Aegean Islands.

The Treaty of London (1913) ended the war, but no one was left satisfied, and soon, the four allies fell out over the partition of Macedonia. In June 1913, Bulgaria attacked Greece and Serbia, beginning the Second Balkan War, but was beaten back. The Treaty of Bucharest (1913), which concluded the Second Balkan War, left Greece with southern Epirus, the southern half of Macedonia (known as Greek Macedonia), Crete and the Aegean islands, except for the Dodecanese, which had been occupied by Italy since 1911. These gains nearly doubled Greece&#x27;s area and population.

In March 1913, an anarchist, Alexandros Schinas, assassinated King George in Thessaloniki, and his son came to the throne as Constantine I. Constantine was the first Greek king born in Greece and the first to be Greek Orthodox by birth. His very name had been chosen in the spirit of romantic Greek nationalism (the &quot;Megali Idea&quot;), evoking the Byzantine emperors of that name. In addition, as the Commander-in-chief of the Greek Army during the Balkan Wars, his popularity was enormous, rivalled only by that of Venizelos, his prime minister.

==World War I and subsequent crises, 1914-1922==

When World War I broke out in 1914, the King and his prime minister Venizelos both preferred to maintain a neutral stance, in spite of Greece&#x27;s treaty of alliance with Serbia, which had been attacked by Austria-Hungary as the first belligerent action of the conflict. But when the Allies asked for Greek help in the Dardanelles campaign of 1915, offering Cyprus in exchange, their diverging views became apparent: Constantine had been educated in Germany, was married to Sophia of Prussia, sister of Kaiser Wilhelm, and was convinced of the Central Powers&#x27; victory. Venizelos, on the other hand, was an ardent anglophile, and believed in an Allied victory.

Since Greece, a maritime country, could not oppose the mighty British navy, and citing the need for a respite after two wars, King Constantine favored continued neutrality, while Venizelos actively sought Greek entry in the war on the Allied side. Venizelos resigned, but won the Greek elections of 1915 and again formed the government. When Bulgaria entered the war as a German ally in October 1915, Venizelos invited Allied forces into Greece (the Salonika front), for which he was again dismissed by Constantine.

In August 1916, after several incidents in which both sides in the war had encroached upon the still theoretically neutral Greek territory, Venizelist officers rose up in Allied-controlled Thessaloniki and Venizelos established a separate government there known as the result of a so-called Movement of National Defence. Constantine was now ruling only in what was Greece before the Balkan Wars (&quot;Old Greece&quot;), and his government was subject to repeated humiliations from the Allies. In November 1916 the French occupied Piraeus, bombarded Athens and forced the Greek fleet to surrender. The royalist troops fired at them, leading to a battle between French and Greek royalist troops. There were also riots against supporters of Venizelos in Athens (the &quot;Noemvriana&quot;).

Following the February Revolution in Russia in 1917, the Tsar&#x27;s support for his cousin Constantine was eliminated, and he was forced to leave the country, without actually abdicating, in June 1917. His second son Alexander became King, while the remaining royal family and the most prominent royalists followed him into exile. Venizelos now led a superficially united Greece into the war on the Allied side, but underneath the surface, the division of Greek society into Venizelists and anti-Venizelists, the so-called National Schism, became more entrenched.

===Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922)===

With the end of the war in November 1918, the moribund Ottoman Empire was ready to be carved up among the victors, and Greece now expected the Allies to deliver on their promises. In no small measure through the diplomatic efforts of Venizelos, Greece secured Western Thrace in the Treaty of Neuilly in November 1919 and Eastern Thrace and a zone around Smyrna in western Anatolia (already under Greek administration as the Occupation of Smyrna since May 1919) in the Treaty of Sèvres of August 1920. The future of Constantinople was left to be determined. But at the same time, a Turkish National Movement rose in Turkey led by Mustafa Kemal (later Kemal Atatürk), who set up a rival government in Ankara and was engaged in fighting the Greek army.

At this point, the fulfillment of the &quot;Megali Idea&quot; seemed near. Yet so deep was the rift in Greek society that on his return to Greece, an assassination attempt was made on Venizelos by two royalist former officers. Even more surprisingly, Venizelos&#x27; Liberal Party lost the Greek elections of November 1920, and in the Greek plebescite of 1920, the Greek people voted for the return of King Constantine from exile after the sudden death of King Alexander.

The United Opposition, which had campaigned on the slogan of an end to the Asia Minor Campaign in Anatolia, instead intensified it. But the royalist restoration had dire consequences: many veteran Venizelist officers were dismissed or left the army, while Italy and France found the return of the hated Constantine a useful pretext for switching their support to Kemal. Finally, in August 1922, the Turkish army shattered the Greek front, and took Smyrna in an operation that led to the disastrous Great Fire of Smyrna.

The Greek army evacuated not only Anatolia, but also Eastern Thrace and the islands of Imbros and Tenedos in accordance with the terms of the Treaty of Lausanne (1923). A population exchange between Greece and Turkey was agreed between the two countries, with over 1.5 million Christians and almost half a million Muslims being uprooted. This catastrophe marked the end of the &quot;Megali Idea&quot;, and left Greece financially exhausted, demoralized, and having to house and feed a proportionately huge number of Greek refugees.

==Republic and Monarchy (1922–1940)==


The catastrophe deepened the political crisis, with the returning army rising up under Venizelist officers and forcing King Constantine to abdicate again, in September 1922, in favour of his firstborn son, George II. The &quot;Revolutionary Committee&quot; headed by Colonels Stylianos Gonatas (soon to become prime minister) and Nikolaos Plastiras engaged in a witch-hunt against the royalists, culminating in the &quot;Trial of the Six&quot;.

The Greek election of 1923 was held to form a National Assembly with powers to draft a new constitution. Following a failed royalist Leonardopoulos-Gargalidis coup attempt, the monarchist parties abstained, leading to a landslide for the Liberals and their allies. King George II was asked to leave the country, and on 25 March 1924, Alexandros Papanastasiou proclaimed the Second Hellenic Republic, ratified by the Greek plebiscite of 1924 a month later.

However, the new Republic was built on unstable foundations. The National Schism lived on, as the monarchists, with the exception of Ioannis Metaxas, did not acknowledge the Venizelist-sponsored Republican regime. The army, which had power and provided many of the leading proponents of both sides, became a factor to be reckoned with, prone to intervene in politics.
Greece was diplomatically isolated and vulnerable, as the Corfu incident of 1923 showed, and the economic foundations of the state were in ruins after a decade of war and the sudden increase of the country&#x27;s population by a quarter. The refugees, however, also brought a new air into Greece. They were impoverished now, but before 1922 many had been entrepreneurs and well-educated. Staunch supporters of Venizelos and the Republic, many would radicalize and play a leading role in the nascent Communist Party of Greece.

In June 1925, General Theodoros Pangalos launched a coup and ruled as a dictator for a year until a counter-coup by another General, Georgios Kondylis, unseated him and restored the Republic. In the meantime, Pangalos managed to embroil Greece in a short-lived war with Bulgaria precipitated by the Incident at Petrich and make unacceptable concessions in Thessaloniki and its hinterland to Yugoslavia in an effort to gain its support for his revanchist policies against Turkey.

In 1928, Venizelos returned from exile. After a landslide victory in the Greek election of 1928, he formed a government. This was the only cabinet of the Second Republic to run its full four-year term, and the work it left behind was considerable. Alongside domestic reforms, Venizelos restored Greece&#x27;s frayed international relations, even initiating a Greco-Turkish reconciliation with a visit to Ankara and the signing of a Friendship Agreement in 1930.

The Great Depression hit Greece, an already poor country dependent on agricultural exports, particularly hard. Matters were made worse by the closing off of emigration to the United States, the traditional safety valve of rural poverty. High unemployment and consequent social unrest resulted, and the Communist Party of Greece made rapid advances. Venizelos was forced to default on Greece&#x27;s national debt in 1932, and he fell from office after the Greek elections of 1932. He was succeeded by a monarchist coalition government led by Panagis Tsaldaris of the People&#x27;s Party.

Two failed Venizelist military coups followed in 1933 and 1935 in an effort to preserve the Republic, but they had the opposite effect. On 10 October 1935, a few months after he suppressed the 1935 Greek coup d&#x27;état attempt, Georgios Kondylis, the former Venizelist stalwart, abolished the Republic in another coup, and declared the monarchy restored. The rigged Greek plebiscite of 1935 confirmed the regime change (with an unsurprising 97.88% of votes), and King George II returned.

King George II immediately dismissed Kondylis and appointed professor Konstantinos Demertzis as interim prime minister. Venizelos meanwhile, in exile, urged an end to the conflict over the monarchy in view of the threat to Greece from the rise of Fascist Italy. His successors as Liberal leader, Themistoklis Sophoulis and Georgios Papandreou, agreed, and the restoration of the monarchy was accepted. The Greek elections of 1936 resulted in a hung parliament, with the Communists holding the balance. As no government could be formed, Demertzis continued on. At the same time, a series of deaths left the Greek political scene in disarray: Kondylis died in February, Venizelos in March, Demertzis in April and Tsaldaris in May. The road was now clear for Ioannis Metaxas, who had succeeded Demertzis as interim prime minister.

Metaxas, a retired royalist general, believed that an authoritarian government was necessary to prevent social conflict and quell the rising power of the Communists. On 4 August 1936, with the King&#x27;s support, he suspended parliament and established the 4th of August Regime. The Communists were suppressed and the Liberal leaders went into internal exile. Patterning itself after Benito Mussolini&#x27;s Fascist Italy, Metaxas&#x27; regime promoted various concepts such as the &quot;Third Hellenic Civilization&quot;, the Roman salute, a National Organisation of Youth, and introduced measures to gain popular support, such as the Greek Social Insurance Institute (IKA), still the biggest social security institution in Greece.

Despite these efforts, the regime lacked a broad popular base or a mass movement supporting it. The Greek people were generally apathetic, without actively opposing Metaxas. Metaxas also improved the country&#x27;s defenses in preparation for the forthcoming European war, constructing, among other defensive measures, the &quot;Metaxas Line&quot;. Despite his aping of Fascism, and the strong economic ties with resurgent Nazi Germany, Metaxas followed a policy of neutrality, given Greece&#x27;s traditionally strong ties to Britain, reinforced by King George II&#x27;s personal anglophilia. In April 1939, the Italian threat suddenly loomed closer when Italy annexed Albania, whereupon Britain publicly guaranteed Greece&#x27;s borders. Thus, when World War II broke out in September 1939, Greece remained neutral.

==World War II==

Despite this declared neutrality, Greece became a target for Mussolini&#x27;s expansionist policies. Provocations against Greece included the sinking of the Greek cruiser &quot;Elli&quot; on 15 August 1940. Italian troops crossed the border on 28 October 1940, beginning the Greco-Italian War, but were stopped by a determined Greek defence that ultimately drove them back into Albania.

Metaxas died suddenly in January 1941. His death raised hopes for a liberalization of his regime and the restoration of parliamentary rule, but King George quashed these hopes when he retained the regime&#x27;s machinery in place. In the meantime, Adolf Hitler was reluctantly forced to divert German troops to rescue Mussolini from defeat, and attacked Greece through Yugoslavia and Bulgaria on 6 April 1941. Despite British assistance, the Germans overran most of the country by the end of May. The King and the government escaped to Crete, where they stayed until the end of the Battle of Crete. They then transferred to Egypt, where a Greek government in exile was established.

Greece was divided into German, Italian and Bulgarian zones and in Athens, a puppet regime was established. The members were either conservatives or nationalists with fascist leanings. The three quisling prime ministers were Georgios Tsolakoglou, the general who had signed the armistice with the Wehrmacht, Konstantinos Logothetopoulos, and Ioannis Rallis, who took office when the German defeat was inevitable and aimed primarily at combating the left-wing Resistance movement. To this end, he created the collaborationist Security Battalions.
Greece suffered terrible privations during World War II as the Germans appropriated most of the country&#x27;s agricultural production and prevented its fishing fleets from operating. As a result, and because a British blockade initially hindered foreign relief efforts, the Great Greek Famine resulted. Hundreds of thousands of Greeks perished, especially in the winter of 1941–1942. The drachma suffered one of the five worst hyperinflations in recorded history. In the mountains of the Greek mainland, in the meantime, several Greek resistance movements sprang up, and by mid-1943, the Axis forces controlled only the main towns and the connecting roads, while a &quot;Free Greece&quot; was set up in the mountains. In September 1943, the Italian occupation zones of Greece were invaded by German forces following Mussolini&#x27;s deposition and Italy&#x27;s decision to join Greece as an Allied nation in the war.

The largest resistance group, the National Liberation Front (EAM), was controlled by the Communist Party of Greece, as was the Greek People&#x27;s Liberation Army (ELAS), led by Aris Velouchiotis, and a civil war soon broke out between it and non-Communist groups such as the National Republican Greek League (EDES) in those areas liberated from the Germans. The exiled government in Cairo was only intermittently in touch with the resistance movement and exercised virtually no influence in the occupied country. Part of this was due to the unpopularity of King George II in Greece itself, but despite efforts by Greek politicians, British support ensured his retention at the head of the Cairo government.

As the German defeat drew nearer, the various Greek political factions convened in Lebanon in May 1944 under British auspices and formed a government of national unity under George Papandreou, in which EAM was represented by six ministers.

==Civil War==
German forces withdrew on 12 October 1944, and the government in exile returned to Athens. After the German withdrawal, the EAM-ELAS guerrilla army effectively controlled most of Greece, but its leaders were reluctant to take control of the country, as they knew that Soviet premier Joseph Stalin had agreed that Greece would be in the British sphere of influence after the war. Tensions between the British-backed Papandreou and the EAM, especially over the issue of disarmament of the various armed groups, led to the resignation of the latter&#x27;s ministers from the government.

A few days later, on 3 December 1944, a large-scale pro-EAM demonstration in Athens ended in violence and ushered an intense, house-to-house struggle with British and monarchist forces (the &quot;Dekemvriana&quot;). After three weeks, the Communists were defeated: the Varkiza agreement ended the conflict and disarmed ELAS, and an unstable coalition government was formed. The anti-EAM backlash grew into a full-scale &quot;White Terror&quot;, which exacerbated tensions.

The Communists boycotted the March 1946 elections, and on the same day, fighting broke out again. By the end of 1946, the Communist Democratic Army of Greece had been formed, pitted against the governmental National Army, which was backed first by Britain and after 1947 by the United States.

Communist successes in 1947–1948 enabled them to move freely over much of mainland Greece, but with extensive reorganization, the deportation of rural populations and American material support, the National Army was slowly able to regain control over most of the countryside. In 1949, the insurgents suffered a major blow, as Yugoslavia closed its borders following the split between Marshal Josip Broz Tito with the Soviet Union. Finally, in August 1949, the National Army under Marshal Alexander Papagos launched an offensive that forced the remaining insurgents to surrender or flee across the northern border into the territory of Greece&#x27;s northern Communist neighbors.

The civil war resulted in 100,000 killed and caused catastrophic economic disruption. In addition, at least 25,000 Greeks and an unspecified number of Macedonian Slavs were either voluntarily or forcibly evacuated to Eastern bloc countries, while 700,000 became displaced persons inside the country. Many more emigrated to Australia and other countries.

The postwar settlement ended Greece&#x27;s territorial expansion, which had begun in 1832. The 1947 Treaty of Paris required Italy to hand over the Dodecanese islands to Greece. These were the last majority-Greek-speaking areas to be united with the Greek state, apart from Cyprus which was a British possession until it became independent in 1960. Greece&#x27;s ethnic homogeneity was increased by the postwar expulsion of 25,000 Albanians from Epirus (see Cham Albanians). The only significant remaining minorities are the Muslims in Western Thrace (about 100,000) and a small Slavic-speaking minority in the north. Greek nationalists continued to claim southern Albania (which they called Northern Epirus), home of a significant Greek population (about 3%-12% in the whole of Albania), and the Turkish-held islands of Imvros and Tenedos, where there were smaller Greek minorities.

==Postwar Greece (1950–1973)==
After the civil war, Greece sought to join the Western democracies and became a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1952.

Since the Civil war (1946–49) but even more after that, the parties in the parliament were divided in three political concentrations. The political formation Right-Centre-Left, given the exacerbation of political animosity that had preceded dividing the country in the 40s, tended to turn the concurrence of parties into ideological positions.

In the beginning of the 1950s, the forces of the centre (EPEK) succeeded in gaining the power and under the leadership of the aged general N. Plastiras they governed for about half a four-year term. These were a series of governments having limited maneuverability and inadequate influence in the political arena. This government, as well as those that followed, was constantly under the American auspices. The defeat of EPEK in the elections of 1952, apart from increasing the repressive measures that concerned the defeated of the Civil war, also marked the end of the general political position that it represented, namely political consensus and social reconciliation.

The Left, which had been ostracized from the political life of the country, found a way of expression through the constitution of EDA (United Democratic Left) in 1951, which turned out to be a significant pole, yet steadily excluded from the decision making centres. After the disbandment of the centre as an autonomous political institution, EDA practically expanded its electoral influence to a significant part of the EAM-based Centre-Left.

The 1960s are part of the period 1953–72, during which Greek economy developed rapidly and was structured within the scope of European and worldwide economic developments. One of the main characteristics of that period was the major political event of the country&#x27;s accession in the European Economic Community, in an attempt to create a common market. The relevant treaty was contracted in 1962.

The developmental strategy adopted by the country was embodied in centrally organized five-year plans; yet their orientation was indistinct. The average annual emigration, which absorbed the excess workforce and contributed to extremely high growth rates, exceeded the annual natural increase in population. The influx of large amounts of foreign private capital was being facilitated and consumption was expanded. These, associated with the rise of tourism, the expansion of shipping activity and with the migrant remittances, had a positive effect on the country&#x27;s balance of payments.

The peak of development was registered principally in manufacturing, mainly in the textile, chemical and metallurgical industries, the growth rate of which reached 11% during 1965–70. The other large area where obvious economic and social consequences occurred was that of construction. The policy of αντιπαροχή (&quot;antiparochi&quot;, &quot;property-swap&quot;), a Greek invention which entailed the concession of construction land to developers in return for a share in the resulting multi-storey apartment buildings, favoured the creation of a class of small-medium contractors on the one hand and settled the housing system and property status on the other. However, it was also responsible for the demolition of much of the country&#x27;s traditional and 19th-century neoclassical architecture, and the transformation of Greek cities, and especially Athens, into a &quot;form-less, border-less and placeless urban landscape&quot;.

During that decade, youth culture came to the fore in society as a distinct social power with autonomous presence (creation of a new culture in music, fashion etc.) and young people displayed dynamism in the assertion of their social rights. The independence granted to Cyprus, which was mined from the very beginning, constituted the main focus of young activist mobilizations, along with struggles aiming at reforms in education, which were provisionally realized to a certain extent through the educational reform of 1964. The country reckoned on and was influenced by Europe—usually behind time—and by the current trends like never before.

===Greek military junta of 1967–1974===

The country descended into a prolonged political crisis, and elections were scheduled for late April 1967. On 21 April 1967 a group of right-wing colonels led by Colonel George Papadopoulos seized power in a coup d&#x27;état establishing the Regime of the Colonels. Civil liberties were suppressed, special military courts were established, and political parties were dissolved.

Several thousand suspected communists and political opponents were imprisoned or exiled to remote Greek islands. Alleged US support for the junta is claimed to be the cause of rising anti-americanism in Greece during and following the junta&#x27;s harsh rule. The junta&#x27;s early years also saw a marked upturn in the economy, with increased foreign investment and large-scale infrastructure works. The junta was widely condemned abroad, but inside the country, discontent began to increase only after 1970, when the economy slowed down.

Even the armed forces, the regime&#x27;s foundation, were not immune: In May 1973, a planned coup by the Hellenic Navy was narrowly suppressed, but led to the mutiny of the , whose officers sought political asylum in Italy. In response, junta leader Papadopoulos attempted to steer the regime towards a controlled democratization, abolishing the monarchy and declaring himself President of the Republic.

==Transition and democracy (1973–2009)==
On 25 November 1973, following the bloody suppression of the Athens Polytechnic uprising on 17 November, the hardliner Brigadier Dimitrios Ioannides overthrew Papadopoulos and tried to continue the dictatorship despite the popular unrest the uprising had triggered. Ioannides&#x27; attempt in July 1974 to overthrow Archbishop Makarios, the President of Cyprus, brought Greece to the brink of war with Turkey, which invaded Cyprus and occupied part of the island.

Senior Greek military officers then withdrew their support from the junta, which collapsed. Constantine Karamanlis returned from exile in France to establish a government of national unity until elections could be held. Karamanlis worked to defuse the risk of war with Turkey and also legalised the Communist Party, which had been illegal since 1947. His newly organized party, New Democracy (ND), won the elections held in November 1974 by a wide margin, and he became prime minister.

Following the 1974 referendum which resulted in the abolition of the monarchy, a new constitution was approved by parliament on 19 June 1975. Parliament elected Constantine Tsatsos as President of the Republic. In the parliamentary elections of 1977, New Democracy again won a majority of seats. In May 1980, Prime Minister Karamanlis was elected to succeed Tsatsos as president. George Rallis succeeded Karamanlis as prime minister.

On 1 January 1981, Greece became the tenth member of the European Community (now the European Union). In parliamentary elections held on 18 October 1981, Greece elected its first socialist government when the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK), led by Andreas Papandreou, won 172 of 300 seats. On 29 March 1985, after Prime Minister Papandreou declined to support President Karamanlis for a second term, triggering a constitutional crisis, Supreme Court Justice Christos Sartzetakis was elected president by the Greek parliament.

Greece had two rounds of parliamentary elections in 1989. The first coalition was between conservatives and communists to form a government with a limited mandate; the investigation for the numerous corruption scandals, including the Koskotas scandal, that was rocking Papandreou&#x27;s government. This coalition was extraordinary for the Greek society, and was the first step in healing the wounds of the Greek Civil War. After the indictment of Papandreou and new elections, a National Unity government under Xenophon Zolotas was formed to reverse the economy&#x27;s deterioration. Party leaders withdrew their support in February 1990, and elections were held on 8 April. New Democracy, led by Constantine Mitsotakis, won 150 seats in that election and subsequently gained two others. However, a split between Mitsotakis and his first foreign minister, Antonis Samaras, in 1992, led to Samaras&#x27; dismissal and the eventual collapse of the ND government. In new elections in September 1993, Papandreou returned to power.

On 17 January 1996, following a protracted illness, Papandreou resigned and was replaced as prime minister by the former Minister of Trade and Industry Costas Simitis. Within days, the new prime minister had to handle a major Greek-Turkish crisis over the Imia/Kardak islands. Simitis subsequently won re-election in the 1996 and 2000 elections. After two decades of the exuberant rhetoric of Simitis&#x27; predecessors and financial stagnation, the Greek economy was put in order and became one of the fastest-growing economies in Europe, with an average annual increase of 4.1% of gross domestic product (GDP). The performance of the Greek economy under Simitis sealed the Greek entry into the Euro currency, closing the journey of aligning Greece with the West, which started with Eleftherios Venizelos and continued with Constantine Karamanlis. Simitis also succeeded in the Cypriot accession into the EU, a diplomatic priority for Greece. In 2004, Simitis retired, and George Papandreou succeeded him as PASOK leader.

In the March 2004 elections, PASOK was defeated by New Democracy, led by Kostas Karamanlis, the nephew of the former president. The government called early elections in September 2007 (normally, elections would have been held in March 2008), and New Democracy again was the majority party in the Parliament. As a result of that defeat, PASOK undertook a party election for a new leader. In that contest, George Papandreou was reelected as the head of the socialist party in Greece. In the 2009 elections however, PASOK became the majority party in the Parliament and George Papandreou became Prime Minister of Greece. After PASOK lost its majority in the Parliament, ND and PASOK joined the smaller Popular Orthodox Rally in a grand coalition, pledging their parliamentary support for a government of national unity headed by former European Central Bank vice-president Lucas Papademos.

==Greek Government and Economic Crisis (2009–)==
===Government-Debt Crisis (2009–2018)===

From late 2009, fears of a sovereign debt crisis developed among investors concerning Greece&#x27;s ability to meet its debt obligations due to strong increase in government debt levels. This led to a crisis of confidence, indicated by a widening of bond yield spreads and risk insurance on credit default swaps compared to other countries, most importantly Germany. Downgrading of Greek government debt to junk bonds created alarm in financial markets.

On 2 May 2010, the Eurozone countries and the International Monetary Fund agreed on a loan for Greece, conditional on the implementation of harsh austerity measures. In October 2011, Eurozone leaders also agreed on a proposal to write off 50% of Greek debt owed to private creditors, increasing the EFSF to about €1 trillion and requiring European banks to achieve 9% capitalisation to reduce the risk of contagion to other countries. These austerity measures proved to be extremely unpopular with the public in Greece, precipitating demonstrations and civil unrest.

There are widespread fears that a Greek default on its debt would have global repercussions, endangering the economies of many other countries in the European Union, threatening the stability of the European currency, the euro, and possibly plunging the world into another recession. It has been speculated that the crisis may force Greece to abandon the euro and return to the drachma. In April 2014, Greece returned to the global bond market as it successfully sold €3 billion worth of five-year government bonds at a yield of 4.95%. According to the IMF, Greece will have real GDP growth of 0.6% in 2014 after five years of decline.

===Coalition government===
Following the May 2012 legislative election where the New Democracy party became the largest party in the Hellenic Parliament, Samaras, leader of ND, was asked by Greek President Karolos Papoulias to try to form a government. However, after a day of hard negotiations with the other parties in Parliament, Samaras officially announced he was giving up the mandate to form a government. The task passed to Alexis Tsipras, leader of the SYRIZA (the second-largest party) who was also unable to form a government. After PASOK also failed to negotiate a successful agreement to form a government, emergency talks with the President ended with a new election being called while Panagiotis Pikrammenos was appointed as prime minister in a caretaker government.

Voters once again took to the polls in the widely watched June 2012 election. New Democracy came out on top in a stronger position with 129 seats, compared to 108 in the May election. On 20 June 2012, Samaras successfully formed a coalition with PASOK (now led by former finance minister Evangelos Venizelos) and DIMAR. The new government would have a majority of 58, with SYRIZA, Independent Greeks (ANEL), Golden Dawn (XA) and the Communist Party (KKE) comprising the opposition. PASOK and DIMAR chose to take a limited role in Samaras&#x27; Cabinet, being represented by party officials and independent technocrats instead of MPs.

===SYRIZA victory===
In wake of the austerity measures adopted by the Samaras government, Greeks voted the anti-austerity, left-wing SYRIZA into office in the January 2015 legislative election. Samaras accepted defeat and said that his party had done much to restore the country&#x27;s finances.

SYRIZA government lost its majority in August 2015, when some of its MPs withdrew their support in favor of the governing coalition. SYRIZA won the September elections, but failed to get an outright majority. Later they formed a coalition with Independent Greeks, a right-wing party.

The party suffered heavy defeats at the 2019 European Parliament election, and prime minister and SYRIZA leader, Alexis Tsipras resigned to organize a snap election. It resulted in a majority for New Democracy, and the appointment of Kyriakos Mitsotakis as prime minister.

=== New Democracy back in power (2019–) ===

On 7 July 2019, Kyriakos Mitsotakis was sworn in as the new prime minister of Greece. He formed a centre-right government after the landslide election victory of his New Democracy party.

In March 2020, Greece&#x27;s parliament elected a non-partisan candidate, Katerina Sakellaropoulou, as the first female President of Greece.

In June 2023, conservative New Democracy party won the legislative election, meaning another four-year term as prime minister for Kyriakos Mitsotakis.

==See also==

* Timeline of Greek history
* Timeline of modern Greek history
* Economic history of Greece and the Greek world
*Investiture of Greek Sovereigns

==References==
==Sources==
* 

== Further reading==
* Beaton, Roderick. &quot;Greece: Biography of a Modern Nation&quot; (Allen Lane, 2019) 
* Beaton, Roderick, and D. Ricks, eds., &quot;The Making of Modern Greece&quot; (2009) 
* Brewer, David. &quot;The Flame of Freedom: The Greek War of Independence, 1821–1833&quot; (2001)
* Brewer, David. &quot;Greece, the Hidden Centuries: Turkish Rule from the Fall of Constantinople to Greek Independence&quot; (2010).
* Close, D. H. &quot;Greece since 1945&quot; (2002). 
* Colovas, Anthone C. &quot;A Quick History of Modern Greece&quot; (2007) excerpt and text search
* Gallant, Thomas W. &quot;Modern Greece&quot; (Brief Histories) (2001)
* Hall, Richard C. ed. &quot;War in the Balkans: An Encyclopedic History from the Fall of the Ottoman Empire to the Breakup of Yugoslavia&quot; (2014)
* Herzfeld, Michael. &quot;Ours Once More: Folklore, Ideology and the Making of Modern Greece&quot; (1986) excerpt and text search
* Kalyvas, Stathis. &quot;Modern Greece: What Everyone Needs to Know&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2015)
* Keridis, Dimitris. &quot;Historical Dictionary of Modern Greece&quot; (2009) excerpt and text search
* Miller, James E. &quot;The United States and the Making of Modern Greece: History and Power, 1950-1974&quot; (2008) excerpt and text search
* Pirounakis, N. G. &quot;The Greek Economy: Past, Present and Future&quot; (1997) 
* Woodhouse, C. M. &quot;Modern Greece: A Short History&quot; (2000) excerpt and text search

=== Historiography ===

* Boletsi, M. &quot;The futurity of things past: Thinking Greece beyond crisis.&quot; &quot;Inaugural Speech as Marilena Laskaridis Chair of Modern Greek Studies, Amsterdam, Netherlands&quot; 21 (2018) online.
* Tziovas, Dimitris. &quot;The study of modern Greece in a changing world: fading allure or potential for reinvention?.&quot; &quot;Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies&quot; 40.1 (2016): 114–125. online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1204808" start="4" end="28" title="History of modern Greece" label="history of modern Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="51" end="57" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="101" end="119" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="121" end="127" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="132" end="138" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="148" end="160" title="Greek War of Independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="170" end="184" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="234" end="250" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="357" end="368" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Muslim Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="373" end="387" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuk Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="430" end="455" title="Fourth Crusade" label="sacking of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="463" end="478" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Latin Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197995" start="518" end="530" title="Latinokratia" label="Latin states"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="580" end="596" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantine Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q207585" start="712" end="723" title="Palaiologos" label="Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="938" end="952" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="1015" end="1037" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="Fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q334714" start="1067" end="1082" title="Duchy of Athens" label="Duchy of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q604593" start="1103" end="1125" title="Despotate of the Morea" label="Despotate of the Morea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1350" end="1358" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="1363" end="1370" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="1488" end="1494" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q767935" start="1495" end="1499" title="Siege of Rhodes (1522)" label="fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="1509" end="1515" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="1552" end="1557" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q170295" start="1574" end="1588" title="Ionian Islands" label="Ionian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q178488" start="1630" end="1639" title="Kefalonia" label="Kefalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q783310" start="1796" end="1808" title="Orlov Revolt" label="Orlov Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424747" start="1912" end="1938" title="Modern Greek Enlightenment" label="Modern Greek Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2142" end="2159" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="2252" end="2259" title="Greek War of Independence" label="rose up"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2272" end="2286" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q616951" start="2551" end="2567" title="Treaty of London (1827)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q238440" start="2611" end="2629" title="Battle of Navarino" label="Battle of Navarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="2661" end="2671" title="autonomous" label="autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="2692" end="2702" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287308" start="2724" end="2748" title="Treaty of Constantinople (1832)" label="Treaty of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540065" start="2821" end="2842" title="Third National Assembly at Troezen" label="3rd National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q220430" start="2879" end="2899" title="Ioannis Kapodistrias" label="Ioannis Kapodistrias"/>
<link wikidata="Q182899" start="3391" end="3401" title="quarantine" label="quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="3451" end="3464" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="3466" end="3473" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="3478" end="3487" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380156" start="3811" end="3818" title="phoenix (currency)" label="phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="3992" end="3998" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4318" end="4332" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="4455" end="4462" title="Laconia" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996974" start="4838" end="4845" title="Maniots" label="Maniots"/>
<link wikidata="Q190600" start="4863" end="4874" title="Central Greece (geographic region)" label="Roumeliotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208319" start="4925" end="4930" title="Hydra island" label="Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q368275" start="4932" end="4939" title="Spetses" label="Spetses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330873" start="4944" end="4949" title="Psara" label="Psara"/>
<link wikidata="Q499572" start="5303" end="5311" title="Andreas Vokos Miaoulis" label="Miaoulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q459887" start="5316" end="5340" title="Alexandros Mavrokordatos" label="Alexandros Mavrokordatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q724394" start="5350" end="5355" title="Poros" label="Poros"/>
<link wikidata="Q558832" start="5710" end="5728" title="Pyotr Ivanovich Ricord" label="Rikord (or Ricord)"/>
<link wikidata="Q603886" start="5965" end="5972" title="Bourtzi (Nafplio)" label="Bourtzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562396" start="6892" end="6914" title="Petros Mavromichalis" label="Petrobey Mavromichalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="6920" end="6923" title="Bey" label="Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q745295" start="6931" end="6945" title="Mani Peninsula" label="Mani Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="7101" end="7116" title="Julian Calendar" label="Julian Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561065" start="7172" end="7182" title="Konstantinos Mavromichalis" label="Konstantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548400" start="7191" end="7199" title="Georgios Mavromichalis" label="Georgios"/>
<link wikidata="Q357093" start="7230" end="7244" title="Saint Spyridon" label="Saint Spyridon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202337" start="7248" end="7255" title="Nafplio" label="Nafplio"/>
<link wikidata="Q471297" start="7329" end="7352" title="Augustinos Kapodistrias" label="Augustinos Kapodistrias"/>
<link wikidata="Q625717" start="7484" end="7509" title="London Conference of 1832" label="London Conference of 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="7532" end="7539" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208573" start="7647" end="7651" title="Arta, Greece" label="Arta"/>
<link wikidata="Q200036" start="7652" end="7657" title="Volos" label="Volos"/>
<link wikidata="Q77067" start="7769" end="7784" title="Otto of Greece" label="Otto of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60295" start="8092" end="8104" title="Queen Amalia of Greece" label="Queen Amalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="8209" end="8216" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15845480" start="8218" end="8243" title="Regency council of Otto of Greece" label="regents ruled in his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q60295" start="8697" end="8709" title="Queen Amalia of Greece" label="Queen Amalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584397" start="9175" end="9202" title="3 September 1843 Revolution" label="3 September 1843 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601763" start="9336" end="9362" title="Greek Constitution of 1844" label="Greek Constitution of 1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="9378" end="9398" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="9888" end="9902" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q335081" start="9957" end="9968" title="Megali Idea" label="Megali Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="10095" end="10100" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="10102" end="10110" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="10115" end="10124" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="10136" end="10147" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="10588" end="10595" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383233" start="10697" end="10718" title="Epirus Revolt of 1854" label="Epirus Revolt of 1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q365201" start="11038" end="11058" title="Konstantinos Kanaris" label="Konstantinos Kanaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q158143" start="11267" end="11280" title="Duke Alfred of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142" start="11379" end="11392" title="George I of Greece" label="King George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170295" start="11606" end="11620" title="Ionian Islands" label="Ionian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142" start="11700" end="11711" title="George I of Greece" label="King George"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995220" start="11753" end="11779" title="Greek Constitution of 1864" label="Greek Constitution of 1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q526530" start="11895" end="11910" title="Approval voting" label="Approval voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q197692" start="12387" end="12406" title="Charilaos Trikoupis" label="Charilaos Trikoupis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="12420" end="12441" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q471319" start="12483" end="12504" title="Theodoros Deligiannis" label="Theodoros Deligiannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q127366" start="12518" end="12537" title="Thrasivoulos Zaimis" label="Thrasivoulos Zaimis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335081" start="12930" end="12941" title="Megali Idea" label="Megali Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691" start="13173" end="13181" title="Ribes" label="currants"/>
<link wikidata="Q13186" start="13183" end="13189" title="raisin" label="raisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="13195" end="13202" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="13259" end="13266" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13564" end="13577" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080" start="13779" end="13807" title="1896 Summer Olympics" label="revival of the Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="14115" end="14139" title="Confidence and supply" label="parliamentary confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q197692" start="14165" end="14184" title="Charilaos Trikoupis" label="Charilaos Trikoupis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182873" start="14422" end="14435" title="Corinth Canal" label="Corinth Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092023" start="14498" end="14515" title="National bankruptcy" label="public insolvency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546395" start="14698" end="14721" title="Greek language question" label="Greek language question"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="14769" end="14776" title="Modern Greek" label="Demotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="14881" end="14894" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35961" start="14969" end="14981" title="Katharevousa" label="Katharevousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="15211" end="15224" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668235" start="15554" end="15579" title="Cretan Revolt (1866–1869)" label="Cretan Revolt (1866–1869)"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="15667" end="15696" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="15874" end="15882" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q180484" start="15902" end="15908" title="Epirus (region)" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="15945" end="15961" title="Treaty of Berlin (1878)" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q657055" start="16152" end="16177" title="Greco-Turkish War (1897)" label="Greco-Turkish War of 1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q170396" start="16426" end="16449" title="Prince George of Greece" label="Prince George of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q72785" start="16457" end="16469" title="Cretan State" label="Cretan State"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="16600" end="16609" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277369" start="16825" end="16844" title="Greek Struggle for Macedonia" label="Macedonian Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298662" start="16871" end="16892" title="Young Turk Revolution" label="Young Turk Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="16910" end="16924" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="16976" end="16991" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="17000" end="17022" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="17027" end="17035" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="17151" end="17172" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q369063" start="17189" end="17195" title="Enosis" label="Enosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209144" start="17291" end="17307" title="Dimitrios Rallis" label="Dimitrios Rallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q760023" start="17496" end="17511" title="Military League" label="Military League"/>
<link wikidata="Q760023" start="17619" end="17629" title="Goudi coup" label="Goudi coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601761" start="18166" end="18199" title="Greek Constitution of 1911" label="new and more liberal constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="18475" end="18492" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="Italo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="18628" end="18636" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="18638" end="18648" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="18653" end="18659" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q239225" start="18672" end="18685" title="Balkan League" label="Balkan League"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="18752" end="18768" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="18900" end="18912" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q180484" start="18965" end="18971" title="Epirus (region)" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183199" start="18977" end="18985" title="Ioannina" label="Ioannina"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="18998" end="19003" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q878481" start="19012" end="19026" title="Aegean Islands" label="Aegean Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q584617" start="19033" end="19056" title="Treaty of London (1913)" label="Treaty of London (1913)"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="19160" end="19169" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="19236" end="19253" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q500067" start="19280" end="19306" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1913)" label="Treaty of Bucharest (1913)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="19422" end="19437" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131555" start="19485" end="19495" title="Dodecanese" label="Dodecanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="19524" end="19529" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147447" start="19634" end="19652" title="Alexandros Schinas" label="Alexandros Schinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124079910" start="19654" end="19678" title="Assassination of George I of Greece" label="assassinated King George"/>
<link wikidata="Q335081" start="19927" end="19938" title="Megali Idea" label="Megali Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="20060" end="20071" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="20214" end="20225" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="20495" end="20501" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="20530" end="20550" title="Dardanelles campaign" label="Dardanelles campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="20569" end="20575" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="20661" end="20668" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q155822" start="20685" end="20702" title="Sophia of Prussia" label="Sophia of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="20714" end="20728" title="Wilhelm II of Germany" label="Kaiser Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="20755" end="20769" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q541557" start="20829" end="20839" title="anglophile" label="anglophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556138" start="21157" end="21180" title="Greek legislative election, May 1915" label="Greek elections of 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="21296" end="21302" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262377" start="21327" end="21341" title="Macedonian front (World War I)" label="Salonika front"/>
<link wikidata="Q12879472" start="21685" end="21713" title="Movement of National Defence" label="Movement of National Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="21925" end="21932" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564426" start="22164" end="22174" title="Noemvriana" label="Noemvriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="22198" end="22217" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="22221" end="22227" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151742" start="22402" end="22411" title="Alexander of Greece (king)" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564160" start="22660" end="22671" title="Venizelism" label="Venizelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346487" start="22708" end="22723" title="National Schism" label="National Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="23047" end="23061" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q269267" start="23069" end="23086" title="Treaty of Neuilly" label="Treaty of Neuilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q171323" start="23108" end="23122" title="Eastern Thrace" label="Eastern Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="23141" end="23147" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="23159" end="23167" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451365" start="23211" end="23231" title="Occupation of Smyrna" label="Occupation of Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q182515" start="23255" end="23271" title="Treaty of Sèvres" label="Treaty of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="23368" end="23393" title="Turkish National Movement" label="Turkish National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="23402" end="23408" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="23416" end="23429" title="Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="23486" end="23492" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q937927" start="23805" end="23818" title="Liberal Party (Greece)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565898" start="23828" end="23860" title="Greek legislative election, 1920" label="Greek elections of November 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566090" start="23873" end="23897" title="Greek plebiscite, 1920" label="Greek plebescite of 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="24086" end="24105" title="Asia Minor Campaign" label="Asia Minor Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205622" start="24509" end="24529" title="Great Fire of Smyrna" label="Great Fire of Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q658437" start="24619" end="24625" title="Imbros" label="Imbros"/>
<link wikidata="Q211817" start="24630" end="24637" title="Tenedos" label="Tenedos"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="24674" end="24699" title="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)" label="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131017" start="24703" end="24748" title="population exchange between Greece and Turkey" label="population exchange between Greece and Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563263" start="25048" end="25062" title="Greek refugees" label="Greek refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q152935" start="25311" end="25320" title="George II of Greece" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q708293" start="25381" end="25398" title="Stylianos Gonatas" label="Stylianos Gonatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q449445" start="25435" end="25453" title="Nikolaos Plastiras" label="Nikolaos Plastiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629002" start="25526" end="25542" title="Trial of the Six" label="Trial of the Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066853" start="25555" end="25577" title="Greek legislative election, 1923" label="Greek election of 1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998931" start="25684" end="25722" title="Leonardopoulos-Gargalidis coup attempt" label="Leonardopoulos-Gargalidis coup attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q734996" start="25885" end="25909" title="Alexandros Papanastasiou" label="Alexandros Papanastasiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q265824" start="25925" end="25949" title="Second Hellenic Republic" label="Second Hellenic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066847" start="25967" end="25991" title="Greek plebiscite, 1924" label="Greek plebiscite of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q189139" start="26141" end="26156" title="Ioannis Metaxas" label="Ioannis Metaxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008840" start="26434" end="26448" title="Corfu incident" label="Corfu incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q192406" start="26875" end="26900" title="Communist Party of Greece" label="Communist Party of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q515693" start="26925" end="26943" title="Theodoros Pangalos (general)" label="Theodoros Pangalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="26975" end="26983" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q167278" start="27036" end="27053" title="Georgios Kondylis" label="Georgios Kondylis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048886" start="27202" end="27221" title="Incident at Petrich" label="Incident at Petrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="27259" end="27271" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="27294" end="27304" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565880" start="27456" end="27478" title="Greek legislative election, 1928" label="Greek election of 1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="27850" end="27866" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="28021" end="28034" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q192406" start="28148" end="28173" title="Communist Party of Greece" label="Communist Party of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566016" start="28301" end="28324" title="Greek legislative election, 1932" label="Greek elections of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q728895" start="28387" end="28404" title="Panagis Tsaldaris" label="Panagis Tsaldaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q782419" start="28412" end="28431" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Greece)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998933" start="28627" end="28662" title="1935 Greek coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="1935 Greek coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q167278" start="28664" end="28681" title="Georgios Kondylis" label="Georgios Kondylis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454881" start="28802" end="28826" title="Greek plebiscite, 1935" label="Greek plebiscite of 1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q708377" start="28995" end="29017" title="Konstantinos Demertzis" label="Konstantinos Demertzis"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="29172" end="29185" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q545617" start="29221" end="29243" title="Themistoklis Sophoulis" label="Themistoklis Sophoulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q311207" start="29248" end="29267" title="Georgios Papandreou" label="Georgios Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565999" start="29331" end="29354" title="Greek legislative election, 1936" label="Greek elections of 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="29369" end="29384" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q192406" start="29395" end="29405" title="Communist Party of Greece" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358836" start="30012" end="30032" title="4th of August Regime" label="4th of August Regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="30139" end="30155" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q841184" start="30282" end="30294" title="Roman salute" label="Roman salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371316" start="30298" end="30328" title="National Organisation of Youth" label="National Organisation of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257909" start="30397" end="30423" title="Social Insurance Institute" label="Social Insurance Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355486" start="30818" end="30830" title="Metaxas Line" label="Metaxas Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="30912" end="30924" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q714644" start="31151" end="31166" title="Italian invasion of Albania" label="annexed Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31240" end="31252" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q637886" start="31483" end="31513" title="Greek cruiser Elli (1912)" label="Greek cruiser &amp;quot;Elli&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q223604" start="31601" end="31618" title="Greco-Italian War" label="Greco-Italian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="31704" end="31711" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="31962" end="31974" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="32059" end="32074" title="Battle of Greece" label="attacked Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="32083" end="32093" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153316" start="32296" end="32311" title="Battle of Crete" label="Battle of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="32338" end="32343" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112644" start="32353" end="32378" title="Greek government in exile" label="Greek government in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="32474" end="32487" title="puppet regime" label="puppet regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="32529" end="32542" title="Conservatism" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="32546" end="32558" title="nationalists" label="nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546863" start="32592" end="32600" title="quisling" label="quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q471242" start="32622" end="32642" title="Georgios Tsolakoglou" label="Georgios Tsolakoglou"/>
<link wikidata="Q707189" start="32705" end="32733" title="Konstantinos Logothetopoulos" label="Konstantinos Logothetopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q707184" start="32739" end="32753" title="Ioannis Rallis" label="Ioannis Rallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="32905" end="32921" title="collaborationist" label="collaborationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q663751" start="32922" end="32941" title="Security Battalions" label="Security Battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="32986" end="32998" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558509" start="33218" end="33236" title="Great Famine (Greece)" label="Great Greek Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546443" start="33332" end="33339" title="Modern drachma" label="drachma"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="33371" end="33385" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q490035" start="33473" end="33499" title="Greek Resistance" label="Greek resistance movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q192254" start="33896" end="33921" title="National Liberation Front (Greece)" label="National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q192406" start="33951" end="33976" title="Communist Party of Greece" label="Communist Party of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="34026" end="34030" title="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="ELAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q704222" start="34138" end="34170" title="National Republican Greek League" label="National Republican Greek League"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="34246" end="34251" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q311207" start="34745" end="34762" title="George Papandreou (senior)" label="George Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="35109" end="35122" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714457" start="35127" end="35133" title="percentages agreement" label="agreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473722" start="35607" end="35618" title="Dekemvriana" label="Dekemvriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q321933" start="35680" end="35697" title="Varkiza agreement" label="Varkiza agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054964" start="35830" end="35854" title="White Terror (Greece)" label="&amp;quot;White Terror&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q822042" start="35914" end="35934" title="Greek legislative election, 1946" label="March 1946 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186143" start="36017" end="36042" title="Democratic Army of Greece" label="Democratic Army of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="36163" end="36176" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196099" start="36549" end="36554" title="Tito–Stalin split" label="split"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="36571" end="36586" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="36596" end="36608" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q312046" start="36667" end="36684" title="Alexander Papagos" label="Alexander Papagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="37010" end="37026" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonian Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="37076" end="37088" title="Eastern bloc" label="Eastern bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="37182" end="37191" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="37314" end="37329" title="Paris Peace Treaties, 1947" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q131555" start="37362" end="37372" title="Dodecanese" label="Dodecanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25484341" start="37672" end="37686" title="Chameria Issue" label="Cham Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151103" start="37739" end="37764" title="Muslim minority (Greece)" label="Muslims in Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q35952" start="37793" end="37808" title="Slavic language (Greece)" label="Slavic-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="37879" end="37886" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q550369" start="37906" end="37921" title="Northern Epirus" label="Northern Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q658437" start="38035" end="38041" title="Imvros" label="Imvros"/>
<link wikidata="Q211817" start="38046" end="38053" title="Tenedos" label="Tenedos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="38224" end="38258" title="NATO" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558610" start="38671" end="38675" title="EPEK" label="EPEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q201478" start="39418" end="39421" title="United Democratic Left" label="EDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="40021" end="40048" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="40076" end="40089" title="European Single Market" label="common market"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="40708" end="40727" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="41505" end="41530" title="neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059289" start="41689" end="41702" title="youth culture" label="youth culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q156505" start="42525" end="42544" title="Georgios Papadopoulos" label="George Papadopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="42563" end="42579" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q504081" start="42597" end="42619" title="Greek military junta of 1967–1974" label="Regime of the Colonels"/>
<link wikidata="Q574827" start="42918" end="42934" title="anti-americanism" label="anti-americanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129369" start="43382" end="43395" title="Hellenic Navy" label="Hellenic Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204796" start="43580" end="43606" title="Metapolitefsi" label="controlled democratization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628742" start="43784" end="43811" title="Athens Polytechnic uprising" label="Athens Polytechnic uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q460912" start="43852" end="43871" title="Dimitrios Ioannides" label="Dimitrios Ioannides"/>
<link wikidata="Q153509" start="44050" end="44058" title="Makarios III" label="Makarios"/>
<link wikidata="Q841760" start="44064" end="44083" title="President of Cyprus" label="President of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050999" start="44139" end="44153" title="Turkish invasion of Cyprus" label="invaded Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156806" start="44280" end="44302" title="Constantine Karamanlis" label="Constantine Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="44326" end="44332" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="44566" end="44579" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510840" start="44594" end="44603" title="Greek legislative election, 1974" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602054" start="44689" end="44704" title="Greek republic referendum, 1974" label="1974 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q365209" start="44836" end="44855" title="Constantine Tsatsos" label="Constantine Tsatsos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409203" start="44859" end="44884" title="President of Greece" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337928" start="44893" end="44916" title="Greek legislative election, 1977" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q252657" start="45055" end="45068" title="George Rallis" label="George Rallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="45167" end="45185" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="45195" end="45209" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337898" start="45215" end="45238" title="Greek legislative election, 1981" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="45319" end="45349" title="Panhellenic Socialist Movement" label="Panhellenic Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="45366" end="45384" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q132775350" start="45531" end="45552" title="Greek constitutional crisis of 1985" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q344729" start="45576" end="45596" title="Christos Sartzetakis" label="Christos Sartzetakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20552390" start="45879" end="45895" title="Koskotas scandal" label="Koskotas scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="46052" end="46067" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q318009" start="46157" end="46173" title="Xenophon Zolotas" label="Xenophon Zolotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q312013" start="46343" end="46365" title="Constantine Mitsotakis" label="Constantine Mitsotakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532458" start="46389" end="46397" title="Greek legislative election, 1990" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57806" start="46502" end="46517" title="Antonis Samaras" label="Antonis Samaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052966" start="46610" end="46623" title="Greek legislative election, 1993" label="new elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="46826" end="46840" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119012" start="46930" end="46941" title="Imia/Kardak" label="Imia/Kardak"/>
<link wikidata="Q737031" start="46995" end="46999" title="Greek legislative election, 1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934584" start="47004" end="47018" title="Greek legislative election, 2000" label="2000 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q45074" start="47124" end="47137" title="Economy of Greece" label="Greek economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="47257" end="47279" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="47370" end="47374" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="47458" end="47479" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q156806" start="47499" end="47521" title="Constantine Karamanlis" label="Constantine Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953962" start="47553" end="47582" title="Cyprus in the European Union" label="Cypriot accession into the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q151917" start="47648" end="47665" title="George Papandreou (junior)" label="George Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518129" start="47705" end="47725" title="Greek legislative election, 2004" label="March 2004 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q188978" start="47771" end="47788" title="Kostas Karamanlis" label="Kostas Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204824" start="47848" end="47863" title="Greek legislative election, 2007" label="early elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131031" start="48052" end="48066" title="Panhellenic Socialist Movement leadership election, 2007" label="party election"/>
<link wikidata="Q863595" start="48187" end="48201" title="2009 Greek parliamentary election" label="2009 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q226085" start="48397" end="48419" title="Popular Orthodox Rally" label="Popular Orthodox Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q164281" start="48568" end="48583" title="Lucas Papademos" label="Lucas Papademos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092023" start="48704" end="48725" title="sovereign debt crisis" label="sovereign debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="48840" end="48855" title="government debt" label="government debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="48927" end="48931" title="bond (finance)" label="bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053548" start="48932" end="48944" title="yield spread" label="yield spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q624028" start="48968" end="48987" title="credit default swap" label="credit default swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050279" start="49084" end="49094" title="High-yield debt" label="junk bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="49178" end="49205" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q499041" start="49537" end="49546" title="Financial contagion" label="contagion"/>
<link wikidata="Q429958" start="50378" end="50407" title="Greek legislative election, May 2012" label="May 2012 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="50418" end="50431" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57806" start="50491" end="50498" title="Antonis Samaras" label="Samaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409203" start="50527" end="50542" title="President of Greece" label="Greek President"/>
<link wikidata="Q57303" start="50543" end="50560" title="Karolos Papoulias" label="Karolos Papoulias"/>
<link wikidata="Q312015" start="50769" end="50783" title="Alexis Tsipras" label="Alexis Tsipras"/>
<link wikidata="Q222897" start="50799" end="50805" title="Coalition of the Radical Left" label="SYRIZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="50881" end="50886" title="Panhellenic Socialist Movement" label="PASOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q318492" start="51037" end="51059" title="Panagiotis Pikrammenos" label="Panagiotis Pikrammenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112663" start="51097" end="51117" title="caretaker government" label="caretaker government"/>
<link wikidata="Q751553" start="51178" end="51196" title="Greek legislative election, June 2012" label="June 2012 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q312994" start="51408" end="51427" title="Evangelos Venizelos" label="Evangelos Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128823" start="51433" end="51438" title="Democratic Left (Greece)" label="DIMAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q222897" start="51888" end="51894" title="SYRIZA" label="SYRIZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091742" start="51914" end="51947" title="January 2015 Greek legislative election" label="January 2015 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q20853340" start="52200" end="52219" title="September 2015 Greek legislative election" label="September elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q529666" start="52296" end="52314" title="Independent Greeks" label="Independent Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999180" start="52377" end="52410" title="2019 European Parliament election" label="2019 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q312015" start="52450" end="52464" title="Alexis Tsipras" label="Alexis Tsipras"/>
<link wikidata="Q552751" start="52571" end="52590" title="Kyriakos Mitsotakis" label="Kyriakos Mitsotakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053460" start="52798" end="52806" title="2019 Greek legislative election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57415743" start="52918" end="52942" title="Katerina Sakellaropoulou" label="Katerina Sakellaropoulou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409203" start="52964" end="52983" title="President of Greece" label="President of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q118616507" start="53041" end="53061" title="June 2023 Greek legislative election" label="legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794" start="53154" end="53179" title="Timeline of Greek history" label="Timeline of Greek history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806111" start="53182" end="53214" title="Timeline of modern Greek history" label="Timeline of modern Greek history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333478" start="53217" end="53263" title="Economic history of Greece and the Greek world" label="Economic history of Greece and the Greek world"/>
<link wikidata="Q125565598" start="53265" end="53296" title="Investiture of Greek Sovereigns" label="Investiture of Greek Sovereigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663544" start="53914" end="53932" title="Gallant, Thomas W." label="Gallant, Thomas W."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13815" wikidata="Q122248" url="?curid=13815" title="Heracles">
<text>Heracles ( ; ), born Alcaeus (, &quot;Alkaios&quot;) or Alcides (, &quot;Alkeidēs&quot;), was a divine hero in Greek mythology, the son of Zeus and Alcmene, and the foster son of Amphitryon. He was a descendant and half-brother (as they are both sired by the god Zeus) of Perseus.

He was the greatest of the Greek heroes, the ancestor of royal clans who claimed to be Heracleidae (), and a champion of the Olympian order against chthonic monsters. In Rome and the modern West, he is known as Hercules, with whom the later Roman emperors, in particular Commodus and Maximian, often identified themselves. Details of his cult were adapted to Rome as well.

==Origin==
Many popular stories were told of his life, the most famous being the twelve Labours of Hercules; Alexandrian poets of the Hellenistic age drew his mythology into a high poetic and tragic atmosphere. His figure, which initially drew on Near Eastern motifs such as the lion-fight, was widely known.

Heracles was the greatest of Hellenic chthonic heroes, but unlike other Greek heroes, no tomb was identified as his. Heracles was both hero and god, as Pindar says &quot;heros theos&quot;; at the same festival sacrifice was made to him, first as a hero, with a chthonic libation, and then as a god, upon an altar: thus he embodies the closest Greek approach to a &quot;demi-god&quot;.

The core of the story of Heracles has been identified by Walter Burkert as originating in Neolithic hunter culture and traditions of shamanistic crossings into the netherworld. It is possible that the myths surrounding Heracles were based on the life of a real person or several people whose accomplishments became exaggerated with time.

===Hero or god===
Heracles&#x27;s role as a culture hero, whose death could be a subject of mythic telling (see below), was accepted into the Olympian Pantheon during Classical times. This created an awkwardness in the encounter with Odysseus in the episode of &quot;Odyssey&quot; XI, called the Nekuia, where Odysseus encounters Heracles in Hades:

Ancient critics were aware of the problem of the aside that interrupts the vivid and complete description, in which Heracles recognizes Odysseus and hails him, and some modern critics deny that the verse&#x27;s beginning, in Fagles&#x27;s translation &quot;His ghost I mean ...&quot;, was part of the original composition: &quot;once people knew of Heracles&#x27; admission to Olympus, they would not tolerate his presence in the underworld&quot;, remarks Friedrich Solmsen, noting that the interpolated verses represent a compromise between conflicting representations of Heracles.

==Cult==
The ancient Greeks celebrated the festival of the &quot;Heracleia&quot;, which commemorated the death of Heracles, on the second day of the month of Metageitnion (which would fall in late July or early August). What is believed to be an Egyptian Temple of Heracles in the Bahariya Oasis dates to 21 BCE. A reassessment of Ptolemy&#x27;s descriptions of the island of Malta attempted to link the site at Ras ir-Raħeb with a temple to Heracles, but the arguments are not conclusive. Several ancient cities were named Heraclea in his honor. A very small island close to the island of Lemnos was called Neai (Νέαι), from νέω, which means &quot;I dive/swim&quot;, because Heracles swam there. According to the Greek legends, the Herculaneum in Italy was founded by him.

Several &quot;poleis&quot; provided two separate sanctuaries for Heracles, one recognizing him as a god, the other only as a hero. Sacrifice was made to him as a hero and as a god within the same festival. This ambiguity helped create the Heracles cult especially when historians (e.g. Herodotus) and artists encouraged worship such as the painters during the time of the Peisistratos, who often presented Heracles entering Olympus in their works.

Some sources explained that the cult of Heracles persisted because of the hero&#x27;s ascent to heaven and his suffering, which became the basis for festivals, ritual, rites, and the organization of mysteries. There is the observation, for example, that sufferings (&quot;pathea&quot;) gave rise to the rituals of grief and mourning, which came before the joy in the mysteries in the sequence of cult rituals. Also, like the case of Apollo, the cult of Heracles had been sustained through the years by absorbing local cult figures such as those who share the same nature. He was also constantly invoked as a patron for men, especially the young ones. For example, he was considered the ideal in warfare so he presided over gymnasiums and the &quot;ephebes&quot; or those men undergoing military training.

There were ancient towns and cities that also adopted Heracles as a patron deity, contributing to the spread of his cult. There was the case of the royal house of Macedonia, which claimed lineal descent from the hero, primarily for purposes of divine protection and legitimator of actions.

The earliest evidence that shows the worship of Heracles in popular cult was in 6th century BCE (121–122 and 160–165) via an ancient inscription from Phaleron. After the 4th century BCE, Heracles became identified with the Phoenician God Melqart

Oitaeans worshiped Heracles and called him Cornopion (Κορνοπίων) because he helped them get rid of locusts (which they called &quot;cornopes&quot;), while the citizens of Erythrae at Mima called him Ipoctonus (ἰποκτόνος) because he destroyed the vine-eating &quot;ips&quot; (ἀμπελοφάγων ἰπῶν), a kind of cynips wasp, there.

Near the town of Bura in Achaea, there was a statue of Heracles on the River Buraicus and an oracle in a cave. People who consulted this oracle first prayed before the statue, then threw four dice from a mound that was always kept ready onto a table. These dice were marked with certain characters, the significance of which was elucidated by an artwork shown in the cave. Because of this town Heracles had the epithet Buraicus (Βουραϊκός).

==Character==

Extraordinary strength, courage, ingenuity, and sexual prowess with both males and females were among the characteristics commonly attributed to him. Heracles used his wits on several occasions when his strength did not suffice, such as when laboring for the king Augeas of Elis, wrestling the giant Antaeus, or tricking Atlas into taking the sky back onto his shoulders. Together with Hermes he was the patron and protector of gymnasia and palaestrae. His iconographic attributes are the lion skin and the club. These qualities did not prevent him from being regarded as a playful figure who used games to relax from his labors and played a great deal with children. By conquering dangerous archaic forces he is said to have &quot;made the world safe for mankind&quot; and to be its benefactor. Heracles was an extremely passionate and emotional individual, capable of doing both great deeds for his friends (such as wrestling with Thanatos on behalf of Prince Admetus, who had regaled Heracles with his hospitality, or restoring his friend Tyndareus to the throne of Sparta after he was overthrown) and being a terrible enemy who would wreak horrible vengeance on those who crossed him, as Augeas, Neleus, and Laomedon all found out to their cost. There was also a coldness to his character, which was demonstrated by Sophocles&#x27;s depiction of the hero in &quot;The Trachiniae&quot;. Heracles threatened his marriage with his desire to bring two women under the same roof; one of them was his wife Deianeira.

In the works of Euripides involving Heracles, his actions were partly driven by forces outside rational human control. By highlighting the divine causation of his madness, Euripides problematized Heracles&#x27;s character and status within the civilized context. This aspect is also highlighted in &quot;Hercules Furens&quot; where Seneca linked the hero&#x27;s madness to an illusion and a consequence of Heracles&#x27;s refusal to live a simple life, as offered by Amphitryon. It was indicated that he preferred the extravagant violence of the heroic life and that its ghosts eventually manifested in his madness and that the hallucinatory visions defined Heracles&#x27;s character.

==Mythology==

===Birth and childhood===

A major factor in the well-known tragedies surrounding Heracles is the hatred that the goddess Hera, wife of Zeus, had for him. Heracles was the son of the affair Zeus had with the mortal woman Alcmene. When Zeus desired Alcmene, he decided to make one night last three by ordering Helios, the god of the sun, not to rise for three days, so he would have more time with Alcmene. Zeus made love to her after disguising himself as her husband, Amphitryon, home early from war (Amphitryon did return later the same night, and Alcmene became pregnant with his son at the same time, a case of heteropaternal superfecundation, where a woman carries twins sired by different fathers). Thus, Heracles&#x27;s very existence proved at least one of Zeus&#x27;s many illicit affairs, and Hera often conspired against Zeus&#x27;s mortal offspring as revenge for her husband&#x27;s infidelities. His twin mortal brother, son of Amphitryon, was Iphicles, father of Heracles&#x27;s charioteer Iolaus.

On the night Heracles and Iphicles were to be born, Hera, knowing of her husband Zeus&#x27;s adultery, persuaded Zeus to swear an oath that the child born that night to a member of the House of Perseus would become High King. Hera did this knowing that while Heracles was to be born a descendant of Perseus, so too was Eurystheus. Once the oath was sworn, Hera hurried to Alcmene&#x27;s dwelling and slowed the birth of Heracles and Iphicles by forcing Ilithyia, goddess of childbirth, to sit cross-legged with her clothing tied in knots, thereby causing the twins to be trapped in the womb. Meanwhile, Hera caused Eurystheus to be born prematurely, making him High King in place of Heracles. She would have permanently delayed Heracles&#x27;s birth had she not been fooled by Galanthis, Alcmene&#x27;s servant, who lied to Ilithyia, saying that Alcmene had already delivered the baby. Upon hearing this, she jumped in surprise, loosing the knots and inadvertently allowing Alcmene to give birth to Heracles and Iphicles.

Fear of Hera&#x27;s revenge led Alcmene to expose the infant Heracles, but he was taken up and brought to Hera by his half-sister Athena, who played an important role as protectress of heroes. Hera did not recognize Heracles and nursed him out of pity. Heracles suckled so strongly that he caused Hera pain, and she pushed him away. Her milk sprayed across the heavens and there formed the Milky Way. Athena brought the infant back to his mother, and he was subsequently raised by his parents.

The child was originally given the name Alcides by his parents; it was only later that he became known as Heracles. He was renamed Heracles in an unsuccessful attempt to mollify Hera, with Heracles meaning Hera&#x27;s &quot;pride&quot; or &quot;glory&quot;. He and his twin were just eight months old when Hera sent two giant snakes into the children&#x27;s chamber. Iphicles cried from fear, but his brother grabbed a snake in each hand and strangled them. He was found by his nurse playing with them on his cot as if they were toys. Astonished, Amphitryon sent for the seer Tiresias, who prophesied an unusual future for the boy, saying he would vanquish numerous monsters.

===Youth===
After killing his music tutor Linus with a lyre, he was sent to tend cattle on a mountain by his foster father Amphitryon. Here, according to an allegorical parable, &quot;The Choice of Heracles&quot;, invented by the sophist Prodicus (c. 400 BCE) and reported in Xenophon&#x27;s &quot;Memorabilia&quot; 2.1.21–34, he was visited by two allegorical figures—Vice and Virtue—who offered him a choice between a pleasant and easy life or a severe but glorious life: he chose the latter. This was part of a pattern of &quot;ethicizing&quot; Heracles over the 5th century BCE.

Later, in Thebes, Heracles married King Creon&#x27;s daughter, Megara.

===Labours of Heracles===
In a fit of madness, induced by Hera, Heracles killed his children and Megara. After his madness had been cured with hellebore by Antikyreus, the founder of Antikyra, he realized what he had done and fled to the Oracle of Delphi. Unbeknownst to him, the Oracle was guided by Hera. He was directed to serve King Eurystheus for ten years and perform any task Eurystheus required of him. Eurystheus decided to give Heracles ten labours, but after completing them, Heracles was cheated by Eurystheus when he added two more, resulting in the Twelve Labors of Heracles. If he succeeded, he would be purified of his sin and, as myth says, he would become a god, and be granted immortality.

Other traditions place Heracles&#x27;s madness at a later time and relate the circumstances differently. In some traditions, there was only a divine reason for Heracles&#x27;s twelve labours: Zeus, in his desire not to leave Heracles the victim of Hera&#x27;s jealousy, made her promise that, if Heracles executed twelve great works in the service of Eurystheus, he should become immortal. In the play &quot;Herakles&quot; by Euripides, Heracles is driven to madness by Hera and kills his children after his twelve labours.

Despite the difficulty, Heracles accomplished these tasks, but Eurystheus in the end did not accept the success the hero had with two of the labours: the cleansing of the Augean stables, because Heracles was going to accept pay for the labour; and the killing of the Lernaean Hydra, as Heracles&#x27;s nephew, Iolaus, had helped him burn the stumps of the multiplying heads.

Eurystheus set two more tasks, fetching the Golden Apples of Hesperides and capturing Cerberus. In the end, with ease, the hero successfully performed each added task, bringing the total number of labours up to twelve.

Not all versions and writers give the labours in the same order. The &quot;Bibliotheca&quot; (2.5.1–2.5.12) gives the following order:

;1. Slay the Nemean Lion: Heracles defeated a lion that was attacking the city of Nemea with his bare hands. After he succeeded he wore the skin as a cloak to demonstrate his power over the opponent he had defeated.
;2. Slay the nine-headed Lernaean Hydra: A fire-breathing monster with multiple serpent heads. When one head was cut off, two would grow in its place. It lived in a swamp near Lerna. Hera had sent it in hopes it would destroy Heracles&#x27;s home city because she thought it was invincible. With help from his nephew Iolaus, he defeated the monster and dipped his arrows in its poisoned blood, thus envenomizing them.
;3. Capture the Golden Hind of Artemis: Not to kill, but to catch, this hind that was sacred to Artemis. A different, but still difficult, task. It cost time, but, having chased it for a year, Heracles wore out the Hind. Artemis intervened, but as soon as Heracles explained the situation to her, she allowed him to take it, and he presented it alive to Eurystheus.
;4. Capture the Erymanthian Boar: A fearsome marauding boar on the loose. Eurystheus set Heracles the Labour of catching it, and bringing it to Mycenae. Again, a time-consuming task, but the tireless hero found the beast, captured it, and brought it to its final spot. Patience is the heroic quality in the third and fourth Labours.
;5. Clean the Augean stables in a single day: The Augean stables were the home of 3,000 cattle with poisoned faeces which Augeas had been given by his father Helios. Heracles was given the near impossible task of cleaning the stables of the diseased faeces. He accomplished it by digging ditches on both sides of the stables, moving them into the ditches, and then diverting the rivers Alpheios and Pineios to wash the ditches clean.
;6. Slay the Stymphalian Birds: These aggressive man-eating birds were terrorizing a forest near Lake Stymphalia in northern Arcadia. Heracles scared them with a rattle given to him by Athena, to frighten them into flight away from the forest, allowing him to shoot many of them with his bow and arrow and bring back this proof of his success to Eurystheus.
;7. Capture the Cretan Bull: The harmful bull, father of the Minotaur, was laying waste to the lands round Knossos on Crete. It embodied the rage of Poseidon at having his gift (the Bull) to Minos diverted from the intention to sacrifice it to himself. Heracles captured it, and carried it on his shoulders to Eurystheus in Tiryns. Eurystheus released it, when it wandered to Marathon which it then terrorized, until killed by Theseus.
;8. Steal the Mares of Diomedes: Stealing the horses from Diomedes&#x27;s stables that had been trained by their owner to feed on human flesh was his next challenge. Heracles&#x27;s task was to capture them and hand them over to Eurystheus. He accomplished this task by feeding King Diomedes to the animals before binding their mouths shut.
;9. Obtain the belt of Hippolyta, Queen of the Amazons: Hippolyta was an Amazon queen and she had a belt given to her by her father Ares. Heracles had to retrieve the belt and return it to Eurystheus. He and his band of companions received a rough welcome because, ordered by Hera, the Amazons were supposed to attack them; however, against all odds, Heracles completed the task and secured the belt for Eurystheus.
;10. Obtain the cattle of the monster Geryon: The next challenge was to capture the herd guarded by a two-headed dog called Orthrus, which belonged to Geryon; a giant with three heads and six arms who lived in Erytheia. While travelling to Erytheia, he passed through the Libyan desert and was so annoyed by the heat he shot an arrow at Helios, the sun. Helios, impressed, lent him his giant cup which Heracles used to find Orthrus, the herdsman Erytion and the owner, Geryon. He killed the first two with his club and the third with a poisoned arrow. Heracles then herded the cattle and, with difficulty, took them to Eurystheus.
;11. Steal the golden apples of the Hesperides: These sacred fruits were protected by Hera who had set Ladon, a fearsome hundred-headed dragon as the guardian. Heracles had to first find where the garden was; he asked Nereus for help. He came across Prometheus on his journey. Heracles shot the eagle eating at his liver, and in return he helped Heracles with knowledge that his brother would know where the garden was. His brother Atlas offered him help with the apples if he would hold up the heavens while he was gone. Atlas tricked him and did not return. Heracles returned the trickery and managed to get Atlas taking the burden of the heavens once again, and returned the apples to Mycenae.
;12. Capture and bring back Cerberus: His last labour and undoubtedly the riskiest. Eurystheus was so frustrated that Heracles was completing all the tasks that he had given him that he imposed one he believed to be impossible: Heracles had to go down into the underworld of Hades and capture the ferocious three-headed dog Cerberus who guarded the gates. He used the souls to help convince Hades to hand over the dog. He agreed to give him the dog if he used no weapons to obtain him. Heracles succeeded and took the creature back to Mycenae, causing Eurystheus to be fearful of the power and strength of this hero.

===Further adventures===
After completing these tasks, Heracles fell in love with Princess Iole of Oechalia. King Eurytus of Oechalia promised his daughter, Iole, to whoever could beat his sons in an archery contest. Heracles won but Eurytus abandoned his promise. Heracles&#x27;s advances were spurned by the king and his sons, except for one: Iole&#x27;s brother Iphitus. Heracles killed the king and his sons—excluding Iphitus—and abducted Iole. Iphitus became Heracles&#x27;s best friend. However, once again, Hera drove Heracles mad and he threw Iphitus over the city wall to his death. Once again, Heracles purified himself through three years of servitude—this time to Queen Omphale of Lydia.

===Omphale===

Omphale was a queen or princess of Lydia. As penalty for a murder, imposed by Xenoclea, the Delphic Oracle, Heracles was to serve as her slave for a year. He was forced to do women&#x27;s work and to wear women&#x27;s clothes, while she wore the skin of the Nemean Lion and carried his olive-wood club. After some time, Omphale freed Heracles and married him. Some sources mention a son born to them who is variously named. It was at that time that the cercopes, mischievous wood spirits, stole Heracles&#x27;s weapons. He punished them by tying them to a stick with their faces pointing downward.

===Hylas===
While walking through the wilderness, Heracles was set upon by the Dryopes. In Apollonius of Rhodes&#x27;s &quot;Argonautica&quot;, it is recalled that Heracles had mercilessly slain their king, Theiodamas, over one of the latter&#x27;s bulls, and made war upon the Dryopes &quot;because they gave no heed to justice in their lives&quot;. After the death of their king, the Dryopes gave in and offered him Prince Hylas. He took the youth on as his weapons bearer. Years later, Heracles and Hylas joined the crew of the &quot;Argo&quot;. As Argonauts, they only participated in part of the journey. In Mysia, Hylas was kidnapped by the nymphs of a local spring. Heracles, searched for a long time but Hylas had fallen in love with the nymphs and never showed up again. In other versions, he simply drowned. Either way, the &quot;Argo&quot; set sail without them.

===Rescue of Prometheus===
Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Theogony&quot; and Aeschylus&#x27; &quot;Prometheus Unbound&quot; both tell that Heracles shot and killed the eagle that tortured Prometheus (which was his punishment by Zeus for stealing fire from the gods and giving it to mortals). Heracles freed the Titan from his chains and his torments. Prometheus then made predictions regarding further deeds of Heracles.

===Heracles&#x27;s constellation===
On his way back to Mycenae from Iberia, having obtained the Cattle of Geryon as his tenth labour, Heracles came to Liguria in North-Western Italy where he engaged in battle with two giants, Albion and Bergion or Dercynus, sons of Poseidon. The opponents were strong; Heracles was in a difficult position so he prayed to his father Zeus for help. Under the aegis of Zeus, Heracles won the battle. It was this kneeling position of Heracles when he prayed to his father Zeus that gave the name Engonasin (&quot;Εγγόνασιν&quot;, derived from &quot;εν γόνασιν&quot;), meaning &quot;on his knees&quot; or &quot;the Kneeler&quot;,
to the constellation known as Heracles&#x27;s constellation. The story, among others, is described by Dionysius of Halicarnassus.

===Heracles&#x27;s sack of Troy===

Before Homer&#x27;s Trojan War, Heracles had made an expedition to Troy and sacked it. Previously, Poseidon had sent a sea monster (Greek: kētŏs, Latin: cetus) to attack Troy. The story is related in several digressions in the &quot;Iliad&quot; (7.451–53; 20.145–48; 21.442–57) and is found in pseudo-Apollodorus&#x27;s Bibliotheke (2.5.9). This expedition became the theme of the Eastern pediment of the Temple of Aphaea. Laomedon planned on sacrificing his daughter Hesione to Poseidon in the hope of appeasing him. Heracles happened to arrive (along with Telamon and Oicles) and agreed to kill the monster if Laomedon would give him the horses received from Zeus as compensation for Zeus&#x27;s kidnapping Ganymede. Laomedon agreed. Heracles killed the monster, but Laomedon went back on his word. Accordingly, in a later expedition, Heracles and his followers attacked Troy and sacked it. Then they slew all Laomedon&#x27;s sons present there save Podarces, who was renamed Priam, who saved his own life by giving Heracles a golden veil Hesione had made. Telamon took Hesione as a war prize and they had a son, Teucer.

===Colony at Sardinia===
After Heracles had performed his Labours, gods told him that before he passed into the company of the gods, he should create a colony at Sardinia and make his sons, whom he had with the daughters of Thespius, the leaders of the settlement. When his sons became adults, he sent them together with Iolaus to the island.

===Other adventures===
* Heracles defeated the Bebryces (ruled by King Mygdon) and gave their land to Prince Lycus of Mysia, son of Dascylus.
* He killed the robber Termerus.
* Heracles visited Evander with Antor, who then stayed in Italy.
* Heracles killed King Amyntor of Ormenium for not allowing him into his kingdom. He also killed King Emathion of Arabia.
* Heracles kills the Egyptian King Busiris and his followers after they attempt to sacrifice him to the gods.
* Heracles killed Lityerses after beating him in a contest of harvesting.
* Heracles killed Periclymenus at Pylos.
* Heracles killed Syleus for forcing strangers to hoe a vineyard.
* Heracles rivaled with Lepreus and eventually killed him.
* Heracles founded the city Tarentum (modern Taranto in Italy).
* Heracles learned music from Linus (and Eumolpus), but killed him after Linus corrected his mistakes and caned him with rods. He learned how to wrestle from Autolycus. He killed the famous boxer Eryx of Sicily in a match.
* Heracles was an Argonaut. He killed Alastor and his brothers.

* When Hippocoon overthrew his brother, Tyndareus, as King of Sparta, Heracles reinstated the rightful ruler and killed Hippocoon and his sons.
* Heracles killed Cycnus, the son of Ares. The expedition against Cycnus, in which Iolaus accompanied Heracles, is the ostensible theme of a short epic attributed to Hesiod, &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot;. 
* When Ares tried to avenge Cycnus, Heracles defeated him, with the help of Athena.
* Heracles killed the Giants Alcyoneus and Porphyrion.
* Heracles killed Antaeus the giant who was immortal while touching the earth, by picking him up and holding him in the air while strangling him.
* Pygmies tried to kill Heracles because they were brothers of Antaeus and wanted to avenge Antaeus&#x27;s death, but failed.
* Heracles went to war with Augeias after he denied him a promised reward for clearing his stables. Augeias remained undefeated due to the skill of his two generals, the Molionides, and after Heracles fell ill, his army was badly beaten. Later, however, he was able to ambush and kill the Molionides, and thus march into Elis, sack it, and kill Augeias and his sons.
* Heracles visited the house of Admetus on the day Admetus&#x27;s wife, Alcestis, had agreed to die in his place. Admetus, not wanting to turn Heracles away, nor wanting to burden him with his sadness, welcomes him and instructs the servants not to inform Heracles of what has occurred. Heracles, thus unaware of Alcestis&#x27;s fate, enjoys the hospitality of Admetus&#x27;s house, drinking and revelling, which angers the servants, who wish to mourn as is their right. One scolds the guest and Heracles is ashamed of his actions. By hiding beside the grave of Alcestis, Heracles was able to surprise Death when he came to collect her, and by squeezing him tight until he relented, was able to persuade Death to return Alcestis to her husband.
* Heracles challenged wine god Dionysus to a drinking contest and lost, resulting in his joining the Thiasus for a period.
* Heracles also appears in Aristophanes&#x27;s &quot;The Frogs&quot;, in which Dionysus seeks out the hero to find a way to the underworld. Heracles is greatly amused by Dionysus&#x27;s appearance and jokingly offers several ways to commit suicide before finally offering his knowledge of how to get to there.
* Heracles appears as the ancestral hero of Scythia in Herodotus&#x27;s text. While Heracles is sleeping out in the wilderness, a half-woman, half-snake creature steals his horses. Heracles eventually finds the creature, but she refuses to return the horses until he has sex with her. After doing so, he takes back his horses, but before leaving, he hands over his belt and bow, and gives instructions as to which of their children should found a new nation in Scythia.
* In the fifth book of the &quot;New History&quot;, ascribed by Photius to Ptolemy Hephaestion, mention that Heracles did not wear the skin of the Nemean lion, but that of a certain Lion giant killed by Heracles whom he had challenged to single combat.
* Heracles fought and killed Cacus.
* Heracles fought with the Sicani people, killing many including the famous Leucaspis.
* Heracles encountered Scylla during a journey to Sicily and slew her.

===Death===

This is described in Sophocles&#x27;s &quot;Trachiniae&quot; and in Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; Book IX. Having wrestled and defeated Achelous, god of the Acheloos river, Heracles takes Deianira as his wife. Travelling to Tiryns, a centaur, Nessus, offers to help Deianira across a fast flowing river while Heracles swims it. However, Nessus is true to the archetype of the mischievous centaur and tries to steal Deianira away while Heracles is still in the water. Angry, Heracles shoots him with his arrows dipped in the poisonous blood of the Lernaean Hydra. Thinking of revenge, Nessus gives Deianira his blood-soaked tunic before he dies, telling her it will &quot;excite the love of her husband&quot;.

Several years later, rumor tells Deianira that she has a rival for the love of Heracles. Deianira, remembering Nessus&#x27;s words, gives Heracles the bloodstained shirt. Lichas, the herald, delivers the shirt to Heracles. However, it is still covered in the Hydra&#x27;s blood from Heracles&#x27;s arrows, and this poisons him, tearing his skin and exposing his bones. Before he dies, Heracles throws Lichas into the sea, thinking he was the one who poisoned him (according to several versions, Lichas turns to stone, becoming a rock standing in the sea, named for him). Heracles then uproots several trees and builds a funeral pyre on Mount Oeta, which Poeas, father of Philoctetes, lights. As his body burns, only his immortal side is left. Through Zeus&#x27;s apotheosis, Heracles rises to Olympus as he dies.

No one but Heracles&#x27;s friend Philoctetes (Poeas in some versions) would light his funeral pyre (in an alternative version, it is Iolaus who lights the pyre). For this action, Philoctetes or Poeas received Heracles&#x27;s bow and arrows, which were later needed by the Greeks to defeat Troy in the Trojan War.

Philoctetes confronted Paris and shot a poisoned arrow at him. The Hydra poison subsequently led to the death of Paris. The Trojan War, however, continued until the Trojan Horse was used to defeat Troy.

According to Herodotus, Heracles lived 900 years before Herodotus&#x27;s own time (c. 1300 BCE).

=== Godhood ===
After his death in the pyre, Heracles ascended to Olympus as a god, and having finally reconciled with Hera, he got her daughter Hebe as his fourth and final wife. They had two sons together, Alexiares and Anicetus.

When Typhon attacked Olympus, all gods transformed into animals and ran terrified to Egypt; Heracles became a fawn.

In the &quot;Dialogues of the Gods&quot;, a satirical work by Lucian of Samosata, Heracles and another recently deified mortal, Asclepius, fight over which gets the most prestigious seat on the table of the gods, each arguing that they are the one who deserve it. Zeus intervenes, and rules in favour of Asclepius, reasoning that the best seat should go to the one who became a god first.

Heracles also appears to Philoctetes, stranded and abandoned by the other Greeks on Lemnos island, and through his &quot;deus ex machina&quot; intervention, Philoctetes is convinced to join the other Greeks at Troy, where he kills Paris with Heracles&#x27;s arrows.

=== Christian chronology ===
In Christian circles, a Euhemerist reading of the widespread Heracles cult was attributed to a historical figure who had been offered cult status after his death. Thus Eusebius, &quot;Preparation of the Gospel&quot; (10.12), reported that Clement could offer historical dates for Heracles as a king in Argos: &quot;from the reign of Heracles in Argos to the of Heracles himself and of Asclepius there are comprised thirty-eight years, according to Apollodorus the chronicler: and from that point to the deification of Castor and Pollux fifty-three years: and somewhere about this time was the capture of Troy.&quot;

Readers with a literalist bent, following Clement&#x27;s reasoning, have asserted from this remark that, since Heracles ruled over Tiryns in Argos at the same time that Eurystheus ruled over Mycenae, and since at about this time Linus was Heracles&#x27;s teacher, one can conclude, based on Jerome&#x27;s date—in his universal history, his &quot;Chronicon&quot;—given to Linus&#x27;s notoriety in teaching Heracles in 1264 BCE, that Heracles&#x27;s death and deification occurred 38 years later, in approximately 1226 BCE.

==Lovers==

===Women===

====Marriages====

During the course of his life, Heracles married four times.

* Heracles waged a victorious war against the kingdom of Orchomenus in Boeotia and married his first wife Megara, daughter of Creon, king of Thebes. But he killed their children in a fit of madness sent by Hera and, consequently, was obliged to become the servant of Eurystheus. According to Pseudo-Apollodorus (Bibliotheca, 2.4.12) Megara was unharmed. According to Hyginus (Fabulae, 32), Heracles also killed Megara.

* His second wife was Omphale, the Lydian queen to whom he was delivered as a slave (Hyginus, Fabulae, 32).
* His third marriage was to Deianira, for whom he had to fight the river god Achelous (upon Achelous&#x27;s defeat, Heracles removed one of his horns and gave it to some nymphs who turned it into the cornucopia). Soon after they wed, Heracles and Deianira had to cross a river, and a centaur named Nessus offered to help Deianira across but then attempted to rape her. Enraged, Heracles shot the centaur from the opposite shore with a poisoned arrow (tipped with the Lernaean Hydra&#x27;s blood) and killed him. As he lay dying, Nessus plotted revenge, told Deianira to gather up his blood and spilled semen and, if she ever wanted to prevent Heracles from having affairs with other women, she should apply them to his vestments. Nessus knew that his blood had become tainted by the poisonous blood of the Hydra, and would burn through the skin of anyone it touched. Later, when Deianira suspected that Heracles was fond of Iole, she soaked a shirt of his in the mixture, creating the poisoned shirt of Nessus. Heracles&#x27;s servant, Lichas, brought him the shirt and he put it on. Instantly he was in agony, the cloth burning into him. As he tried to remove it, the flesh ripped from his bones. Heracles chose a voluntary death, asking that a pyre be built for him to end his suffering. After death, the gods transformed him into an immortal, or alternatively, the fire burned away the mortal part of the demigod, so that only the god remained. After his mortal parts had been incinerated, he could become a full god and join his father and the other Olympians on Mount Olympus.
* His fourth marriage was to Hebe, his last wife.

====Affairs====

An episode of his female affairs that stands out was his stay at the palace of Thespius, king of Thespiae, who wished him to kill the Lion of Cithaeron. As a reward, the king offered him the chance to perform sexual intercourse with all fifty of his daughters in one night. Heracles complied and they all became pregnant and all bore sons. This is sometimes referred to as his Thirteenth Labour. Many of the kings of ancient Greece traced their lines to one or another of these, notably the kings of Sparta and Macedon.

Yet another episode of his female affairs that stands out was when he carried away the oxen of Geryon, he also visited the country of the Scythians. Once there, while asleep, his horses suddenly disappeared. When he woke and wandered about in search of them, he came into the country of Hylaea. He then found the dracaena of Scythia (sometimes identified as Echidna) in a cave. When he asked whether she knew anything about his horses, she answered, that they were in her own possession, but that she would not give them up, unless he would consent to stay with her for a time. Heracles accepted the request, and became by her the father of Agathyrsus, Gelonus, and Scythes. The last of them became king of the Scythians, according to his father&#x27;s arrangement, because he was the only one among the three brothers that was able to manage the bow which Heracles had left behind and to use his father&#x27;s girdle.

Dionysius of Halicarnassus writes that Heracles and Lavinia, daughter of Evander, had a son named Pallas.

===Men===

Many myths were later &#x27;homosexualized&#x27; after the institutionalization of pederasty and athletic nudity c. 630 BC. Plutarch, in his &quot;Eroticos,&quot; maintains that Heracles&#x27;s male lovers were beyond counting. Of these, the one most closely linked to Heracles is the Theban Iolaus. According to a myth thought to be of ancient origins, Iolaus was Heracles&#x27;s charioteer and squire. Heracles in the end helped Iolaus find a wife. Plutarch reports that down to his own time, male couples would go to Iolaus&#x27;s tomb in Thebes to swear an oath of loyalty to the hero and to each other. He also mentions Admetus, known in myth for assisting the Calydonian boar hunt, as one of Heracles&#x27;s male lovers.

One of Heracles&#x27;s male lovers, and one represented in ancient as well as modern art, is Hylas, who sailed with Heracles on the Argo.

Another reputed male lover of Heracles is Elacatas, who was honored in Sparta with a sanctuary and yearly games, Elacatea. The myth of their love is an ancient one.

Abdera&#x27;s eponymous hero, Abderus, was another of Heracles&#x27;s lovers. He was said to have been entrusted with—and slain by—the carnivorous mares of Thracian Diomedes. Heracles founded the city of Abdera in Thrace in his memory, where he was honored with athletic games.

Another myth is that of Iphitus.

Another story is the one of his love for Nireus, who was &quot;the most beautiful man who came beneath Ilion&quot; (&quot;Iliad&quot;, 673). But Ptolemy adds that certain authors made Nireus out to be a son of Heracles.

Pausanias makes mention of Sostratus, a youth of Dyme, Achaea, as a lover of Heracles. Sostratus was said to have died young and to have been buried by Heracles outside the city. The tomb was still there in historical times, and the inhabitants of Dyme honored Sostratus as a hero. The youth seems to have also been referred to as Polystratus.

A series of lovers are only known in later literature. Among these are Eurystheus, Adonis, Corythus, Argus, and Nestor who was said to have been loved for his wisdom. In the account of Ptolemaeus Chennus, Nestor&#x27;s role as lover explains why he was the only son of Neleus to be spared by the hero.

A scholiast commenting on Apollonius&#x27;s &quot;Argonautica&quot; lists the following male lovers of Heracles: &quot;Hylas, Philoctetes, Diomus, Perithoas, and Phrix, after whom a city in Libya was named&quot;. Diomus is also mentioned by Stephanus of Byzantium as the eponym of the deme Diomeia of the Attic phyle Aegeis: Heracles is said to have fallen in love with Diomus when he was received as guest by Diomus&#x27;s father Collytus. Perithoas and Phrix are otherwise unknown, and so is the version that suggests a sexual relationship between Heracles and Philoctetes.

==Children==

All of Heracles&#x27;s marriages and almost all of his affairs resulted in births of a number of sons and at least four daughters.
One of the most prominent is Hyllus, the son of Heracles and Deianeira or Melite. The term &quot;Heracleidae&quot;, although it could refer to all of Heracles&#x27;s children and further descendants, is most commonly used to indicate the descendants of Hyllus, in the context of their lasting struggle for return to Peloponnesus, out of where Hyllus and his brothers—the children of Heracles by Deianeira—were thought to have been expelled by Eurystheus.

The children of Heracles by Megara are collectively well known because of their ill fate, but there is some disagreement among sources as to their number and individual names. Apollodorus lists three, Therimachus, Creontiades and Deicoon; to these Hyginus adds Ophitus and, probably by mistake, Archelaus, who is otherwise known to have belonged to the Heracleidae, but to have lived several generations later. A scholiast on Pindar&#x27; s odes provides a list of seven completely different names: Anicetus, Chersibius, Mecistophonus, Menebrontes, Patrocles, Polydorus, Toxocleitus.

Other well-known children of Heracles include Telephus, king of Mysia (by Auge), and Tlepolemus, one of the Greek commanders in the Trojan War (by Astyoche).

According to Herodotus, a line of 22 Kings of Lydia descended from Heracles and Omphale. The line was called Tylonids after his Lydian name.

The divine sons of Heracles and Hebe are Alexiares and Anicetus.

===Consorts and children===
# Megara
## Therimachus
## Creontiades
## Ophitus
## Deicoon
# Omphale
## Agelaus
## Tyrsenus
# Deianira
## Hyllus
## Ctesippus
## Glenus
## Oneites
## Macaria
## Onites
# Hebe
## Alexiares
## Anicetus
# Astydameia, daughter of Ormenus or Amyntor
## Ctesippus
# Astyoche, daughter of Phylas
## Tlepolemus
# Auge
## Telephus
# Autonoë, daughter of Piraeus / Iphinoe, daughter of Antaeus
## Palaemon
# Baletia, daughter of Baletus
## Brettus
# Barge
## Bargasus
# Bolbe
## Olynthus
# Celtine
## Celtus
# Chalciope
## Thessalus
# Chania, nymph
## Gelon
# The Scythian dracaena or Echidna
## Agathyrsus
## Gelonus
## Scythes
# Epicaste
## Thestalus
# Lavinia, daughter of Evander
## Pallas
# Malis, a slave of Omphale
## Acelus
# Meda
##Antiochus
# Melite (heroine)
# Melite (naiad)
## Hyllus (possibly)
# Myrto
## Eucleia
# Palantho of Hyperborea
## Latinus
# Parthenope, daughter of Stymphalus (son of Elatus)
## Everes (mythology)
# Phialo
## Aechmagoras
# Psophis
## Echephron
## Promachus
# Pyrene
## none known
# Rhea, Italian priestess
## Aventinus
# Thebe (daughter of Adramys)
# Tinge, wife of Antaeus
##Sophax
# 50 daughters of Thespius
## 50 sons, see Thespius#Daughters and grandchildren
# Unnamed Celtic woman
## Galates
# Unnamed female slave of Iardanus
## Alcaeus / Cleodaeus
# Unnamed daughter of Syleus (Xenodoce?)
# Unnamed daughter of Aphra
## Diodorus
# Unknown consorts
## Agylleus
## Amathous
## Azon
## Chromis
## Cyrnus
##Dexamenus
## Leucites
## Manto
## Pandaie
## Phaestus &quot;or&quot; Rhopalus
==Heracles around the world==

===Rome===

In Rome, Heracles was honored as &quot;Hercules&quot;, and had a number of distinctively Roman myths and practices associated with him under that name.

===Egypt===
Herodotus connected Heracles to the Egyptian god Shu. Also he was associated with Khonsu, another Egyptian god who was in some ways similar to Shu. As Khonsu, Heracles was worshipped at the now sunken city of Heracleion, where a large temple was constructed.

Most often the Egyptians identified Heracles with Heryshaf, transcribed in Greek as &quot;Arsaphes&quot; or &quot;Harsaphes&quot; (Ἁρσαφής). He was an ancient ram-god whose cult was centered in Herakleopolis Magna.

===Other cultures===
Via the Greco-Buddhist culture, Heraclean symbolism was transmitted to the Far East. An example remains to this day in the Nio guardian deities in front of Japanese Buddhist temples.

Herodotus also connected Heracles to Phoenician god Melqart.

Sallust mentions in his work on the Jugurthine War that the Africans believe Heracles to have died in Spain where, his multicultural army being left without a leader, the Medes, Persians, and Armenians who were once under his command split off and populated the Mediterranean coast of Africa.

Temples dedicated to Heracles abounded all along the Mediterranean coastal countries. For example, the temple of &quot;Heracles Monoikos&quot; (i.e. the lone dweller), built far from any nearby town upon a promontory in what is now the Côte d&#x27;Azur, gave its name to the area&#x27;s more recent name, Monaco.

The gateway to the Mediterranean Sea from the Atlantic Ocean, where the southernmost tip of Spain and the northernmost of Morocco face each other is, classically speaking, referred to as the Pillars of Hercules/Heracles, owing to the story that he set up two massive spires of stone to stabilise the area and ensure the safety of ships sailing between the two landmasses.

==Uses of Heracles as a name==

In various languages, variants of Heracles&#x27;s name are used as a male given name, such as Iraklis () in Modern Greek and Irakli () in Georgian.

There are many teams around the world that have this name or have Heracles as their symbol. The most popular in Greece is G.S. Iraklis Thessaloniki.

&quot;Heracleum&quot; is a genus of flowering plants in the carrot family Apiaceae. Some of the species in this genus are quite large. In particular, the giant hogweed (&quot;Heracleum mantegazzianum&quot;) is exceptionally large, growing up to 5 m tall.

==Genealogy==

; Source:





==See also==

;Other figures in Greek mythology punished by the gods include
* Atlas
* Ixion
* Medusa
* Prometheus
* Sisyphus
* Tantalus
* The Danaides

;Figures resembling Heracles in other mythological traditions
* Agilaz
* Beowulf
* Cú Chulainn
* Gilgamesh
* Lugalbanda
* Melqart
* Samson
* Thor

==Notes==
==References==
* Heracles at Theoi.com Classical literature and art
* Timeless Myths – Heracles The life and adventure of Heracles, including his twelve labours.
* Heracles, Greek Mythology Link
* Heracles (in French)
* Vollmer: Herkules (1836, in German)
* Burkert, Walter, (1977) 1985. &quot;Greek Religion&quot; (Harvard University Press).

==Further reading==
* Brockliss, William. 2017. &quot;The Hesiodic &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot;: The Text as Nightmarish Vision.&quot; &quot;Illinois Classical Studies&quot; 42.1: 1–19. . .
* Burkert, Walter. 1982. &quot;Heracles and the Master of Animals.&quot; In &quot;Structure and History in Greek Mythology and Ritual&quot;, 78–98. Sather Classical Lectures 47. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press.
* Haubold, Johannes. 2005. &quot;Heracles in the Hesiodic Catalogue of Women.&quot; In &quot;The Hesiodic Catalogue of Women: Constructions and Reconstructions.&quot; Edited by Richard Hunter, 85–98. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
*Karanika, Andromache. 2011. &quot;The End of the Nekyia: Odysseus, Heracles, and the Gorgon in the Underworld.&quot; &quot;Arethusa&quot; 44.1: 1–27.
* Padilla, Mark W. 1998. &quot;Herakles and Animals in the Origins of Comedy and Satyr Drama&quot;. In &quot;Le Bestiaire d&#x27;Héraclès: IIIe Rencontre héracléenne&quot;, edited by Corinne Bonnet, Colette Jourdain-Annequin, and Vinciane Pirenne-Delforge, 217–30. Kernos Suppl. 7. Liège: Centre International d&#x27;Etude de la Religion Grecque Antique.
* Padilla, Mark W. 1998. &quot;The Myths of Herakles in Ancient Greece: Survey and Profile&quot;. Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America.
* Papadimitropoulos, Loukas. 2008. &quot;Heracles as Tragic Hero.&quot; Classical World 101.2: 131–38. 
* Papadopoulou, Thalia. 2005. &quot;Heracles and Euripidean Tragedy.&quot; Cambridge Classical Studies. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press.
* Segal, Charles Paul. 1961. &quot;The Character and Cults of Dionysus and the Unity of the &quot;Frogs&quot;.&quot; &quot;Harvard Studies in Classical Philology&quot; 65:207–42. . .
* Stafford, Emma. 2012. &quot;Herakles. Gods and Heroes of the Ancient World.&quot; New York: Routledge.
* Strid, Ove. 2013. &quot;The Homeric Prefiguration of Sophocles&#x27; Heracles.&quot; &quot;Hermes&quot; 141.4: 381–400. .
* Woodford, Susan. 1971. &quot;Cults of Herakles in Attica.&quot; In &quot;Studies Presented to George M. A. Hanfmann.&quot; Edited by David Gordon Mitten, John Griffiths Pedley, and Jane Ayer Scott, 211–25. Monographs in Art and Archaeology 2. Mainz, Germany: Verlag Philipp von Zabern.
* Euripides. The Children of Herakles. New York: Oxford University Press, 1981.
* Euripides. Heracles. England: Shirley A. Barlow, 1996. Greek Version: Oxford University Press, 1981.

===Primary sources===
*Homer, &quot;Odyssey&quot;, 12.072 (7th century BCE)
*Sophocles, &quot;Women of Trachis&quot; ()
*Euripides, &quot;Herakles&quot; (416 BCE)
*Theocritus, &quot;Idylls&quot;, 13 (350–310 BCE)
*Callimachus, &quot;Aetia (Causes)&quot;, 24. Thiodamas the Dryopian, Fragments, 160. Hymn to Artemis (310–250? BCE)
*Apollonios Rhodios, &quot;Argonautika&quot;, I. 1175–1280 ()
*Pseudo-Apollodorus, &quot;Bibliotheca&quot; 1.9.19, 2.7.7 (140 BCE)
*Sextus Propertius, &quot;Elegies&quot;, i.20.17ff (50–15 BCE)
*Ovid, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; (8 CE)
*Ovid, &quot;Ibis&quot;, 488 (8–18 CE)
*Gaius Valerius Flaccus, &quot;Argonautica&quot;, I.110, III.535, 560, IV.1–57 (1st century)
*Hyginus, &quot;Fables&quot;, 14. Argonauts Assembled (1st century)
* Lucian. Dialogues of the Dead. Dialogues of the Sea-Gods. Dialogues of the Gods. Dialogues of the Courtesans. Translated by M. D. MacLeod. Loeb Classical Library 431. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1961.
*Philostratus the Elder, &quot;Images&quot;, ii.24 Thiodamas (170–245)
*First Vatican Mythographer, 49. Hercules et Hylas

==External links==
* Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (ca 2950 images of Heracles)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="0" end="8" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="21" end="28" title="Heracles" label="Alcaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="56" end="63" title="Heracles" label="Alcides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="96" end="102" title="Divinity" label="divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="103" end="107" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="111" end="126" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="139" end="143" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190543" start="148" end="155" title="Alcmene" label="Alcmene"/>
<link wikidata="Q206214" start="179" end="189" title="Amphitryon" label="Amphitryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="263" end="267" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="272" end="279" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q828084" start="369" end="380" title="Heracleidae" label="Heracleidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="407" end="421" title="Twelve Olympians" label="Olympian order"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="430" end="438" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="452" end="456" title="Roman mythology" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="465" end="471" title="modernity" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="472" end="476" title="western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="493" end="501" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="523" end="536" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="553" end="561" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46768" start="566" end="574" title="Maximian" label="Maximian"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="620" end="624" title="cult (religion)" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233460" start="744" end="763" title="Labours of Hercules" label="Labours of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="765" end="775" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="790" end="805" title="Hellenistic age" label="Hellenistic age"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="1004" end="1012" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="1118" end="1124" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333686" start="1236" end="1244" title="libation" label="libation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466470" start="1335" end="1343" title="demi-god" label="demi-god"/>
<link wikidata="Q61888" start="1409" end="1423" title="Walter Burkert" label="Walter Burkert"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="1485" end="1491" title="shaman" label="shaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="1833" end="1850" title="Twelve Olympians" label="Olympian Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="1925" end="1933" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="1958" end="1965" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468471" start="1987" end="1993" title="Nekuia" label="Nekuia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="2033" end="2038" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q214712" start="2497" end="2514" title="Friedrich Solmsen" label="Friedrich Solmsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145002" start="2690" end="2699" title="Heracleia (festival)" label="Heracleia"/>
<link wikidata="Q758195" start="2783" end="2795" title="Metageitnion" label="Metageitnion"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2871" end="2876" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q738878" start="2906" end="2920" title="Bahariya Oasis" label="Bahariya Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2956" end="2963" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="3001" end="3006" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15950102" start="3037" end="3049" title="Ras ir-Raħeb" label="Ras ir-Raħeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q225363" start="3149" end="3157" title="Heraclea (disambiguation)" label="Heraclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192483" start="3215" end="3221" title="Lemnos" label="Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="3358" end="3369" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q242172" start="3772" end="3784" title="Peisistratos" label="Peisistratos"/>
<link wikidata="Q843408" start="5184" end="5191" title="Melqart" label="Melqart"/>
<link wikidata="Q132378" start="5193" end="5201" title="Oitaeans" label="Oitaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q83931" start="5292" end="5298" title="locust" label="locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q723091" start="5364" end="5372" title="Erythrae" label="Erythrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q743314" start="5376" end="5380" title="Karaburun" label="Mima"/>
<link wikidata="Q147252" start="5497" end="5503" title="cynips" label="cynips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555318" start="5535" end="5539" title="Bura (Achaea)" label="Bura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495811" start="5543" end="5549" title="Achaea" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871901" start="5595" end="5603" title="Buraicus" label="Buraicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208160" start="5999" end="6006" title="courage" label="courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q207663" start="6239" end="6245" title="Augeas" label="Augeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536845" start="6249" end="6253" title="Ancient Elis" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272006" start="6275" end="6282" title="Antaeus" label="Antaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="6296" end="6301" title="Atlas (mythology)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="6361" end="6367" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q504400" start="6403" end="6411" title="Gymnasium (ancient Greece)" label="gymnasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q647160" start="6416" end="6425" title="palaestra" label="palaestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q199438" start="6464" end="6473" title="Nemean Lion" label="lion skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q392326" start="6482" end="6486" title="Club (weapon)" label="club"/>
<link wikidata="Q199647" start="6908" end="6916" title="Thanatos" label="Thanatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192109" start="6937" end="6944" title="Admetus" label="Admetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192946" start="7017" end="7026" title="Tyndareus" label="Tyndareus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="7044" end="7050" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q637955" start="7175" end="7181" title="Neleus" label="Neleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332324" start="7187" end="7195" title="Laomedon" label="Laomedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q945342" start="7343" end="7357" title="Women of Trachis" label="The Trachiniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q272000" start="7479" end="7488" title="Deianira" label="Deianeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="7507" end="7516" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785162" start="7795" end="7810" title="Hercules (Seneca)" label="Hercules Furens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="7823" end="7829" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q206214" start="7958" end="7968" title="Amphitryon" label="Amphitryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="8306" end="8313" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="8314" end="8318" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="8328" end="8332" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190543" start="8413" end="8420" title="Alcmene" label="Alcmene"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="8501" end="8507" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q206214" start="8661" end="8671" title="Amphitryon" label="Amphitryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q333428" start="8822" end="8838" title="superfecundation" label="superfecundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q738862" start="9149" end="9157" title="Iphicles" label="Iphicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q504076" start="9196" end="9202" title="Iolaus" label="Iolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="9399" end="9406" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212087" start="9524" end="9534" title="Eurystheus" label="Eurystheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q94066" start="9658" end="9666" title="Ilithyia" label="Ilithyia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386394" start="9982" end="9991" title="Galanthis" label="Galanthis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190543" start="10051" end="10058" title="Alcmene" label="Alcmene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062217" start="10271" end="10277" title="Infant exposure" label="expose"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="10358" end="10364" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q116610970" start="10457" end="10479" title="Milk of Hera" label="nursed him out of pity"/>
<link wikidata="Q656881" start="11299" end="11307" title="Tiresias" label="Tiresias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241660" start="11442" end="11447" title="Linus of Thrace" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="11455" end="11459" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q208555" start="11569" end="11576" title="parable" label="parable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607766" start="11584" end="11606" title="Hercules at the crossroads" label="The Choice of Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q297402" start="11638" end="11646" title="Prodicus" label="Prodicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="11676" end="11684" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373343" start="11698" end="11709" title="Memorabilia (Xenophon)" label="Memorabilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="11994" end="12000" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q732066" start="12024" end="12029" title="Creon of Thebes" label="Creon"/>
<link wikidata="Q929768" start="12047" end="12053" title="Megara (mythology)" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q147289" start="12199" end="12208" title="hellebore" label="hellebore"/>
<link wikidata="Q680099" start="12239" end="12247" title="Anticyra" label="Antikyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="12294" end="12310" title="Delphi" label="Oracle of Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212087" start="12393" end="12403" title="Eurystheus" label="Eurystheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233835" start="13174" end="13182" title="Herakles (Euripides)" label="Herakles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="13192" end="13201" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q504076" start="13601" end="13607" title="Iolaus" label="Iolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83496" start="13753" end="13761" title="Cerberus" label="Cerberus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="13962" end="13973" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q199438" start="14036" end="14047" title="Nemean lion" label="Nemean Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q748108" start="14105" end="14110" title="Nemea" label="Nemea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170379" start="14264" end="14278" title="Lernaean Hydra" label="Lernaean Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236078" start="14415" end="14420" title="Lerna" label="Lerna"/>
<link wikidata="Q504076" start="14556" end="14562" title="Iolaus" label="Iolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466882" start="14673" end="14695" title="Ceryneian Hind" label="Golden Hind of Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="14753" end="14760" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212087" start="15011" end="15021" title="Eurystheus" label="Eurystheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334456" start="15039" end="15055" title="Erymanthian Boar" label="Erymanthian Boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="15167" end="15174" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q207663" start="15370" end="15376" title="Augeas" label="Augean"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="15514" end="15520" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q941745" start="15735" end="15750" title="Alfeios" label="rivers Alpheios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233866" start="15755" end="15762" title="Pineios (Peloponnese)" label="Pineios"/>
<link wikidata="Q236429" start="15803" end="15820" title="Stymphalian birds" label="Stymphalian Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251026" start="15887" end="15902" title="Lake Stymphalia" label="Lake Stymphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746198" start="16164" end="16175" title="Cretan Bull" label="Cretan Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q129866" start="16209" end="16217" title="Minotaur" label="Minotaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q173527" start="16255" end="16262" title="Knossos" label="Knossos"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="16266" end="16271" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="16297" end="16305" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23168" start="16339" end="16344" title="Minos" label="Minos"/>
<link wikidata="Q217379" start="16472" end="16478" title="Tiryns" label="Tiryns"/>
<link wikidata="Q212150" start="16524" end="16532" title="Marathon, Greece" label="Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="16575" end="16582" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048023" start="16598" end="16615" title="Mares of Diomedes" label="Mares of Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q393186" start="16642" end="16650" title="Diomedes of Thrace" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210303" start="16948" end="16957" title="Hippolyta" label="Hippolyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="16972" end="16979" title="Amazons" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="17057" end="17061" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q86805" start="17379" end="17385" title="Geryon" label="Geryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q336230" start="17465" end="17472" title="Orthrus" label="Orthrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363689" start="17551" end="17559" title="Erytheia" label="Erytheia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165938" start="18008" end="18018" title="Hesperides" label="Hesperides"/>
<link wikidata="Q274600" start="18075" end="18080" title="Ladon (mythology)" label="Ladon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189527" start="18190" end="18196" title="Nereus" label="Nereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83160" start="18222" end="18232" title="Prometheus" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="18404" end="18409" title="Atlas (mythology)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q83496" start="18697" end="18705" title="Cerberus" label="Cerberus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="18944" end="18949" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q744147" start="19378" end="19382" title="Iole" label="Iole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594069" start="19386" end="19394" title="Oechalia (Thessaly)" label="Oechalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q939149" start="19396" end="19420" title="King Eurytus of Oechalia" label="King Eurytus of Oechalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q744147" start="19444" end="19448" title="Iole" label="Iole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672196" start="19652" end="19659" title="Iphitus of Oechalia" label="Iphitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q486698" start="19969" end="19976" title="Omphale" label="Omphale"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="19980" end="19985" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q486698" start="20003" end="20010" title="Omphale" label="Omphale"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="20038" end="20043" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043551" start="20081" end="20089" title="Xenoclea" label="Xenoclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="20095" end="20109" title="Pythia" label="Delphic Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q199438" start="20261" end="20272" title="Nemean Lion" label="Nemean Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="20289" end="20299" title="olive" label="olive-wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504253" start="20456" end="20464" title="cercopes" label="cercopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917781" start="20681" end="20688" title="Dryopes" label="Dryopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="20693" end="20713" title="Apollonius of Rhodes" label="Apollonius of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q739529" start="20727" end="20738" title="Argonautica" label="Argonautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16884613" start="20809" end="20819" title="Theiodamas" label="Theiodamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q332752" start="21027" end="21032" title="Hylas" label="Hylas"/>
<link wikidata="Q317932" start="21139" end="21143" title="Argo" label="Argo"/>
<link wikidata="Q622319" start="21215" end="21220" title="Mysia" label="Mysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="21504" end="21510" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="21524" end="21532" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="21543" end="21552" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142522" start="21565" end="21583" title="Prometheus Unbound (Aeschylus)" label="Prometheus Unbound"/>
<link wikidata="Q83160" start="21654" end="21664" title="Prometheus" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45713" start="21777" end="21782" title="Titan (mythology)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="21943" end="21950" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="21956" end="21962" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q86805" start="21994" end="22000" title="Geryon" label="Geryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233460" start="22008" end="22020" title="The Twelve Labours" label="tenth labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="22039" end="22046" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="22064" end="22069" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q541061" start="22114" end="22120" title="Alebion" label="Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891678" start="22125" end="22132" title="Bergion" label="Bergion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="22154" end="22162" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="22255" end="22259" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22415" end="22424" title="Engonasin#History" label="Engonasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10448" start="22578" end="22607" title="Hercules (constellation)" label="Heracles&amp;#x27;s constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="22650" end="22676" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="22722" end="22727" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269950" start="22868" end="22873" title="cetus (mythology)" label="cetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="22885" end="22889" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="23035" end="23046" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23120" end="23136" title="Temple of Aphaea#Eastern pediment" label="Temple of Aphaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q332324" start="23138" end="23146" title="Laomedon" label="Laomedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137657" start="23183" end="23190" title="Hesione" label="Hesione"/>
<link wikidata="Q331327" start="23273" end="23280" title="Telamon" label="Telamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358973" start="23285" end="23291" title="Oicles" label="Oicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131588" start="23424" end="23432" title="Ganymede (mythology)" label="Ganymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="23667" end="23675" title="Priam" label="Podarces"/>
<link wikidata="Q878184" start="23830" end="23836" title="Teucer" label="Teucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="24001" end="24009" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q952188" start="24063" end="24071" title="Thespius" label="Thespius"/>
<link wikidata="Q504076" start="24160" end="24166" title="Iolaus" label="Iolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38665497" start="24230" end="24238" title="Bebryces" label="Bebryces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647552" start="24254" end="24260" title="Mygdon of Phrygia" label="Mygdon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24292" end="24297" title="Lycus (son of Dascylus)" label="Lycus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622319" start="24301" end="24306" title="Mysia" label="Mysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056327" start="24315" end="24323" title="Dascylus" label="Dascylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562581" start="24348" end="24356" title="Termerus" label="Termerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705204" start="24377" end="24384" title="Evander (philosopher)" label="Evander"/>
<link wikidata="Q21548563" start="24446" end="24453" title="Amyntor (son of Ormenus)" label="Amyntor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11939548" start="24457" end="24465" title="Ormenium" label="Ormenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334961" start="24525" end="24533" title="Emathion" label="Emathion"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="24537" end="24543" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56257493" start="24580" end="24587" title="Busiris (Greek mythology)" label="Busiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446665" start="24673" end="24682" title="Lityerses" label="Lityerses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294569" start="24747" end="24759" title="Periclymenus" label="Periclymenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263152" start="24763" end="24768" title="Pylos" label="Pylos"/>
<link wikidata="Q532251" start="24788" end="24794" title="Syleus (mythology)" label="Syleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259170" start="24860" end="24867" title="Lepreus (mythology)" label="Lepreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="24923" end="24931" title="Taranto" label="Tarentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="24940" end="24947" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315253" start="24989" end="24994" title="Linus (mythology)" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125049" start="25000" end="25008" title="Eumolpus" label="Eumolpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q463107" start="25117" end="25126" title="Autolycus" label="Autolycus"/>
<link wikidata="Q430157" start="25155" end="25159" title="Eryx (mythology)" label="Eryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="25163" end="25169" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="25200" end="25208" title="Argonauts" label="Argonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403344" start="25220" end="25227" title="Alastor" label="Alastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27700265" start="25254" end="25263" title="Hippocoon" label="Hippocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192946" start="25287" end="25296" title="Tyndareus" label="Tyndareus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="25309" end="25315" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q577245" start="25409" end="25415" title="Cycnus (son of Ares)" label="Cycnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="25428" end="25432" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="25557" end="25563" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q599487" start="25571" end="25589" title="Shield of Heracles" label="Shield of Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="25674" end="25680" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q191192" start="25704" end="25710" title="Giants (Greek mythology)" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q653681" start="25711" end="25720" title="Alcyoneus" label="Alcyoneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421201" start="25725" end="25735" title="Porphyrion" label="Porphyrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q272006" start="25755" end="25762" title="Antaeus" label="Antaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747200" start="25885" end="25892" title="Pygmy (Greek mythology)" label="Pygmies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207663" start="26037" end="26044" title="Augeias" label="Augeias"/>
<link wikidata="Q192109" start="26408" end="26415" title="Admetus" label="Admetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q320449" start="26448" end="26456" title="Alcestis" label="Alcestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="27152" end="27160" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q478063" start="27222" end="27229" title="Thiasus" label="Thiasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="27271" end="27283" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q815376" start="27297" end="27306" title="The Frogs" label="The Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q243187" start="28088" end="28095" title="Photius" label="Photius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487010" start="28099" end="28118" title="Ptolemy Hephaestion" label="Ptolemy Hephaestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q754686" start="28306" end="28311" title="Cacus" label="Cacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q952123" start="28340" end="28346" title="Sicani" label="Sicani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973969" start="28389" end="28398" title="Leucaspis" label="Leucaspis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193115" start="28423" end="28429" title="Scylla" label="Scylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="28506" end="28515" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q945342" start="28529" end="28539" title="Trachiniae" label="Trachiniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="28553" end="28557" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="28571" end="28584" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q391379" start="28629" end="28637" title="Achelous" label="Achelous"/>
<link wikidata="Q272000" start="28681" end="28689" title="Deianira" label="Deianira"/>
<link wikidata="Q217379" start="28717" end="28723" title="Tiryns" label="Tiryns"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="28727" end="28734" title="centaur" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q466866" start="28736" end="28742" title="Nessus (mythology)" label="Nessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170379" start="29040" end="29054" title="Lernaean Hydra" label="Lernaean Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216208" start="29103" end="29121" title="Shirt of Nessus" label="blood-soaked tunic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878352" start="29224" end="29229" title="rumor" label="rumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q922330" start="29605" end="29611" title="Lichas" label="Lichas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135305" start="29824" end="29836" title="Pyre of Herakles" label="funeral pyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q132378" start="29840" end="29850" title="Mount Oeta" label="Mount Oeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10350754" start="29858" end="29863" title="Poeas" label="Poeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q212827" start="29875" end="29886" title="Philoctetes" label="Philoctetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q580995" start="29967" end="29977" title="apotheosis" label="apotheosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212827" start="30052" end="30063" title="Philoctetes" label="Philoctetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10350754" start="30065" end="30070" title="Poeas" label="Poeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q504076" start="30152" end="30158" title="Iolaus" label="Iolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="30356" end="30361" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15402866" start="30373" end="30387" title="poisoned arrow" label="poisoned arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q50193" start="30498" end="30510" title="Trojan Horse" label="Trojan Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="30530" end="30534" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="30550" end="30559" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131125" start="30780" end="30784" title="Hebe (mythology)" label="Hebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834414" start="30843" end="30865" title="Alexiares and Anicetus" label="Alexiares and Anicetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="30873" end="30879" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706676" start="30998" end="31019" title="Dialogues of the Gods" label="Dialogues of the Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="31047" end="31053" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q667098" start="31057" end="31065" title="Samsat" label="Samosata"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="31113" end="31122" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q212827" start="31400" end="31411" title="Philoctetes" label="Philoctetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192483" start="31459" end="31465" title="Lemnos" label="Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q203698" start="31496" end="31511" title="deus ex machina" label="deus ex machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="31585" end="31589" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="31606" end="31611" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513013" start="31695" end="31705" title="Euhemerism" label="Euhemerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="31839" end="31847" title="Eusebius of Caesarea" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134888" start="31855" end="31880" title="Preparation of the Gospel" label="Preparation of the Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="31910" end="31917" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="32016" end="32021" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="32056" end="32065" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="32119" end="32130" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="32189" end="32206" title="Castor and Pollux" label="Castor and Pollux"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="32275" end="32279" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217379" start="32419" end="32425" title="Tiryns" label="Tiryns"/>
<link wikidata="Q212087" start="32457" end="32467" title="Eurystheus" label="Eurystheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="32479" end="32486" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315253" start="32517" end="32522" title="Linus (mythology)" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="32579" end="32585" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18882" start="32605" end="32622" title="Universal history (genre)" label="universal history"/>
<link wikidata="Q929768" start="33023" end="33029" title="Megara (wife of Heracles)" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q486698" start="33359" end="33366" title="Omphale" label="Omphale"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="33372" end="33377" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272000" start="33473" end="33481" title="Deianira" label="Deianira"/>
<link wikidata="Q391379" start="33522" end="33530" title="Achelous" label="Achelous"/>
<link wikidata="Q332682" start="33645" end="33655" title="cornucopia" label="cornucopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="33729" end="33736" title="centaur" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q466866" start="33743" end="33749" title="Nessus (mythology)" label="Nessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="33804" end="33808" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q744147" start="34369" end="34373" title="Iole" label="Iole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216208" start="34439" end="34454" title="shirt of Nessus" label="shirt of Nessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q922330" start="34481" end="34487" title="Lichas" label="Lichas"/>
<link wikidata="Q736132" start="34691" end="34695" title="pyre" label="pyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="35012" end="35025" title="Mount Olympus (Mountain)" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131125" start="35056" end="35060" title="Hebe (mythology)" label="Hebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q952188" start="35174" end="35182" title="Thespius" label="Thespius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141295" start="35192" end="35200" title="Thespiae" label="Thespiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743879" start="35229" end="35246" title="Lion of Cithaeron" label="Lion of Cithaeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="35304" end="35322" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="35595" end="35601" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="35606" end="35613" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q86805" start="35711" end="35717" title="Geryon" label="Geryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="35754" end="35763" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35903" end="35909" title="Hylaea (geography)" label="Hylaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330255" start="35929" end="35937" title="Drakaina (mythology)" label="dracaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q845909" start="35941" end="35948" title="Scythia" label="Scythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185670" start="35974" end="35981" title="Echidna (mythology)" label="Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343938" start="36257" end="36267" title="Agathyrsus" label="Agathyrsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499805" start="36269" end="36276" title="Gelonus" label="Gelonus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36282" end="36289" title="Scythes (mythology)" label="Scythes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="36536" end="36562" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q837699" start="36609" end="36616" title="Evander of Pallene" label="Evander"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="36778" end="36786" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="36939" end="36945" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Theban"/>
<link wikidata="Q504076" start="36946" end="36952" title="Iolaus" label="Iolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192109" start="37279" end="37286" title="Admetus" label="Admetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q654379" start="37320" end="37340" title="Calydonian boar hunt" label="Calydonian boar hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q332752" start="37475" end="37480" title="Hylas" label="Hylas"/>
<link wikidata="Q317932" start="37514" end="37518" title="Argo" label="Argo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="37592" end="37598" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q132527193" start="37687" end="37693" title="Abdera, Thrace" label="Abdera"/>
<link wikidata="Q308055" start="37717" end="37724" title="Abderus" label="Abderus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048023" start="37852" end="37860" title="Mares of Diomedes" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="37901" end="37907" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11955875" start="37990" end="37997" title="Iphitus" label="Iphitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671771" start="38041" end="38047" title="Nireus" label="Nireus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="38122" end="38127" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="38221" end="38230" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563929" start="38248" end="38257" title="Sostratus of Dyme" label="Sostratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495811" start="38276" end="38282" title="Achaea" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="38497" end="38501" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226995" start="38552" end="38563" title="Polystratus" label="Polystratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212087" start="38637" end="38647" title="Eurystheus" label="Eurystheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="38649" end="38655" title="Adonis" label="Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693599" start="38657" end="38665" title="Corythus" label="Corythus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27993997" start="38667" end="38672" title="Argus (Greek myth)" label="Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193267" start="38678" end="38684" title="Nestor (mythology)" label="Nestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487010" start="38751" end="38769" title="Ptolemaeus Chennus" label="Ptolemaeus Chennus"/>
<link wikidata="Q637955" start="38835" end="38841" title="Neleus" label="Neleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="38871" end="38878" title="scholia" label="scholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="38895" end="38905" title="Apollonius of Rhodes" label="Apollonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q739529" start="38919" end="38930" title="Argonautica" label="Argonautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q212827" start="38995" end="39006" title="Philoctetes" label="Philoctetes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39008" end="39014" title="Diomus (mythology)" label="Diomus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39016" end="39025" title="Perithoas" label="Perithoas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39031" end="39036" title="Phrix" label="Phrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="39059" end="39064" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q672490" start="39154" end="39158" title="deme" label="deme"/>
<link wikidata="Q13518339" start="39159" end="39166" title="Diomeia" label="Diomeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q607608" start="39180" end="39185" title="phyle" label="phyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q847268" start="39620" end="39626" title="Hyllus" label="Hyllus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272000" start="39652" end="39661" title="Deianeira" label="Deianeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933131" start="39665" end="39671" title="Melite (naiad)" label="Melite"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="40473" end="40479" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q916442" start="40678" end="40686" title="Telephus" label="Telephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622319" start="40696" end="40701" title="Mysia" label="Mysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q760213" start="40706" end="40710" title="Auge" label="Auge"/>
<link wikidata="Q690613" start="40717" end="40727" title="Tlepolemus" label="Tlepolemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="40764" end="40774" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="40804" end="40813" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q652858" start="40828" end="40842" title="List of Kings of Lydia" label="Kings of Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131125" start="40965" end="40969" title="Hebe (mythology)" label="Hebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834414" start="40974" end="40996" title="Alexiares and Anicetus" label="Alexiares and Anicetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q929768" start="41029" end="41035" title="Megara (mythology)" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q486698" start="41090" end="41097" title="Omphale" label="Omphale"/>
<link wikidata="Q54313439" start="41101" end="41108" title="Agelaus" label="Agelaus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41112" end="41120" title="Tyrsenus" label="Tyrsenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272000" start="41123" end="41131" title="Deianira" label="Deianira"/>
<link wikidata="Q847268" start="41135" end="41141" title="Hyllus" label="Hyllus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688223" start="41145" end="41154" title="Ctesippus" label="Ctesippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550960" start="41179" end="41186" title="Macaria (daughter of Heracles)" label="Macaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41190" end="41196" title="Onites (myth)" label="Onites"/>
<link wikidata="Q131125" start="41199" end="41203" title="Hebe (mythology)" label="Hebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834414" start="41207" end="41216" title="Alexiares and Anicetus" label="Alexiares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834414" start="41220" end="41228" title="Alexiares and Anicetus" label="Anicetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q752335" start="41231" end="41241" title="Astydameia" label="Astydameia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886056" start="41255" end="41262" title="Ormenus" label="Ormenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21548563" start="41266" end="41273" title="Amyntor (son of Ormenus)" label="Amyntor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688223" start="41277" end="41286" title="Ctesippus" label="Ctesippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627549" start="41289" end="41297" title="Astyoche" label="Astyoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188469" start="41311" end="41317" title="Phylas" label="Phylas"/>
<link wikidata="Q690613" start="41321" end="41331" title="Tlepolemus" label="Tlepolemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q760213" start="41334" end="41338" title="Auge" label="Auge"/>
<link wikidata="Q916442" start="41342" end="41350" title="Telephus" label="Telephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30098124" start="41353" end="41360" title="Autonoe (mythology)" label="Autonoë"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792188" start="41384" end="41391" title="Iphinoe (mythology)" label="Iphinoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q272006" start="41405" end="41412" title="Antaeus" label="Antaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105658177" start="41416" end="41424" title="Palaemon (Greek myth)" label="Palaemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810860" start="41489" end="41494" title="Bolbe" label="Bolbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069546" start="41498" end="41506" title="Olynthus (mythology)" label="Olynthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058577" start="41509" end="41516" title="Celtine" label="Celtine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477143" start="41520" end="41526" title="Celtus" label="Celtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28005214" start="41529" end="41538" title="Chalciope" label="Chalciope"/>
<link wikidata="Q920254" start="41542" end="41551" title="Thessalus" label="Thessalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q845909" start="41583" end="41590" title="Scythia" label="Scythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330255" start="41592" end="41600" title="Drakaina (mythology)" label="dracaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q185670" start="41604" end="41611" title="Echidna (mythology)" label="Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q430172" start="41615" end="41625" title="Agathyrsi" label="Agathyrsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q897690" start="41629" end="41636" title="Gelonians" label="Gelonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q897690" start="41640" end="41647" title="Gelonians" label="Scythes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726833" start="41650" end="41658" title="Epicaste" label="Epicaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q837699" start="41695" end="41702" title="Evander of Pallene" label="Evander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41715" end="41720" title="Maliya#Greek attestations" label="Malis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804963" start="41753" end="41757" title="Meda (mythology)" label="Meda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618732" start="41760" end="41769" title="Antiochus (mythology)" label="Antiochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4289514" start="41772" end="41788" title="Melite (heroine)" label="Melite (heroine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933131" start="41791" end="41805" title="Melite (naiad)" label="Melite (naiad)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948653" start="41829" end="41834" title="Myrto (mythology)" label="Myrto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314305" start="41838" end="41845" title="Eucleia" label="Eucleia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="41860" end="41870" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q105227086" start="41884" end="41894" title="Parthenope (mythology)" label="Parthenope"/>
<link wikidata="Q775176" start="41908" end="41934" title="Stymphalus (son of Elatus)" label="Stymphalus (son of Elatus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735430" start="41938" end="41956" title="Everes (mythology)" label="Everes (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181590" start="41959" end="41965" title="Phialo" label="Phialo"/>
<link wikidata="Q126955954" start="41983" end="41990" title="Psophis (mythology)" label="Psophis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60221583" start="41994" end="42003" title="Echephron" label="Echephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112792" start="42007" end="42016" title="Promachus" label="Promachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509554" start="42019" end="42025" title="Pyrene (daughter of Bebryx)" label="Pyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625035" start="42069" end="42078" title="Aventinus (mythology)" label="Aventinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872278" start="42081" end="42108" title="Thebe (daughter of Adramys)" label="Thebe (daughter of Adramys)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9087747" start="42111" end="42116" title="Tinjis" label="Tinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850942" start="42136" end="42142" title="Sufax" label="Sophax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42186" end="42222" title="Thespius#Daughters and grandchildren" label="Thespius#Daughters and grandchildren"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="42233" end="42239" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11710892" start="42283" end="42291" title="Iardanus (father of Omphale)" label="Iardanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19987583" start="42295" end="42302" title="Alcaeus (mythology)" label="Alcaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q329690" start="42305" end="42314" title="Cleodaeus" label="Cleodaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="42387" end="42395" title="Diodorus" label="Diodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740603" start="42430" end="42438" title="Amathes" label="Amathous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113806" start="42450" end="42457" title="Chromis (mythology)" label="Chromis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993227" start="42470" end="42479" title="Dexamenus" label="Dexamenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59772479" start="42495" end="42500" title="Manto (mythology)" label="Manto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130455" start="42504" end="42511" title="Pandaie" label="Pandaie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42515" end="42523" title="Phaistos#Iron Age" label="Phaestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="42756" end="42765" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="42792" end="42797" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170138" start="42805" end="42808" title="Shu (Egyptian deity)" label="Shu"/>
<link wikidata="Q190521" start="42838" end="42844" title="Khonsu" label="Khonsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607758" start="42965" end="42975" title="Heracleion" label="Heracleion"/>
<link wikidata="Q939129" start="43066" end="43074" title="Heryshaf" label="Heryshaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="43091" end="43096" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="43175" end="43178" title="Ram (sheep)" label="ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="43179" end="43182" title="god" label="god"/>
<link wikidata="Q249480" start="43210" end="43229" title="Herakleopolis Magna" label="Herakleopolis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q970700" start="43261" end="43275" title="Greco-Buddhist" label="Greco-Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q539715" start="43376" end="43379" title="Nio (Buddhism)" label="Nio"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="43437" end="43446" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="43474" end="43483" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843408" start="43489" end="43496" title="Melqart" label="Melqart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170" start="43499" end="43506" title="Sallust" label="Sallust"/>
<link wikidata="Q827612" start="43535" end="43549" title="Jugurthine War" label="Jugurthine War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="43601" end="43606" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8735" start="43670" end="43675" title="Medes" label="Medes"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="43677" end="43685" title="Persian people" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="43691" end="43700" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="44029" end="44045" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="44098" end="44104" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q152854" start="44298" end="44326" title="Pillars of Hercules" label="Pillars of Hercules/Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203053" start="44637" end="44643" title="Irakli" label="Irakli"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="44773" end="44779" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416768" start="44783" end="44808" title="G.S. Iraklis Thessaloniki" label="G.S. Iraklis Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q327106" start="44817" end="44826" title="Heracleum (plant)" label="Heracleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q145794" start="44885" end="44893" title="Apiaceae" label="Apiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q826602" start="44986" end="45010" title="Heracleum mantegazzianum" label="Heracleum mantegazzianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="45176" end="45181" title="Atlas (mythology)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q271891" start="45184" end="45189" title="Ixion" label="Ixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q160730" start="45192" end="45198" title="Medusa" label="Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83160" start="45201" end="45211" title="Prometheus" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102561" start="45214" end="45222" title="Sisyphus" label="Sisyphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182101" start="45225" end="45233" title="Tantalus" label="Tantalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210883" start="45236" end="45248" title="The Danaides" label="The Danaides"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481956" start="45314" end="45320" title="Agilaz" label="Agilaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="45323" end="45330" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q211955" start="45333" end="45344" title="Cú Chulainn" label="Cú Chulainn"/>
<link wikidata="Q159709" start="45347" end="45356" title="Gilgamesh" label="Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q755755" start="45359" end="45369" title="Lugalbanda" label="Lugalbanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q843408" start="45372" end="45379" title="Melqart" label="Melqart"/>
<link wikidata="Q214648" start="45382" end="45388" title="Samson" label="Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="45391" end="45395" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q61888" start="45665" end="45680" title="Walter Burkert" label="Burkert, Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q62392260" start="46730" end="46744" title="Corinne Bonnet" label="Corinne Bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55154400" start="48100" end="48117" title="Shirley Barlow" label="Shirley A. Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="48195" end="48200" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="48249" end="48258" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q945342" start="48266" end="48282" title="Women of Trachis" label="Women of Trachis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="48293" end="48302" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233835" start="48310" end="48318" title="Herakles (Euripides)" label="Herakles"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="48336" end="48346" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="48386" end="48397" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="48503" end="48521" title="Apollonios Rhodios" label="Apollonios Rhodios"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="48565" end="48583" title="Pseudo-Apollodorus" label="Pseudo-Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="48591" end="48602" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q8827" start="48634" end="48651" title="Sextus Propertius" label="Sextus Propertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="48697" end="48701" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="48709" end="48722" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="48737" end="48741" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q316090" start="48776" end="48798" title="Gaius Valerius Flaccus" label="Gaius Valerius Flaccus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738147" start="48884" end="48890" title="Fabulae" label="Fables"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="48938" end="48944" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q691292" start="49153" end="49175" title="Philostratus the Elder" label="Philostratus the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401638" start="49224" end="49250" title="First Vatican Mythographer" label="First Vatican Mythographer"/>
</links>
</doc>
