<doc id="14560" wikidata="Q27" url="?curid=14560" title="Republic of Ireland">
<text>Ireland ( ), also known as the Republic of Ireland (), is a country in Northwestern Europe consisting of 26 of the 32 counties of the island of Ireland, with a population of about 5.4 million. Its capital and largest city is Dublin, on the eastern side of the island, with a population of over 1.5 million. The sovereign state shares its only land border with Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom. It is otherwise surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the Celtic Sea to the south, St George&#x27;s Channel to the south-east and the Irish Sea to the east. It is a unitary, parliamentary republic. The legislature, the , consists of a lower house, ; an upper house, ; and an elected president () who serves as the largely ceremonial head of state, but with some important powers and duties. The head of government is the (prime minister, ), elected by the Dáil and appointed by the president, who appoints other government ministers.

The Irish Free State was created with Dominion status in 1922, following the Anglo-Irish Treaty. In 1937, a new constitution was adopted, in which the state was named &quot;Ireland&quot; and effectively became a republic, with an elected non-executive president. It was officially declared a republic in 1949, following The Republic of Ireland Act 1948. Ireland became a member of the United Nations in 1955. It joined the European Communities (EC), the predecessor of the European Union (EU), in 1973. The state had no formal relations with Northern Ireland for most of the 20th century, but the 1980s and 1990s saw the British and Irish governments working with Northern Irish parties to resolve the conflict that had become known as the Troubles. Since the signing of the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, the Irish government and Northern Irish government have co-operated on a number of policy areas under the North/South Ministerial Council created by the Agreement.

Ireland is a developed country with a quality of life that ranks amongst the highest in the world; after adjustments for inequality, the 2022 Human Development Index listing ranked it the fifth-highest in the world. It also ranks highly in healthcare, economic freedom and freedom of the press. According to the Global Peace Index, Ireland was the second most peaceful country worldwide in 2024.

It is a member of the EU and a founding member of the Council of Europe and the OECD. The Irish government has followed a policy of military neutrality through non-alignment since before World War II, and the country is consequently not a member of NATO, although it is a member of the Partnership for Peace and certain aspects of PESCO. Ireland&#x27;s economy is advanced, with one of Europe&#x27;s major financial hubs being centred on Dublin. It ranks among the top five wealthiest countries in the world in terms of both GDP and GNI per capita. After joining the EC, the country&#x27;s government enacted a series of liberal economic policies that helped to boost economic growth between 1995 and 2007, a time now often referred to as the Celtic Tiger period. A recession and reversal in growth then followed during the Great Recession, which was exacerbated by the bursting of the Irish property bubble. The Great Recession lasted until 2014, and was followed by a new period of strong economic growth.

==Name==

The Irish name for Ireland is , deriving from , a goddess in Irish mythology. The state created in 1922, comprising 26 of the 32 counties of Ireland, was &quot;styled and known as the Irish Free State&quot; (). The Constitution of Ireland, adopted in 1937, says that &quot;the name of the State is &quot;Éire&quot;, or, in the English language, Ireland&quot;. Section 2 of the Republic of Ireland Act 1948 states, &quot;It is hereby declared that the description of the State shall be the Republic of Ireland.&quot; The 1948 Act does not &quot;name&quot; the state &quot;Republic of Ireland&quot;, because to have done so would have put it in conflict with the Constitution.

The government of the United Kingdom used the name &quot;Eire&quot; (without the diacritic) and, from 1949, &quot;Republic of Ireland&quot;, for the state. It was not until the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, when the state dropped its claim to Northern Ireland, that it began calling the state &quot;Ireland&quot;.

The state is also informally called &quot;the Republic&quot;, &quot;Southern Ireland&quot; or &quot;the South&quot;; especially when distinguishing the state from the island or when discussing Northern Ireland (&quot;the North&quot;). Irish republicans reserve the name &quot;Ireland&quot; for the whole island and often refer to the state as &quot;the Free State&quot;, &quot;the 26 Counties&quot;, or &quot;the South of Ireland&quot;. This is a &quot;response to the partitionist view [...] that Ireland stops at the border&quot;.

==History==

===Home-rule movement===

From the Act of Union on 1 January 1801, until 6 December 1922, the island of Ireland was part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. During the Great Famine, from 1845 to 1849, the island&#x27;s population of over 8 million fell by 30%. One million Irish died of starvation and disease and another 1.5 million emigrated, mostly to the United States. This set the pattern of emigration for the century to come, resulting in constant population decline up to the 1960s.

From 1874, and particularly under Charles Stewart Parnell from 1880, the Irish Parliamentary Party gained prominence. This was firstly through widespread agrarian agitation via the Irish Land League, which won land reforms for tenants in the form of the Irish Land Acts, and secondly through its attempts to achieve Home Rule, via two unsuccessful bills which would have granted Ireland limited national autonomy. These led to &quot;grass-roots&quot; control of national affairs, under the Local Government Act 1898, that had been in the hands of landlord-dominated grand juries of the Protestant Ascendancy.

Home Rule seemed certain when the Parliament Act 1911 abolished the veto of the House of Lords, and John Redmond secured the Third Home Rule Act in 1914. However, the Unionist movement had been growing since 1886 among Irish Protestants after the introduction of the first home rule bill, fearing discrimination and loss of economic and social privileges if Irish Catholics achieved real political power. In the late 19th and early 20th-century unionism was particularly strong in parts of Ulster, where industrialisation was more common in contrast to the more agrarian rest of the island, and where the Protestant population was more prominent, with a majority in four counties. Under the leadership of the Dublin-born Sir Edward Carson of the Irish Unionist Party and the Ulsterman Sir James Craig of the Ulster Unionist Party, unionists became strongly militant, forming Ulster Volunteers in order to oppose &quot;the Coercion of Ulster&quot;. After the Home Rule Bill passed parliament in May 1914, to avoid rebellion with Ulster, the British Prime Minister H. H. Asquith introduced an Amending Bill reluctantly conceded to by the Irish Party leadership. This provided for the temporary exclusion of Ulster from the workings of the bill for a trial period of six years, with an as yet undecided new set of measures to be introduced for the area to be temporarily excluded.

===Revolution and steps to independence===
Though it received the Royal Assent and was placed on the statute books in 1914, the implementation of the Third Home Rule Act was suspended until after the First World War which defused the threat of civil war in Ireland. With the hope of ensuring the implementation of the Act at the end of the war through Ireland&#x27;s engagement in the war, Redmond and the Irish National Volunteers supported the UK and its Allies. 175,000 men joined Irish regiments of the 10th (Irish) and 16th (Irish) divisions of the New British Army, while Unionists joined the 36th (Ulster) divisions.

The remainder of the Irish Volunteers, who refused Redmond and opposed any support of the UK, launched an armed insurrection against British rule in the 1916 Easter Rising, together with the Irish Citizen Army. This commenced on 24 April 1916 with the declaration of independence. After a week of heavy fighting, primarily in Dublin, the surviving rebels were forced to surrender their positions. The majority were imprisoned, with fifteen of the prisoners (including most of the leaders) were executed as traitors to the UK. This included Patrick Pearse, the spokesman for the rising and who provided the signal to the volunteers to start the rising, as well as James Connolly, socialist and founder of the Industrial Workers of the World union and both the Irish and Scottish Labour movements. These events, together with the Conscription Crisis of 1918, had a profound effect on changing public opinion in Ireland against the British Government.

In January 1919, after the December 1918 general election, 73 of Ireland&#x27;s 105 Members of Parliament (MPs) elected were Sinn Féin members who were elected on a platform of abstentionism from the British House of Commons. In January 1919, they set up an Irish parliament called Dáil Éireann. This first Dáil issued a declaration of independence and proclaimed an Irish Republic. The declaration was mainly a restatement of the 1916 Proclamation with the additional provision that Ireland was no longer a part of the United Kingdom. The Irish Republic&#x27;s Ministry of Dáil Éireann sent a delegation under (Head of Council, or Speaker, of the Daíl) Seán T. O&#x27;Kelly to the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, but it was not admitted.

After the War of Independence and truce called in July 1921, representatives of the British government and the five Irish treaty delegates, led by Arthur Griffith, Robert Barton and Michael Collins, negotiated the Anglo-Irish Treaty in London from 11 October to 6 December 1921. The Irish delegates set up headquarters at Hans Place in Knightsbridge, and it was here in private discussions that the decision was taken on 5 December to recommend the treaty to Dáil Éireann. On 7 January 1922, the Second Dáil ratified the Treaty by 64 votes to 57.

In accordance with the treaty, on 6 December 1922 the entire island of Ireland became a self-governing Dominion called the Irish Free State (&quot;Saorstát Éireann&quot;). Under the Constitution of the Irish Free State, the Parliament of Northern Ireland had the option to leave the Irish Free State one month later and return to the United Kingdom. During the intervening period, the powers of the Parliament of the Irish Free State and Executive Council of the Irish Free State did not extend to Northern Ireland. Northern Ireland exercised its right under the treaty to leave the new Dominion and rejoined the United Kingdom on 8 December 1922. It did so by making an address to the King requesting, &quot;that the powers of the Parliament and Government of the Irish Free State shall no longer extend to Northern Ireland.&quot; The Irish Free State was a constitutional monarchy sharing a monarch with the United Kingdom and other Dominions of the British Commonwealth. The country had a governor-general (representing the monarch), a bicameral parliament, a cabinet called the &quot;Executive Council&quot;, and a prime minister called the President of the Executive Council.

===Irish Civil War===

The Irish Civil War (June 1922 – May 1923) was the consequence of the ratification of the Anglo-Irish Treaty and the creation of the Irish Free State. Anti-treaty forces, led by Éamon de Valera, objected to the fact that acceptance of the treaty abolished the Irish Republic of 1919 to which they had sworn loyalty, arguing in the face of public support for the settlement that the &quot;people have no right to do wrong&quot;. They objected most to the fact that the state would remain part of the British Empire and that members of the Free State Parliament would have to swear what the anti-treaty side saw as an oath of fidelity to the British king. Pro-treaty forces, led by Michael Collins, argued that the treaty gave &quot;not the ultimate freedom that all nations aspire to and develop, but the freedom to achieve it&quot;.

At the start of the war, the Irish Republican Army (IRA) split into two opposing camps: a pro-treaty IRA and an anti-treaty IRA. The pro-treaty IRA disbanded and joined the new National Army. However, because the anti-treaty IRA lacked an effective command structure and because of the pro-treaty forces&#x27; defensive tactics throughout the war, Michael Collins and his pro-treaty forces were able to build up an army with many tens of thousands of World War I veterans from the 1922 disbanded Irish regiments of the British Army, capable of overwhelming the anti-treatyists. British supplies of artillery, aircraft, machine-guns and ammunition boosted pro-treaty forces, and the threat of a return of Crown forces to the Free State removed any doubts about the necessity of enforcing the treaty. Lack of public support for the anti-treaty forces (often called the Irregulars) and the determination of the government to overcome the Irregulars contributed significantly to their defeat.

===Constitution of Ireland 1937===
Following a national plebiscite in July 1937, the new Constitution of Ireland (&quot;Bunreacht na hÉireann&quot;) came into force on 29 December 1937. This replaced the Constitution of the Irish Free State and declared that the name of the state is , or &quot;Ireland&quot; in the English language. While Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution defined the national territory to be the whole island, they also confined the state&#x27;s jurisdiction to the area that had been the Irish Free State. The former Irish Free State government had abolished the Office of Governor-General in December 1936. Although the constitution established the office of President of Ireland, the question over whether Ireland was a republic remained open. Diplomats were accredited to the king, but the president exercised all internal functions of a head of state. For instance, the President gave assent to new laws with his own authority, without reference to King George VI who was only an &quot;organ&quot;, that was provided for by statute law.

Ireland remained neutral during World War II, a period it described as The Emergency. Ireland&#x27;s Dominion status was terminated with the passage of The Republic of Ireland Act 1948, which came into force on 18 April 1949 and declared that the state was a republic. At the time, a declaration of a republic terminated Commonwealth membership. This rule was changed 10 days after Ireland declared itself a republic, with the London Declaration of 28 April 1949. Ireland did not reapply when the rules were altered to permit republics to join. Later, the Crown of Ireland Act 1542 was repealed in Ireland by the Statute Law Revision (Pre-Union Irish Statutes) Act 1962.

===Recent history===
Ireland became a member of the United Nations in December 1955, after having been denied membership because of its neutral stance during the Second World War and not supporting the Allied cause. At the time, joining the UN involved a commitment to using force to deter aggression by one state against another if the UN thought it was necessary.

Interest towards membership of the European Communities (EC) developed in Ireland during the 1950s, with consideration also given to membership of the European Free Trade Area. As the United Kingdom intended on EC membership, Ireland applied for membership in July 1961 due to the substantial economic linkages with the United Kingdom. The founding EC members remained sceptical regarding Ireland&#x27;s economic capacity, neutrality, and unattractive protectionist policy. Many Irish economists and politicians realised that economic policy reform was necessary. The prospect of EC membership became doubtful in 1963 when French President General Charles de Gaulle stated that France opposed Britain&#x27;s accession, which ceased negotiations with all other candidate countries. In 1969 his successor, Georges Pompidou, was not opposed to British and Irish membership. Negotiations began and in 1972 the Treaty of Accession was signed. A referendum was held later that year which confirmed Ireland&#x27;s entry into the bloc, and it finally joined the EC as a member state on 1 January 1973.

The economic crisis of the late 1970s was fuelled by the Fianna Fáil government&#x27;s budget, the abolition of the car tax, excessive borrowing, and global economic instability including the 1979 oil crisis. There were significant policy changes from 1989 onwards, with economic reform, tax cuts, welfare reform, an increase in competition, and a ban on borrowing to fund current spending. This policy began in 1989–1992 by the Fianna Fáil/Progressive Democrats government, and continued by the subsequent Fianna Fáil/Labour government and Fine Gael/Labour/Democratic Left government. Ireland became one of the world&#x27;s fastest growing economies by the late 1990s in what was known as the Celtic Tiger period, which lasted until the Great Recession. Since 2014, Ireland has experienced increased economic activity.

In the Northern Ireland question, the British and Irish governments started to seek a peaceful resolution to the violent conflict involving many paramilitaries and the British Army in Northern Ireland known as &quot;The Troubles&quot;. A peace settlement for Northern Ireland, known as the Good Friday Agreement, was approved in 1998 in referendums north and south of the border. As part of the peace settlement, the territorial claim to Northern Ireland in Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland was removed by referendum. In its white paper on Brexit the United Kingdom government reiterated its commitment to the Good Friday Agreement. With regard to Northern Ireland&#x27;s status, it said that the UK Government&#x27;s &quot;clearly-stated preference is to retain Northern Ireland&#x27;s current constitutional position: as part of the UK, but with strong links to Ireland&quot;.

==Geography==


The state extends over an area of about five-sixths () of the island of Ireland (), with Northern Ireland constituting the remainder. The island is bounded to the north and west by the Atlantic Ocean and to the northeast by the North Channel. To the east, the Irish Sea connects to the Atlantic Ocean via St George&#x27;s Channel and the Celtic Sea to the southwest.

The western landscape mostly consists of rugged cliffs, hills and mountains. The central lowlands are extensively covered with glacial deposits of clay and sand, as well as significant areas of bogland and several lakes. The highest point is Carrauntoohil (), located in the MacGillycuddy&#x27;s Reeks mountain range in the southwest. River Shannon, which traverses the central lowlands, is the longest river in Ireland at in length. The west coast is more rugged than the east, with numerous islands, peninsulas, headlands and bays.

Ireland is one of the least forested countries in Europe. Until the end of the Middle Ages, the land was heavily forested. Native species include deciduous trees such as oak, ash, hazel, birch, alder, willow, aspen, elm, rowan and hawthorn, as well as evergreen trees such Scots pine, yew, holly and strawberry trees. The growth of blanket bog and the extensive clearing of woodland for farming are believed to be the main causes of deforestation. Today, only about 10% of Ireland is woodland, most of which is non-native conifer plantations, and only 2% of which is native woodland. The average woodland cover in European countries is over 33%. According to &quot;Coillte&quot;, a state-owned forestry business, the country&#x27;s climate gives Ireland one of the fastest growth rates for forests in Europe. Hedgerows, which are traditionally used to define land boundaries, are an important substitute for woodland habitat, providing refuge for native wild flora and a wide range of insect, bird and mammal species. It is home to two terrestrial ecoregions: Celtic broadleaf forests and North Atlantic moist mixed forests.

Agriculture accounts for about 64% of the total land area. This has resulted in limited land to preserve natural habitats, in particular for larger wild mammals with greater territorial requirements. The long history of agricultural production coupled with modern agricultural methods, such as pesticide and fertiliser use, has placed pressure on biodiversity.

===Climate===


The Atlantic Ocean and the warming influence of the Gulf Stream affect weather patterns in Ireland. Temperatures differ regionally, with central and eastern areas tending to be more extreme. However, due to a temperate oceanic climate, temperatures are seldom lower than in winter or higher than in summer. The highest temperature recorded in Ireland was on 26 June 1887 at Kilkenny Castle in Kilkenny, while the lowest temperature recorded was at Markree Castle in Sligo. Rainfall is more prevalent during winter months and less so during the early months of summer. Southwestern areas experience the most rainfall as a result of south westerly winds, while Dublin receives the least. Sunshine duration is highest in the southeast of the country. The far north and west are two of the windiest regions in Europe, with great potential for wind energy generation.

Ireland normally gets between 1100 and 1600 hours of sunshine each year, most areas averaging between 3.25 and 3.75 hours a day. The sunniest months are May and June, which average between 5 and 6.5 hours per day over most of the country. The extreme southeast gets most sunshine, averaging over 7 hours a day in early summer. December is the dullest month, with an average daily sunshine ranging from about 1 hour in the north to almost 2 hours in the extreme southeast. The sunniest summer in the 100 years from 1881 to 1980 was 1887, according to measurements made at the Phoenix Park in Dublin; 1980 was the dullest.

==Politics==

Ireland is a constitutional republic with a parliamentary system of government. The is the bicameral national parliament composed of the President of Ireland and the two Houses of the Oireachtas: (House of Representatives) and (Senate). Áras an Uachtaráin is the official residence of the President of Ireland, while the houses of the Oireachtas meet at Leinster House in Dublin.

The President serves as head of state, is elected for a seven-year term, and may be re-elected once. The President is primarily a figurehead, but is entrusted with certain constitutional powers with the advice of the Council of State. The office has absolute discretion in some areas, such as referring a bill to the Supreme Court for a judgment on its constitutionality. Michael D. Higgins became the ninth President of Ireland on 11 November 2011.

The (Prime Minister) serves as the head of government and is appointed by the President upon the nomination of the . Most have served as the leader of the political party that gains the most seats in national elections. It has become customary for coalitions to form a government, as there has not been a single-party government since 1989.

The has 174 members () elected to represent multi-seat constituencies under the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. The is composed of sixty members, with eleven nominated by the , six elected by two university constituencies, and 43 elected by public representatives from panels of candidates established on a vocational basis.

The government is constitutionally limited to fifteen members. No more than two members can be selected from the , and the , (deputy prime minister) and Minister for Finance must be members of the . The Dáil must be dissolved within five years of its first meeting following the previous election, and a general election for members of the Dáil must take place no later than thirty days after the dissolution. In accordance with the Constitution of Ireland, parliamentary elections must be held at least every seven years, though a lower limit may be set by statute law. The current government is a coalition of Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael, and some independents with Micheál Martin of Fianna Fáil as Taoiseach and Simon Harris of Fine Gael as Tánaiste. Opposition parties in the current are Sinn Féin, the Labour Party, People Before Profit–Solidarity, Social Democrats, Aontú, The Green Party as well as a number of independents.

Ireland has been a member state of the European Union since 1973. Citizens of the United Kingdom can freely enter the country without a passport due to the Common Travel Area, which is a passport-free zone comprising the islands of Ireland, Great Britain, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. However, some identification is required at airports and seaports.

===Local government===

The Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898 was the founding statute of the present system of local government, while the Twentieth Amendment to the constitution of 1999 provided for its constitutional recognition. The twenty-six traditional counties of Ireland are the basis of the local government areas, with the traditional counties of Cork, Dublin and Galway containing two or more local government areas. The Local Government Act 2001, as amended by the Local Government Reform Act 2014, provides for a system of thirty-one local authorities – twenty-six county councils, two city and county councils, and three city councils. Counties (with the exception of the three counties in Dublin) are divided into municipal districts. A second local government tier of town councils was abolished in 2014.

Local authorities are responsible for matters such as planning, local roads, sanitation, and libraries. The breaching of county boundaries should be avoided as far as practicable in drawing Dáil constituencies. Counties with greater populations have multiple constituencies, some of more than one county, but generally do not cross county boundaries. The counties are grouped into three regions, each with a Regional Assembly composed of members delegated by the various county and city councils in the region. The regions do not have any direct administrative role as such, but they serve for planning, coordination and statistical purposes.

===Law===
Ireland has a common law legal system with a written constitution that provides for a parliamentary democracy. The court system consists of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, the High Court, the Circuit Court and the District Court, all of which apply the Irish law and hear both civil and criminal matters. Trials for serious offences must usually be held before a jury. The High Court, Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court have authority, by means of judicial review, to determine the compatibility of laws and activities of other institutions of the state with the constitution and the law. Except in exceptional circumstances, court hearings must occur in public.

The Garda Síochána (&quot;lit.&quot; Guardians of the Peace), more commonly referred to as the Gardaí, is the state&#x27;s civilian police force. The force is responsible for all aspects of civil policing, both in terms of territory and infrastructure. It is headed by the Garda Commissioner, who is appointed by the Government. Most uniformed members do not routinely carry firearms. Standard policing is traditionally carried out by uniformed officers equipped only with a baton and pepper spray.

The Military Police is the corps of the Irish Army responsible for the provision of policing service personnel and providing a military police presence to forces while on exercise and deployment. In wartime, additional tasks include the provision of a traffic control organisation to allow rapid movement of military formations to their mission areas. Other wartime roles include control of prisoners of war and refugees.

Ireland&#x27;s citizenship laws relate to &quot;the island of Ireland&quot;, including islands and seas, thereby extending them to Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom. Therefore, anyone born in Northern Ireland who meets the requirements for being an Irish citizen, such as birth on the island of Ireland to an Irish or British citizen parent or a parent who is entitled to live in Northern Ireland or the Republic without restriction on their residency, may exercise an entitlement to Irish citizenship, such as an Irish passport.

In 2024, Ireland was second only to Iceland in the list of the world&#x27;s most peaceful countries.

===Foreign relations===

Foreign relations are substantially influenced by membership of the European Union, although bilateral relations with the United Kingdom and United States are also important. It held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union on six occasions, most recently from January to June 2013.

Ireland tends towards independence in foreign policy; thus the country is not a member of NATO and has a longstanding policy of military neutrality. This policy has led to the Irish Defence Forces contributing to peace-keeping missions with the United Nations since 1960, including during the Congo Crisis and subsequently in Cyprus, Lebanon and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Despite Irish neutrality during World War II, Ireland had more than 50,000 participants in the war through enlistment in the British armed forces. During the Cold War, Irish military policy, while ostensibly neutral, was biased towards NATO. During the Cuban Missile Crisis, Seán Lemass authorised the search of Cuban and Czechoslovak aircraft passing through Shannon and passed the information to the CIA. Ireland&#x27;s air facilities were used by the United States military for the delivery of military personnel involved in the 2003 invasion of Iraq through Shannon Airport. The airport had previously been used for the United States invasion of Afghanistan in 2001, as well as the First Gulf War.

Since 1999, Ireland has been a member of NATO&#x27;s Partnership for Peace (PfP) program and NATO&#x27;s Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC), which is aimed at creating trust between NATO and other states in Europe and the former Soviet Union.

===Military===


Ireland is a neutral country, and has &quot;triple-lock&quot; rules governing the participation of Irish troops in conflict zones, whereby approval must be given by the UN, the Dáil and Government. Accordingly, its military role is limited to national self-defence and participation in United Nations peacekeeping.

The Irish Defence Forces () are made up of the Army, Naval Service, Air Corps and Reserve Defence Force. It is small but well equipped, with almost 10,000 full-time military personnel and over 2,000 in reserve. Daily deployments of the Defence Forces cover aid to civil power operations, protection and patrol of Irish territorial waters and EEZ by the Irish Naval Service, and UN, EU and PfP peace-keeping missions. By 1996, over 40,000 Irish service personnel had served in international UN peacekeeping missions.

The Irish Air Corps is the air component of the Defence Forces and operates sixteen fixed wing aircraft and eight helicopters. The Irish Naval Service is Ireland&#x27;s navy, and operates six patrol ships, and smaller numbers of inflatable boats and training vessels, and has armed boarding parties capable of seizing a ship and a special unit of frogmen. The military includes the Reserve Defence Forces (Army Reserve and Naval Service Reserve) for part-time reservists. Ireland&#x27;s special forces include the Army Ranger Wing, which trains and operates with international special operations units. The President is the formal Supreme Commander of the Defence Forces, but in practice these Forces answer to the Government via the Minister for Defence.

In 2017, Ireland signed the United Nations Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

==Economy==
Ireland is an open economy and ranks first for &quot;high-value&quot; foreign direct investment (FDI) flows. Ireland ranks 5th of 187 (IMF) and 6th of 175 (World Bank) in GDP per capita as well as ranking in the top ten for GNI per capita. An alternative metric, known as modified Gross National Income (GNI), was created by the Central Statistics Office and is used by the Irish government to give a view of activity in the domestic economy after stripping out large multinational export movements which can often relate to intangible assets. This is particularly relevant in Ireland&#x27;s economy, as GDP disproportionately includes income from non-Irish owned companies, which often flows out of Ireland. Foreign multinationals are the main driver of Ireland&#x27;s economy, employing a quarter of the private sector workforce, and paying 80% of Irish corporate taxes. 14 of Ireland&#x27;s top 20 firms (by 2017 turnover) are US-based multinationals and 80% of foreign multinationals in Ireland are from the US.
Ireland adopted the euro currency in 2002 along with eleven other EU member states. As of January 2023 there are 20 EU member states using the euro currency with Croatia the most recent member to join on 1 January 2023.

Following the Great Recession and the bursting of the Irish property bubble, the country officially exited recession in 2010, driven by a growth in exports from US multinationals in Ireland. However, due to a rise in the cost of public borrowing due to government guarantees of private banking debt, the Irish government accepted an €85 billion programme of assistance from the EU, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and bilateral loans from the United Kingdom, Sweden and Denmark. Following three years of contraction, the economy grew by 0.7% in 2011 and 0.9% in 2012. The unemployment rate was 14.7% in 2012, including 18.5% among recent immigrants. In March 2016 the unemployment rate was reported by the CSO to be 8.6%, down from a peak unemployment rate of 15.1% in February 2012. In addition to unemployment, net emigration from Ireland between 2008 and 2013 totalled 120,100, or some 2.6% of the total population according to the Census of Ireland 2011. One-third of the emigrants were aged between 15 and 24. By November 2022, unemployment had fallen back to 4.4%.

Ireland exited its EU-IMF bailout programme on 15 December 2013. Having implemented budget cuts, reforms and sold assets, Ireland was again able to access debt markets. Since then, Ireland has been able to sell long term bonds at record rates. However, the stabilisation of the Irish credit bubble required a large transfer of debt from the private sector balance sheet (highest OECD leverage), to the public sector balance sheet (almost unleveraged, pre-crisis), via Irish bank bailouts and public deficit spending. The transfer of this debt means that Ireland, in 2017, still has one of the highest levels of both public sector indebtedness, and private sector indebtedness, in the EU-28/OECD.

Ireland became one of the main destinations for US pharmaceutical corporate tax inversions from 2009 to 2016. The country has also become the largest foreign location for large US technology multinationals (i.e. Apple, Google, Microsoft, Facebook), which delivered a GDP growth rate of 26.3% (and GNP growth rate of 18.7%) in 2015. This growth was subsequently shown to be due to Apple restructuring its &quot;double Irish&quot; subsidiary (Apple Sales International, currently under threat of a €13bn EU &quot;illegal state aid&quot; fine for preferential tax treatment).

===Taxation policy===
The transformation of Ireland&#x27;s tax policy started with the creation of a 10% low-tax &quot;special economic zone&quot;, called the International Financial Services Centre (or &quot;IFSC&quot;), in 1987. In 1999, the entire country was effectively &quot;turned into an IFSC&quot; with the reduction of Irish corporation tax from 32% to 12.5%. This accelerated the later stages of Ireland&#x27;s transition from a predominantly agricultural economy into a knowledge and service economy initially focused on property and construction and later focused on attracting mainly US multinationals from high-tech, life sciences, and financial services industries seeking to avail of Ireland&#x27;s low corporation tax rates and favourable corporate tax system.

The multinational tax schemes foreign firms use in Ireland materially distort Irish economic statistics. This reached a climax with the &quot;leprechaun economics&quot; GDP/GNP growth rates of 2015 (as Apple restructured its Irish subsidiaries in 2015). The Central Bank of Ireland introduced a new statistic, Modified gross national income, to remove these distortions. GNI* is 30% below GDP (or, GDP is 143% of GNI).

From the creation of the IFSC, the country experienced strong and sustained economic growth which fuelled a dramatic rise in Irish consumer borrowing and spending, and Irish construction and investment, which became known as the Celtic Tiger period. By 2007, Ireland had the highest private sector debt in the OECD with a household debt-to-disposable income ratio of 190%. Global capital markets, who had financed Ireland&#x27;s build-up of debt in the Celtic Tiger period by enabling Irish banks to borrow in excess of the domestic deposit base (to over 180% at peak), withdrew support in the financial crisis of 2007–2008. Their withdrawal from the over-borrowed Irish credit system would precipitate a deep Irish property correction which then led to the Post-2008 Irish banking crisis.

Ireland&#x27;s successful &quot;low-tax&quot; economy opens it to accusations of being a &quot;corporate tax haven&quot;, and led to it being &quot;blacklisted&quot; by Brazil. A 2017 study ranks Ireland as the 5th largest global Conduit OFC, which legally route funds to tax havens. A serious challenge is the passing of the US Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (whose FDII and GILTI regimes target Ireland&#x27;s multinational tax schemes). The EU&#x27;s 2018 Digital Sales Tax (DST) (and desire for a CCCTB) is also seen as an attempt to restrict Irish &quot;multinational tax schemes&quot; by US technology firms.

===Trade===

Although multinational corporations dominate Ireland&#x27;s export sector, exports from other sources also contribute significantly to the national income. The activities of multinational companies based in Ireland have made it one of the largest exporters of pharmaceutical agents, medical devices and software-related goods and services in the world. Ireland&#x27;s exports also relate to the activities of large Irish companies (such as Ryanair, Kerry Group and Smurfit Kappa) and exports of mineral resources including zinc and lead concentrates. The country also has significant deposits of gypsum and smaller quantities of copper, silver, gold, barite, and dolomite. Tourism in Ireland contributes about 4% of GDP and is a significant source of employment.

Other goods exports include agri-food, cattle, beef, dairy products, and aluminum. Ireland&#x27;s major imports include data processing equipment, chemicals, petroleum and petroleum products, textiles, and clothing. Financial services provided by multinational corporations based at the Irish Financial Services Centre also contribute to Irish exports. The difference between exports (€89.4 billion) and imports (€45.5 billion) resulted an annual trade surplus of €43.9 billion in 2010, which is the highest trade surplus relative to GDP achieved by any EU member state.

The EU is by far the country&#x27;s largest trading partner, accounting for 57.9% of exports and 60.7% of imports. Prior to Brexit, the United Kingdom was the most important trading partner within the EU, accounting for 15.4% of exports and 32.1% of imports. Outside the EU, the United States accounted for 23.2% of exports and 14.1% of imports in 2010.

===Energy===
ESB, Bord Gáis Energy and Airtricity are the three main electricity and gas suppliers in Ireland. There are 19.82 billion cubic metres of proven reserves of gas. Natural gas extraction previously occurred at the Kinsale Head until its exhaustion. The Corrib gas field was due to come on stream in 2013/14. In 2012, the Barryroe field was confirmed to have up to 1.6 billion barrels of oil in reserve, with between 160 and 600 million recoverable. That could provide for Ireland&#x27;s entire energy needs for up to 13 years, when it is developed in 2015/16.

There have been significant efforts to increase the use of renewable and sustainable forms of energy in Ireland, particularly in wind power, with 3,000 MegaWatts of wind farms being constructed, some for the purpose of export. The Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) has estimated that 6.5% of Ireland&#x27;s 2011 energy requirements were produced by renewable sources. The SEAI has also reported an increase in energy efficiency in Ireland with a 28% reduction in carbon emissions per house from 2005 to 2013.

In 2021, Ireland was the 24th largest wind energy producer in the world and the 3rd ranked in 2020 on a per capita basis.

===Transport===
The country&#x27;s three main international airports at Dublin, Shannon and Cork serve many European and intercontinental routes with scheduled and chartered flights. The London to Dublin air route is the ninth busiest international air route in the world, and also the busiest international air route in Europe, with 14,500 flights between the two in 2017. In 2015, 4.5 million people took the route, at that time, the world&#x27;s second-busiest. Aer Lingus is the flag carrier of Ireland, although Ryanair is the country&#x27;s largest airline. Ryanair is Europe&#x27;s largest low-cost carrier, the second largest in terms of passenger numbers, and the world&#x27;s largest in terms of international passenger numbers.
Railway services are provided by Iarnród Éireann (Irish Rail), which operates all internal intercity, commuter and freight railway services in the country. Dublin is the centre of the network with two main stations, Heuston station and Connolly station, linking to the country&#x27;s cities and main towns. The Enterprise service, which runs jointly with Northern Ireland Railways, connects Dublin and Belfast. The whole of Ireland&#x27;s mainline network operates on track with a gauge of, which is unique in Europe and has resulted in distinct rolling stock designs. Dublin&#x27;s public transport network includes the DART, Luas, Dublin Bus, and dublinbikes.

Motorways, national primary roads and national secondary roads are managed by Transport Infrastructure Ireland, while regional roads and local roads are managed by the local authorities in each of their respective areas. The road network is primarily focused on the capital, but motorways connect it to other major Irish cities including Cork, Limerick, Waterford and Galway.

Dublin is served by major infrastructure such as the East-Link and West-Link toll-bridges, as well as the Dublin Port Tunnel. The Jack Lynch Tunnel, under the River Lee in Cork, and the Limerick Tunnel, under the River Shannon, were two major projects outside Dublin.

==Demographics==

Genetic research suggests that the earliest settlers migrated from Iberia following the most recent ice age. After the Mesolithic, Neolithic and Bronze Age, migrants introduced a Celtic language and culture. Migrants from the two latter eras still represent the genetic heritage of most Irish people. Gaelic tradition expanded and became the dominant form over time. Irish people are a combination of Gaelic, Norse, Anglo-Norman, French, and British ancestry.

The population of Ireland stood at 5,149,139 in 2022, an increase of 8% since 2016. In 2011, Ireland had the highest birth rate in the European Union (16 births per 1,000 of population). In 2014, 36.3% of births were to unmarried women. Annual population growth rates exceeded 2% during the 2002–2006 intercensal period, which was attributed to high rates of natural increase and immigration. This rate declined somewhat during the subsequent 2006–2011 intercensal period, with an average annual percentage change of 1.6%. The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2017 was estimated at 1.80 children born per woman, below the replacement rate of 2.1, it remains considerably below the high of 4.2 children born per woman in 1850. In 2018 the median age of the Irish population was 37.1 years.

At the time of the 2022 census, the number of non-Irish nationals was recorded at 631,785. This represents an 8% increase from the 2016 census figure of 535,475. The five largest sources of non-Irish nationals were Poland (93,680), the UK (83,347), India (45,449), Romania (43,323), Lithuania (31,177), and Latvia (27,338) respectively. The non-Irish nationalities which saw the largest increase from 2016 were India (+33,984), Romania (+14,137), Brazil (+13,698), Ukraine (+10,006). The non-Irish nationalities which saw the largest decrease from 2016 were Poland (−28,835), UK (−19,766), Lithuania (−5,375), Latvia (−1,633), and Slovakia (−1,117).

===Languages===
The Irish Constitution describes Irish as the &quot;national language&quot; and the &quot;first official language&quot;, but English (the &quot;second official language&quot;) is the dominant language. In the 2016 census, about 1.75 million people (40% of the population) said they were able to speak Irish but, of those, under 74,000 spoke it on a daily basis. Irish is spoken as a community language only in a small number of rural areas mostly in the west and south of the country, collectively known as the Gaeltacht. Except in Gaeltacht regions, road signs are usually bilingual. Most public notices and print media are in English only. While the state is officially bilingual, citizens can often struggle to access state services in Irish and most government publications are not available in both languages, even though citizens have the right to deal with the state in Irish. Irish language media include the TV channel TG4, the radio station RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta and online newspaper Tuairisc.ie. In the Irish Defence Forces, all foot and arms drill commands are given in the Irish language.

As a result of immigration, Polish is the most widely spoken language in Ireland after English, with Irish as the third most spoken. Several other Central European languages (namely Czech, Hungarian and Slovak), as well as Baltic languages (Lithuanian and Latvian) are also spoken on a day-to-day basis. Other languages spoken in Ireland include Shelta, spoken by Irish Travellers, and a dialect of Scots is spoken by some Ulster Scots people in Donegal. Most secondary school students choose to learn one or two foreign languages. Languages available for the Junior Certificate and the Leaving Certificate include French, German, Italian and Spanish; Leaving Certificate students can also study Arabic, Japanese and Russian. Some secondary schools also offer Ancient Greek, Hebrew and Latin. The study of Irish is generally compulsory for Leaving Certificate students, but some may qualify for an exemption in some circumstances, such as learning difficulties or entering the country after age 11.

===Healthcare===
Healthcare in Ireland is provided by both public and private healthcare providers. The Minister for Health has responsibility for setting overall health service policy. Every resident of Ireland is entitled to receive health care through the public health care system, which is managed by the Health Service Executive and funded by general taxation. A person may be required to pay a subsidised fee for certain health care received; this depends on income, age, illness or disability. All maternity services are provided free of charge and children up to the age of 6 months. Emergency care is provided to patients who present to a hospital emergency department. However, visitors to emergency departments in non-emergency situations who are not referred by their GP may incur a fee of €100. In some circumstances this fee is not payable or may be waived.

Anyone holding a European Health Insurance Card is entitled to free maintenance and treatment in public beds in Health Service Executive and voluntary hospitals. Outpatient services are also provided for free. However, the majority of patients on median incomes or above are required to pay subsidised hospital charges. Private health insurance is available to the population for those who want to avail of it.

The average life expectancy in Ireland in 2021 was 82.4 years (OECD list), with 80.5 years for men and 84.3 years for women. It has the highest birth rate in the EU (16.8 births per 1,000 inhabitants, compared to an EU average of 10.7) and a very low infant mortality rate (3.5 per 1,000 live births). The Irish healthcare system ranked 13th out of 34 European countries in 2012 according to the European Health Consumer Index produced by Health Consumer Powerhouse. The same report ranked the Irish healthcare system as having the 8th best health outcomes but only the 21st most accessible system in Europe.

===Education===
Ireland has three levels of education: primary, secondary and higher education. The education systems are largely under the direction of the Government via the Minister for Education. Recognised primary and secondary schools must adhere to the curriculum established by the relevant authorities. Education is compulsory between the ages of six and fifteen years, and all children up to the age of eighteen must complete the first three years of secondary, including one sitting of the Junior Certificate examination.

There are approximately 3,300 primary schools in Ireland. The vast majority (92%) are under the patronage of the Catholic Church. Schools run by religious organisations, but receiving public money and recognition, cannot discriminate against pupils based upon religion or lack thereof. A sanctioned system of preference does exist, where students of a particular religion may be accepted before those who do not share the ethos of the school, in a case where a school&#x27;s quota has already been reached.

The Leaving Certificate, which is taken after two years of study, is the final examination in the secondary school system. Those intending to pursue higher education normally take this examination, with access to third-level courses generally depending on results obtained from the best six subjects taken, on a competitive basis. Third-level education awards are conferred by at least 38 Higher Education Institutions – this includes the constituent or linked colleges of seven universities, plus other designated institutions of the Higher Education and Training Awards Council. According to the 2022 US News rankings, Ireland is among the top twenty best countries for education.

The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, currently ranks Ireland as having the fourth highest reading score, ninth highest science score and thirteenth highest mathematics score, among OECD countries, in its 2012 assessment. In 2012, Irish students aged 15 years had the second highest levels of reading literacy in the EU. Ireland also has 0.747 of the World&#x27;s top 500 Universities per capita, which ranks the country in 8th place in the world. Primary, secondary and higher (university/college) level education are all free in Ireland for all EU citizens. There are charges to cover student services and examinations.

In addition, 37 percent of Ireland&#x27;s population has a university or college degree, which is among the highest percentages in the world.

===Religion===

Religious freedom is constitutionally provided for in Ireland, and the country&#x27;s constitution has been secular since 1973. Christianity is the predominant religion, and while Ireland remains a predominantly Catholic country, the percentage of the population who identified as Catholic on the census fell sharply from 84.2 percent in the 2011 census to 78.3 percent in 2016 and 69 percent in 2022. Other results from the 2016 census were: 4.2% Protestant, 1.3% Orthodox, 1.3% as Muslim, and 9.8% as having no religion. According to a Georgetown University study, before 2000 the country had one of the highest rates of regular mass attendance in the Western world.
While daily attendance was 13% in 2006, there was a reduction in weekly attendance from 81% in 1990 to 48% in 2006; the decline was reported as stabilising, though. In 2011, it was reported that weekly mass attendance in Dublin was 18% and even lower among younger generations.

The Church of Ireland, at 2.7% of the population, is the second largest Christian denomination. Membership declined throughout the twentieth century but experienced an increase early in the 21st century alongside other Christian denominations. Other significant Protestant denominations are the Presbyterian Church and Methodist Church. Immigration has contributed to a growth in Hindu and Muslim populations. In percentage terms, as of the 2006 census, Orthodox Christianity and Islam are the fastest growing religions with increases of 100% and 70% respectively.

Ireland&#x27;s patron saints are Saint Patrick, Saint Bridget, and Saint Columba; Saint Patrick is commonly recognised as the primary patron saint. Saint Patrick&#x27;s Day is celebrated on 17 March in Ireland and abroad as the Irish national day with parades and other celebrations.

As with other traditionally Catholic European states, such as Spain and Italy, Ireland underwent a period of legal secularisation in the late twentieth century. In 1972, the article of the Constitution naming specific religious groups was deleted by the Fifth Amendment in a referendum. Article 44 remains in the Constitution: &quot;The State acknowledges that the homage of public worship is due to Almighty God. It shall hold His Name in reverence, and shall respect and honour religion.&quot; The article also establishes freedom of religion, prohibits endowment of any religion, prohibits the state from religious discrimination, and requires the state to treat religious and non-religious schools in a non-prejudicial manner.

Although most schools in Ireland are patronised by religious organisations, government policy has been to &quot;transfer&quot; some schools to non-denominational or multi-denominational patronage, and a secularist trend is occurring among younger generations.

==Culture==

Ireland&#x27;s culture was for centuries predominantly Gaelic, and it remains one of the six principal Celtic nations. Following the Anglo-Norman invasion in the 12th century, and gradual British conquest and colonisation beginning in the 16th century, Ireland became influenced by English and Scottish culture. Subsequently, Irish culture, though distinct in many aspects, shares characteristics with the rest of the Anglosphere, Catholic Europe, and other Celtic regions. The Irish diaspora, one of the world&#x27;s largest and most dispersed, has contributed to the globalisation of Irish culture, producing many prominent figures in art, music, and science.

===Literature===
Ireland has made a significant contribution to world literature in both the English and Irish languages. Modern Irish fiction began with the publishing of the 1726 novel &quot;Gulliver&#x27;s Travels&quot; by Jonathan Swift. Other writers of importance during the 18th century and their most notable works include Laurence Sterne with the publication of &quot;The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman&quot; and Oliver Goldsmith&#x27;s &quot;The Vicar of Wakefield&quot;. Numerous Irish novelists emerged during the 19th century, including Maria Edgeworth, John Banim, Gerald Griffin, Charles Kickham, William Carleton, George Moore, and Somerville and Ross. Bram Stoker is best known as the author of the 1897 novel &quot;Dracula&quot;.

James Joyce (1882–1941) published his most famous work &quot;Ulysses&quot; in 1922, which is an interpretation of the &quot;Odyssey&quot; set in Dublin. Edith Somerville continued writing after the death of her partner Martin Ross in 1915. Dublin&#x27;s Annie M. P. Smithson was one of several authors catering for fans of romantic fiction in the 1920s and 1930s. After the Second World War, popular novels were published by, among others, Brian O&#x27;Nolan, who published as Flann O&#x27;Brien, Elizabeth Bowen, and Kate O&#x27;Brien. During the final decades of the 20th century, Edna O&#x27;Brien, John McGahern, Maeve Binchy, Joseph O&#x27;Connor, Roddy Doyle, Colm Tóibín, and John Banville came to the fore as novelists.

Patricia Lynch was a prolific children&#x27;s author in the 20th century, while Eoin Colfer&#x27;s works were NYT Best Sellers in this genre in the early 21st century. In the genre of the short story, which is a form favoured by many Irish writers, the most prominent figures include Seán Ó Faoláin, Frank O&#x27;Connor and William Trevor. Well known Irish poets include Patrick Kavanagh, Thomas McCarthy, Dermot Bolger, and Nobel Prize in Literature laureates William Butler Yeats and Seamus Heaney (born in Northern Ireland but resided in Dublin). Prominent writers in the Irish language are Pádraic Ó Conaire, Máirtín Ó Cadhain, Séamus Ó Grianna, and Nuala Ní Dhomhnaill.

The history of Irish theatre begins with the expansion of the English administration in Dublin during the early 17th century, and since then, Ireland has significantly contributed to English drama. In its early history, theatrical productions in Ireland tended to serve political purposes, but as more theatres opened and the popular audience grew, a more diverse range of entertainments were staged. Many Dublin-based theatres developed links with their London equivalents, and British productions frequently found their way to the Irish stage. However, most Irish playwrights went abroad to establish themselves. In the 18th century, Oliver Goldsmith and Richard Brinsley Sheridan were two of the most successful playwrights on the London stage at that time. At the beginning of the 20th century, theatre companies dedicated to the staging of Irish plays and the development of writers, directors and performers began to emerge, which allowed many Irish playwrights to learn their trade and establish their reputations in Ireland rather than in Britain or the United States. Following in the tradition of acclaimed practitioners, principally Oscar Wilde, Literature Nobel Prize laureates George Bernard Shaw (1925) and Samuel Beckett (1969), playwrights such as Seán O&#x27;Casey, Brian Friel, Sebastian Barry, Brendan Behan, Conor McPherson and Billy Roche have gained popular success. Other Irish playwrights of the 20th century include Denis Johnston, Thomas Kilroy, Tom Murphy, Hugh Leonard, Frank McGuinness, and John B. Keane.

===Music and dance===


Irish traditional music has remained vibrant, despite globalising cultural forces, and retains many traditional aspects. It has influenced various music genres, such as American country and roots music, and to some extent modern rock. It has occasionally been blended with styles such as rock and roll and punk rock. Ireland has also produced many internationally known artists in other genres, such as rock, pop, jazz, and blues. Ireland&#x27;s best selling musical act is the rock band U2, who have sold 170 million copies of their albums worldwide since their formation in 1976.

There are a number of classical music ensembles around the country, such as the RTÉ Performing Groups. Ireland also has two opera organisations: Irish National Opera in Dublin, and the annual Wexford Opera Festival, which promotes lesser-known operas, takes place during October and November.

Ireland has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest since 1965. Its first win was in 1970, when Dana won with &quot;All Kinds of Everything&quot;. It has subsequently won the competition six more times, the highest number of wins by any competing country. The phenomenon &quot;Riverdance&quot; originated as an interval performance during the 1994 contest.

Irish dance can broadly be divided into social dance and performance dance. Irish social dance can be divided into &quot;céilí&quot; and set dancing. Irish set dances are quadrilles, danced by 4 couples arranged in a square, while céilí dances are danced by varied formations of couples of 2 to 16 people. There are also many stylistic differences between these two forms. Irish social dance is a living tradition, and variations in particular dances are found across the country. In some places dances are deliberately modified and new dances are choreographed. Performance dance is traditionally referred to as stepdance. Irish stepdance, popularised by the show &quot;Riverdance&quot;, is notable for its rapid leg movements, with the body and arms being kept largely stationary. The solo stepdance is generally characterised by a controlled but not rigid upper body, straight arms, and quick, precise movements of the feet. The solo dances can either be in &quot;soft shoe&quot; or &quot;hard shoe&quot;.

===Architecture===
Ireland has a wealth of structures, surviving in various states of preservation, from the Neolithic period, such as &quot;Brú na Bóinne&quot;, Poulnabrone dolmen, Castlestrange stone, Turoe stone, and Drombeg stone circle. As Ireland was never a part of the Roman Empire, ancient architecture in Greco-Roman style is extremely rare, in contrast to most of Western Europe. The country instead had an extended period of Iron Age architecture. The Irish round tower originated during the Early Medieval period.

Christianity introduced simple monastic houses, such as Clonmacnoise, Skellig Michael and Scattery Island. A stylistic similarity has been remarked between these double monasteries and those of the Copts of Egypt. Gaelic kings and aristocrats occupied ringforts or &quot;crannógs&quot;. Church reforms during the 12th century via the Cistercians stimulated continental influence, with the Romanesque styled Mellifont, Boyle and Tintern abbeys. Gaelic settlement had been limited to the Monastic proto-towns, such as Kells, where the current street pattern preserves the original circular settlement outline to some extent. Significant urban settlements only developed following the period of Viking invasions. The major Hiberno-Norse Longphorts were located on the coast, but with minor inland fluvial settlements, such as the eponymous Longford.

Castles were built by the Anglo-Normans during the late 12th century, such as Dublin Castle and Kilkenny Castle, and the concept of the planned walled trading town was introduced, which gained legal status and several rights by grant of a Charter under Feudalism. These charters specifically governed the design of these towns. Two significant waves of planned town formation followed, the first being the 16th- and 17th-century plantation towns, which were used as a mechanism for the Tudor English kings to suppress local insurgency, followed by 18th-century landlord towns. Surviving Norman founded planned towns include Drogheda and Youghal; plantation towns include Portlaoise and Portarlington; well-preserved 18th-century planned towns include Westport and Ballinasloe. These episodes of planned settlement account for the majority of present-day towns throughout the country.
Gothic cathedrals, such as St Patrick&#x27;s, were also introduced by the Normans. Franciscans were dominant in directing the abbeys by the Late Middle Ages, while elegant tower houses, such as Bunratty Castle, were built by the Gaelic and Norman aristocracy. Many religious buildings were ruined with the dissolution of the monasteries. Following the Restoration, palladianism and rococo, particularly country houses, swept through Ireland under the initiative of Edward Lovett Pearce, with the Houses of Parliament being the most significant.

With the erection of buildings such as The Custom House, Four Courts, General Post Office and King&#x27;s Inns, the neoclassical and Georgian styles flourished, especially in Dublin. Georgian townhouses produced streets of singular distinction, particularly in Dublin, Limerick and Cork. Following Catholic Emancipation, cathedrals and churches influenced by the French Gothic Revival emerged, such as St Colman&#x27;s and St Finbarre&#x27;s. Ireland has long been associated with thatched roof cottages, though these are nowadays considered quaint.
Beginning with the American designed art deco church at Turner&#x27;s Cross, Cork in 1927, Irish architecture followed the international trend towards modern and sleek building styles since the 20th century. Other developments include the regeneration of Ballymun and an urban extension of Dublin at Adamstown. Since the establishment of the Dublin Docklands Development Authority in 1997, the Dublin Docklands area underwent large-scale redevelopment, which included the construction of the Convention Centre Dublin and Grand Canal Theatre. Completed in 2018, Capital Dock in Dublin is the tallest building in the Republic of Ireland achieving in height (the Obel Tower in Belfast, Northern Ireland being the tallest in Ireland). The Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland regulates the practice of architecture in the state.

===Media===

 (RTÉ) is Ireland&#x27;s public service broadcaster, funded by a television licence fee and advertising. RTÉ operates two national television channels, RTÉ One and RTÉ Two. The other independent national television channels are Virgin Media One, Virgin Media Two, Virgin Media Three and TG4, the latter of which is a public service broadcaster for speakers of the Irish language. All these channels are available on Saorview, the national free-to-air digital terrestrial television service. Additional channels included in the service are RTÉ News Now, RTÉjr, and RTÉ One +1. Subscription-based television providers operating in Ireland include Virgin Media and Sky.

The BBC&#x27;s Northern Irish division is widely available in Ireland. BBC One Northern Ireland and BBC Two Northern Ireland are available in pay television providers including Virgin and Sky as well as via signal overspill by Freeview in border counties.

Supported by the Irish Film Board, the Irish film industry grew significantly since the 1990s, with the promotion of indigenous films as well as the attraction of international productions like &quot;Braveheart&quot; and &quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot;.

A large number of regional and local radio stations are available countrywide. A survey showed that a consistent 85% of adults listen to a mixture of national, regional and local stations on a daily basis. RTÉ Radio operates four national stations, Radio 1, 2fm, Lyric fm, and RnaG. It also operates four national DAB radio stations. There are two independent national stations: Today FM and Newstalk.

Ireland has a traditionally competitive print media, which is divided into daily national newspapers and weekly regional newspapers, as well as national Sunday editions. The strength of the British press is a unique feature of the Irish print media scene, with the availability of a wide selection of British published newspapers and magazines.

Eurostat reported that 82% of Irish households had Internet access in 2013 compared to the EU average of 79% but only 67% had broadband access.

===Cuisine===
Irish cuisine was traditionally based on meat and dairy products, supplemented with vegetables and seafood.
Examples of popular Irish cuisine include boxty, colcannon, coddle, stew, and bacon and cabbage. Ireland is known for the full Irish breakfast, which involves a fried or grilled meal generally consisting of rashers, egg, sausage, white and black pudding, and fried tomato. Apart from the influence by European and international dishes, there has been an emergence of a new Irish cuisine based on traditional ingredients handled in new ways. This cuisine is based on fresh vegetables, fish, oysters, mussels and other shellfish, and the wide range of hand-made cheeses that are now being produced across the country. Shellfish have increased in popularity, especially due to the high quality shellfish available from the country&#x27;s coastline. The most popular fish include salmon and cod. Traditional breads include soda bread and wheaten bread. Barmbrack is a yeasted bread with added sultanas and raisins, traditionally eaten on Halloween.

Popular everyday beverages among the Irish include tea and coffee. Alcoholic drinks associated with Ireland include Poitín and the world-famous Guinness, which is a dry stout that originated in the brewery of Arthur Guinness at St. James&#x27;s Gate in Dublin. Irish whiskey is also popular throughout the country and comes in various forms, including single malt, single grain, and blended whiskey.

===Sports===
Gaelic football and hurling are the traditional sports of Ireland as well as popular spectator sports. They are administered by the Gaelic Athletics Association on an all-Ireland basis. Other Gaelic games organised by the association include Gaelic handball and rounders. Association football (soccer) is the third most popular spectator sport and has the highest level of participation. Although the League of Ireland is the national league, the English Premier League is the most popular among the public. The Republic of Ireland national football team plays at international level and is administered by the Football Association of Ireland.

The Irish Rugby Football Union is the governing body of rugby union, which is played at local and international levels on an all-Ireland basis, and has produced players such as Brian O&#x27;Driscoll and Ronan O&#x27;Gara, who were on the team that won the Grand Slam in 2009. The success of the Irish Cricket Team in the 2007 Cricket World Cup has led to an increase in the popularity of cricket, which is also administered on an all-Ireland basis by Cricket Ireland. Ireland are one of the twelve Test playing members of the International Cricket Council, having been granted Test status in 2017. Professional domestic matches are played between the major cricket unions of Leinster, Munster, Northern, and North West. Netball is represented by the Ireland national netball team.

Golf is another popular sport in Ireland, with over 300 courses countrywide. The country has produced several internationally successful golfers, such as Pádraig Harrington, Shane Lowry and Paul McGinley. Horse racing has a large presence, with influential breeding and racing operations in the country. Racing takes place at courses at The Curragh Racecourse in County Kildare, Leopardstown Racecourse just outside Dublin, and Galway. Ireland has produced champion horses such as Galileo, Montjeu, and Sea the Stars. Boxing is Ireland&#x27;s most successful sport at an Olympic level. Administered by the Irish Athletic Boxing Association on an all-Ireland basis, it has gained in popularity as a result of the international success of boxers such as Bernard Dunne, Andy Lee and Katie Taylor.

Some of Ireland&#x27;s highest performers in athletics have competed at the Olympic Games, such as Eamonn Coghlan and Sonia O&#x27;Sullivan. The annual Dublin Marathon and Dublin Women&#x27;s Mini Marathon are two of the most popular athletics events in the country. Rugby league is represented by the Ireland national rugby league team and administered by Rugby League Ireland (who are full member of the Rugby League European Federation) on an all-Ireland basis. The team compete in the European Cup (rugby league) and the Rugby League World Cup. Ireland reached the quarter-finals of the 2000 Rugby League World Cup as well as reaching the semi-finals in the 2008 Rugby League World Cup. The Irish Elite League is a domestic competition for rugby league teams in Ireland.

While Australian rules football in Ireland has a limited following, a series of International rules football games (constituting a hybrid of the Australian and Gaelic football codes) takes place annually between teams representing Ireland and Australia. Baseball and basketball are also emerging sports in Ireland, both of which have an international team representing the island of Ireland. Other sports which retain a following in Ireland include cycling, greyhound racing, horse riding, and motorsport.

===Society===

Ireland ranks fifth in the world in terms of gender equality. In 2011, Ireland was ranked the most charitable country in Europe, and second most charitable in the world. Contraception was controlled in Ireland until 1979, however, the receding influence of the Catholic Church has led to an increasingly secularised society. A constitutional ban on divorce was lifted following a referendum in 1995. Divorce rates in Ireland are very low compared to European Union averages (0.7 divorced people per 1,000 population in 2011) while the marriage rate in Ireland is slightly above the European Union average (4.6 marriages per 1,000 population per year in 2012). Abortion had been banned throughout the period of the Irish state, first through provisions of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 and later by the Protection of Life During Pregnancy Act 2013. The right to life of the unborn was protected in the constitution by the Eighth Amendment in 1983; this provision was removed following a referendum, and replaced it with a provision allowing legislation to regulate the termination of pregnancy. The Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018 passed later that year provided for abortion generally during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, and in specified circumstances after that date.

Capital punishment is constitutionally banned in Ireland, while discrimination based on age, gender, sexual orientation, marital or familial status, religion, race or membership of the travelling community is illegal. The legislation which outlawed homosexual acts was repealed in 1993. The Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010 permitted civil partnerships between same-sex couples. The Children and Family Relationships Act 2015 allowed for adoption rights for couples other than married couples, including civil partners and cohabitants, and provided for donor-assisted human reproduction; however, significant sections of the Act have yet to be commenced. Following a referendum held on 23 May 2015, Ireland became the eighteenth country to provide in law for same-sex marriage, and the first to do so by popular vote.

Ireland became the first country in the world to introduce an environmental levy for plastic shopping bags in 2002 and a public smoking ban in 2004. Recycling in Ireland is carried out extensively, and Ireland has the second highest rate of packaging recycling in the European Union. It was the first country in Europe to ban incandescent lightbulbs in 2008 and the first EU country to ban in-store tobacco advertising and product display in 2009. In 2015, Ireland became the second country in the world to introduce plain cigarette packaging. Despite the above measures to discourage tobacco use, smoking rates in Ireland remain at approximately 15.4% as of 2020.

===State symbols===

The state shares many symbols with the island of Ireland. These include the colours green and blue, animals such as the Irish wolfhound and stags, structures such as round towers and celtic crosses, and designs such as Celtic knots and spirals. The shamrock, a type of clover, has been a national symbol of Ireland since the 17th century when it became customary to wear it as a symbol on St. Patrick&#x27;s Day. These symbols are used by state institutions as well as private bodies in the Republic of Ireland.

The flag of Ireland is a tricolour of green, white and orange. The flag originates with the Young Ireland movement of the mid-19th century but was not popularised until its use during the Easter Rising of 1916. The colours represent the Gaelic tradition (green) and the followers of William of Orange in Ireland (orange), with white representing the aspiration for peace between them. It was adopted as the flag of the Irish Free State in 1922 and continues to be used as the sole flag and ensign of the state. A naval jack, a green flag with a yellow harp, is set out in Defence Forces Regulations and flown from the bows of warships in addition to the national flag in limited circumstances (e.g. when a ship is not underway). It is based on the unofficial green ensign of Ireland used in the 18th and 19th centuries and the traditional green flag of Ireland dating from the 16th century.

Like the national flag, the national anthem, (), has its roots in the Easter Rising, when the song was sung by the rebels. Although originally published in English in 1912, the song was translated into Irish in 1923 and the Irish-language version is more commonly sung today. The song was officially adopted as the anthem of the Irish Free State in 1926 and continues as the national anthem of the state. The first four bars of the chorus followed by the last five comprise the presidential salute.

The arms of Ireland originate as the arms of the monarchs of Ireland and was recorded as the arms of the King of Ireland in the 12th century. From the union of the crowns of England, Scotland and Ireland in 1603, they have appeared quartered on the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom. Today, they are the personal arms of the president of Ireland whilst he or she is in office and are flown as the presidential standard. The harp symbol is used extensively by the state to mark official documents, Irish coinage and on the seal of the president of Ireland.

==See also==

* List of Ireland-related topics
* Outline of the Republic of Ireland
==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* Constitution of Ireland (the 1937 constitution)
* &quot;The Irish Free State Constitution Act, 1922&quot;
* J. Anthony Foley and Stephen Lalor (ed), &quot;Gill &amp; Macmillan Annotated Constitution of Ireland&quot; (Gill &amp; Macmillan, 1995) ()
* FSL Lyons (1 January 1985). &quot;Ireland Since the Famine&quot;. .


==External links==
===Government===
* Irish State – official governmental portal
* – official presidential site
* Taoiseach – official prime ministerial site

===General information===
* Ireland. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Ireland – information from the United States Department of State
* from the United States Library of Congress (archived by the WayBackMachine)
* Ireland at &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Ireland profile from the BBC News
* 
* Key Development Forecasts for Ireland from International Futures</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="0" end="7" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="31" end="50" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414323" start="71" end="90" title="Northwestern Europe" label="Northwestern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q179872" start="118" end="126" title="Counties of Ireland" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="144" end="151" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="197" end="204" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="225" end="231" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="311" end="326" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="360" end="376" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="387" end="413" title="Countries of the United Kingdom" label="part of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="449" end="463" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q81499" start="474" end="484" title="Celtic Sea" label="Celtic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209688" start="499" end="523" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Channel" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="550" end="559" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="581" end="588" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="590" end="612" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="651" end="662" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="669" end="680" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="699" end="708" title="President of Ireland" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="749" end="762" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="811" end="829" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="955" end="971" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="989" end="997" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="1028" end="1046" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="1059" end="1075" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1189" end="1212" title="Head of state#Non-executive model" label="non-executive president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428187" start="1271" end="1303" title="The Republic of Ireland Act 1948" label="The Republic of Ireland Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1336" end="1350" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="1374" end="1394" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1424" end="1438" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="1687" end="1699" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="1726" end="1747" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="1761" end="1777" title="Government of Ireland" label="Irish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="1782" end="1807" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Irish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800594" start="1863" end="1894" title="North/South Ministerial Council" label="North/South Ministerial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="1935" end="1952" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="1960" end="1975" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809938" start="2027" end="2053" title="List of countries by inequality-adjusted Human Development Index" label="adjustments for inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="2064" end="2087" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="2162" end="2172" title="healthcare" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810245" start="2174" end="2190" title="List of countries by economic freedom" label="economic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="2195" end="2215" title="Press Freedom Index" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="2234" end="2252" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="2373" end="2390" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="2399" end="2403" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="2451" end="2470" title="Neutral country" label="military neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2506" end="2518" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2568" end="2572" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="2605" end="2626" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2631" end="2655" title="Permanent Structured Cooperation#Neutral states" label="certain aspects of PESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062" start="2657" end="2679" title="Economy of the Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="2844" end="2847" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435787" start="2852" end="2855" title="List of countries by GNI (nominal) per capita" label="GNI"/>
<link wikidata="Q855736" start="3062" end="3074" title="Celtic Tiger" label="Celtic Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="3143" end="3158" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071741" start="3205" end="3226" title="Irish property bubble" label="Irish property bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q179872" start="3467" end="3486" title="counties of Ireland" label="counties of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="3553" end="3576" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428187" start="3715" end="3743" title="Republic of Ireland Act 1948" label="Republic of Ireland Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="4095" end="4104" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="4196" end="4217" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4246" end="4271" title="Ireland–United Kingdom relations#Articles 2 and 3 and the name Ireland" label="claim to Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="4520" end="4536" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="4562" end="4579" title="Irish republicans" label="Irish republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140657" start="4796" end="4808" title="Partitionism" label="partitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="4909" end="4921" title="Act of Union 1800" label="Act of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="5002" end="5045" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="5058" end="5070" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q317436" start="5417" end="5440" title="Charles Stewart Parnell" label="Charles Stewart Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311653" start="5456" end="5481" title="Irish Parliamentary Party" label="Irish Parliamentary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q446921" start="5564" end="5581" title="Irish Land League" label="Irish Land League"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="5593" end="5605" title="land reforms" label="land reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070896" start="5637" end="5652" title="Irish Land Acts" label="Irish Land Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="5699" end="5708" title="Irish Home Rule Movement" label="Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664026" start="5873" end="5898" title="Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898" label="Local Government Act 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="5949" end="5961" title="grand juries" label="grand juries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777934" start="5969" end="5990" title="Protestant Ascendancy" label="Protestant Ascendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080258" start="6027" end="6046" title="Parliament Act 1911" label="Parliament Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="6073" end="6087" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q225392" start="6093" end="6105" title="John Redmond" label="John Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279790" start="6118" end="6137" title="Home Rule Act 1914" label="Third Home Rule Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="6160" end="6177" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Unionist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="6351" end="6366" title="Irish Catholics" label="Irish Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="6483" end="6489" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q177235" start="6714" end="6731" title="Edward Carson" label="Sir Edward Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071313" start="6739" end="6759" title="Irish Unionist Party" label="Irish Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q336809" start="6778" end="6793" title="James Craig, 1st Viscount Craigavon" label="Sir James Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="6801" end="6822" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q935581" start="6868" end="6885" title="Ulster Volunteers" label="Ulster Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="7056" end="7069" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7084" end="7097" title="Irish Parliamentary Party#Home Rule succeeds" label="Amending Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="7438" end="7450" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279790" start="7522" end="7541" title="Home Rule Act 1914" label="Third Home Rule Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7572" end="7587" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12403849" start="7724" end="7760" title="Ireland and World War I" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s engagement in the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728804" start="7784" end="7803" title="National Volunteers" label="National Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="7829" end="7835" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071671" start="7856" end="7870" title="Irish regiment" label="Irish regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546968" start="7879" end="7891" title="10th (Irish) Division (United Kingdom)" label="10th (Irish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552096" start="7896" end="7908" title="16th (Irish) Division" label="16th (Irish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435813" start="7926" end="7942" title="Kitchener&amp;#x27;s Army" label="New British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477538" start="7971" end="7984" title="36th (Ulster) Division" label="36th (Ulster)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074958" start="8018" end="8034" title="Irish Volunteers" label="Irish Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="8155" end="8168" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190570" start="8188" end="8206" title="Irish Citizen Army" label="Irish Citizen Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042670" start="8249" end="8276" title="Irish Declaration of Independence" label="declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q274143" start="8537" end="8551" title="Patrick Pearse" label="Patrick Pearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q213374" start="8660" end="8674" title="James Connolly" label="James Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046722" start="8705" end="8736" title="Industrial Workers of the World" label="Industrial Workers of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162757" start="8825" end="8852" title="Conscription Crisis of 1918" label="Conscription Crisis of 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q905063" start="8983" end="9004" title="1918 Irish general election" label="1918 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="9031" end="9052" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866515" start="9072" end="9081" title="History of Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580111" start="9124" end="9137" title="abstentionism" label="abstentionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="9147" end="9171" title="British House of Commons" label="British House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269552" start="9229" end="9241" title="Dáil Éireann (Irish Republic)" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356572" start="9248" end="9258" title="first Dáil" label="first Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464916" start="9268" end="9295" title="declaration of independence" label="declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140152" start="9314" end="9328" title="Irish Republic" label="Irish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198240" start="9378" end="9395" title="Proclamation of the Irish Republic" label="1916 Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q530982" start="9509" end="9533" title="Ministry of Dáil Éireann" label="Ministry of Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q327203" start="9601" end="9621" title="Seán T. O&amp;#x27;Kelly" label="Seán T. O&amp;#x27;Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="9629" end="9651" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="9697" end="9716" title="Irish War of Independence" label="War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="9771" end="9789" title="British government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q342765" start="9834" end="9849" title="Arthur Griffith" label="Arthur Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q964439" start="9851" end="9864" title="Robert Barton" label="Robert Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q173196" start="9869" end="9884" title="Michael Collins (Irish leader)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="9901" end="9919" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650631" start="10009" end="10019" title="Hans Place" label="Hans Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q26328" start="10023" end="10036" title="Knightsbridge" label="Knightsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443260" start="10183" end="10194" title="Second Dáil" label="Second Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763640" start="10195" end="10203" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty Dáil vote" label="ratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="10338" end="10346" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515419" start="10417" end="10453" title="Constitution of the Irish Free State" label="Constitution of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300937" start="10459" end="10489" title="Parliament of Northern Ireland" label="Parliament of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016884" start="10634" end="10668" title="Parliament of the Irish Free State" label="Parliament of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419833" start="10673" end="10714" title="Executive Council of the Irish Free State" label="Executive Council of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="11094" end="11117" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="11118" end="11135" title="personal union" label="sharing a monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="11187" end="11207" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558541" start="11227" end="11243" title="Governor-General of the Irish Free State" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="11274" end="11283" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376681" start="11380" end="11414" title="President of the Executive Council of the Irish Free State" label="President of the Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="11618" end="11633" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140152" start="11700" end="11714" title="Irish Republic" label="Irish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="11939" end="11953" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016884" start="11978" end="11999" title="Oireachtas of the Irish Free State" label="Free State Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q173196" start="12120" end="12135" title="Michael Collins (Irish leader)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084968" start="12303" end="12324" title="Irish Republican Army (1919–1922)" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015384" start="12386" end="12401" title="Irish Republican Army (1922–1969)" label="anti-treaty IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862972" start="12451" end="12464" title="National Army (Ireland)" label="National Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12770" end="12785" title="Irish regiments#Irish regiments of the British Army" label="Irish regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="13353" end="13376" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517645" start="13413" end="13428" title="adoption of the Constitution of Ireland" label="came into force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515419" start="13468" end="13504" title="Constitution of the Irish Free State" label="Constitution of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800913" start="13604" end="13620" title="Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Articles 2 and 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558541" start="13860" end="13876" title="Governor-General of the Irish Free State" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="13947" end="13967" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="14245" end="14254" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820046" start="14329" end="14353" title="Irish neutrality during World War II" label="Ireland remained neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337549" start="14400" end="14413" title="The Emergency (Ireland)" label="The Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="14430" end="14438" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428187" start="14481" end="14513" title="The Republic of Ireland Act 1948" label="The Republic of Ireland Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670316" start="14756" end="14774" title="London Declaration" label="London Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915629" start="14885" end="14910" title="Crown of Ireland Act 1542" label="Crown of Ireland Act 1542"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104586" start="14942" end="14998" title="Statute Law Revision (Pre-Union Irish Statutes) Act 1962" label="Statute Law Revision (Pre-Union Irish Statutes) Act 1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="15053" end="15067" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820046" start="15137" end="15151" title="Irish neutrality during World War II" label="neutral stance"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="15203" end="15215" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="15403" end="15423" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338737" start="15519" end="15543" title="European Free Trade Area" label="European Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="15820" end="15833" title="protectionist" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="16016" end="16033" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="16172" end="16188" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991237" start="16274" end="16293" title="Treaty of Accession 1972" label="Treaty of Accession"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984928" start="16308" end="16343" title="Third Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="referendum was held later that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="16520" end="16531" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="16655" end="16670" title="1979 oil crisis" label="1979 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q661973" start="16904" end="16925" title="Progressive Democrats" label="Progressive Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="16982" end="16988" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="17004" end="17013" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185856" start="17021" end="17036" title="Democratic Left (Ireland)" label="Democratic Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q855736" start="17157" end="17169" title="Celtic Tiger" label="Celtic Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="17201" end="17216" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="17429" end="17443" title="Paramilitary" label="paramilitaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="17452" end="17464" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="17500" end="17512" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="17574" end="17595" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800913" start="17742" end="17789" title="Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="17839" end="17845" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="18267" end="18274" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="18284" end="18300" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q209113" start="18423" end="18436" title="North Channel (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="North Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="18455" end="18464" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209688" start="18500" end="18524" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Channel" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81499" start="18533" end="18543" title="Celtic Sea" label="Celtic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="18757" end="18764" title="bogland" label="bogland"/>
<link wikidata="Q503368" start="18805" end="18818" title="Carrauntoohil" label="Carrauntoohil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366878" start="18838" end="18864" title="MacGillycuddy&amp;#x27;s Reeks" label="MacGillycuddy&amp;#x27;s Reeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="18898" end="18911" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="19065" end="19074" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q191992" start="19077" end="19085" title="headland" label="headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="19091" end="19094" title="bay" label="bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="19177" end="19188" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="19244" end="19253" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="19268" end="19271" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q156907" start="19273" end="19276" title="Fraxinus excelsior" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q124969" start="19278" end="19283" title="Corylus avellana" label="hazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="19285" end="19290" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q156904" start="19292" end="19297" title="Alnus glutinosa" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="19299" end="19305" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q146110" start="19307" end="19312" title="Populus tremula" label="aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q147498" start="19314" end="19317" title="Wych elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q146198" start="19319" end="19324" title="Sorbus aucuparia" label="rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161511" start="19329" end="19337" title="Crataegus monogyna" label="hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="19350" end="19359" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q133128" start="19371" end="19381" title="Scots pine" label="Scots pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179729" start="19383" end="19386" title="Taxus baccata" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q192190" start="19388" end="19393" title="Ilex aquifolium" label="holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q329046" start="19398" end="19414" title="Arbutus unedo" label="strawberry trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925171" start="19430" end="19441" title="blanket bog" label="blanket bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="19531" end="19544" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="19620" end="19627" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="19628" end="19638" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141484" start="19763" end="19770" title="Coillte" label="Coillte"/>
<link wikidata="Q235779" start="19907" end="19916" title="Hedgerows" label="Hedgerows"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079227" start="20158" end="20182" title="Celtic broadleaf forests" label="Celtic broadleaf forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079301" start="20187" end="20221" title="North Atlantic moist mixed forests" label="North Atlantic moist mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="20224" end="20235" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="20518" end="20527" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="20532" end="20542" title="fertiliser" label="fertiliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="20571" end="20583" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="20606" end="20620" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="20654" end="20665" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="20811" end="20820" title="temperate climate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="20821" end="20836" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453267" start="20976" end="20991" title="Kilkenny Castle" label="Kilkenny Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096149" start="21050" end="21064" title="Markree Castle" label="Markree Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="21261" end="21267" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="21441" end="21452" title="wind energy" label="wind energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="22146" end="22166" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="22193" end="22202" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="22239" end="22259" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107474" start="22339" end="22357" title="Áras an Uachtaráin" label="Áras an Uachtaráin"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="22365" end="22383" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q247595" start="22456" end="22470" title="Leinster House" label="Leinster House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="22474" end="22480" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="22507" end="22520" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472275" start="22613" end="22623" title="figurehead (metaphor)" label="figurehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152244" start="22700" end="22716" title="Council of State (Ireland)" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q57276" start="22855" end="22873" title="Michael D. Higgins" label="Michael D. Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="22969" end="22987" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="23182" end="23192" title="Coalition government" label="coalitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761117" start="23331" end="23345" title="Dáil constituencies" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="23366" end="23393" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="23410" end="23434" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048605" start="23482" end="23494" title="nominated members of Seanad Éireann" label="nominated by"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894997" start="23520" end="23545" title="university constituencies" label="university constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="23654" end="23664" title="Government of Ireland" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294945" start="23803" end="23823" title="Minister for Finance (Ireland)" label="Minister for Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="24083" end="24106" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="24262" end="24273" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="24275" end="24284" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769254" start="24295" end="24307" title="Independent politician (Ireland)" label="independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q920403" start="24313" end="24327" title="Micheál Martin" label="Micheál Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518922" start="24360" end="24372" title="Simon Harris" label="Simon Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="24437" end="24446" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="24452" end="24464" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q21218940" start="24466" end="24497" title="People Before Profit–Solidarity" label="People Before Profit–Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q20682633" start="24499" end="24515" title="Social Democrats (Ireland)" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q61090509" start="24517" end="24522" title="Aontú" label="Aontú"/>
<link wikidata="Q831015" start="24524" end="24539" title="Green Party (Ireland)" label="The Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="24597" end="24631" title="member state of the European Union" label="member state of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324796" start="24734" end="24752" title="Common Travel Area" label="Common Travel Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="24838" end="24849" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="24858" end="24873" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664026" start="24971" end="25006" title="Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898" label="Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857691" start="25085" end="25124" title="Twentieth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Twentieth Amendment to the constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179872" start="25205" end="25224" title="counties of Ireland" label="counties of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="25303" end="25307" title="County Cork" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q173500" start="25309" end="25315" title="County Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169923" start="25320" end="25326" title="County Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664078" start="25378" end="25403" title="Local Government Act 2001" label="Local Government Act 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100431" start="25423" end="25455" title="Local Government Reform Act 2014" label="Local Government Reform Act 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074936" start="25482" end="25510" title="Local government in the Republic of Ireland" label="thirty-one local authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198484" start="25675" end="25693" title="municipal district" label="municipal district"/>
<link wikidata="Q13455770" start="25730" end="25743" title="town council (Ireland)" label="town councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761117" start="25958" end="25977" title="Dáil constituencies" label="Dáil constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q155101" start="26155" end="26162" title="Regions of the Republic of Ireland" label="regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="26436" end="26446" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q858700" start="26447" end="26459" title="legal system" label="legal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="26508" end="26531" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153617" start="26566" end="26579" title="Supreme Court of Ireland" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511526" start="26585" end="26600" title="Court of Appeal (Ireland)" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q671721" start="26606" end="26616" title="High Court (Ireland)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121578" start="26622" end="26635" title="Circuit Court (Ireland)" label="Circuit Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283297" start="26644" end="26658" title="District Court (Ireland)" label="District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039797" start="26683" end="26692" title="Law of the Republic of Ireland" label="Irish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="26793" end="26797" title="jury" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303026" start="26881" end="26896" title="Judicial review in the Republic of Ireland" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366959" start="27101" end="27115" title="Garda Síochána" label="Garda Síochána"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257481" start="27472" end="27480" title="Firearms legislation in Ireland" label="firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="27572" end="27577" title="baton (law enforcement)" label="baton"/>
<link wikidata="Q622653" start="27582" end="27594" title="pepper spray" label="pepper spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852127" start="27601" end="27616" title="Military Police Corps (Ireland)" label="Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038047" start="27637" end="27647" title="Irish Army" label="Irish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="27988" end="28004" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259221" start="28035" end="28051" title="Irish nationality law" label="citizenship laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="28151" end="28167" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284042" start="28554" end="28568" title="Irish passport" label="Irish passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="28607" end="28614" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q308905" start="28885" end="28932" title="Presidency of the Council of the European Union" label="Presidency of the Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="29083" end="29087" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29098" end="29110" title="The Emergency (Ireland)#Neutrality" label="longstanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q327063" start="29169" end="29189" title="Irish Defence Forces" label="Irish Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773926" start="29286" end="29298" title="Congo Crisis" label="Congo Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="29319" end="29325" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="29327" end="29334" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="29339" end="29361" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820046" start="29372" end="29408" title="Irish neutrality during World War II" label="Irish neutrality during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29439" end="29462" title="Participants in World War II#Ireland" label="participants in the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="29522" end="29530" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="29617" end="29637" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q467680" start="29639" end="29650" title="Seán Lemass" label="Seán Lemass"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="29766" end="29769" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="29896" end="29917" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q584102" start="29926" end="29941" title="Shannon Airport" label="Shannon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="29988" end="30025" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="United States invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="30050" end="30064" title="Gulf War" label="First Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="30120" end="30141" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="30172" end="30205" title="Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council" label="Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="30347" end="30362" title="neutral country" label="neutral country"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="30511" end="30515" title="Dáil" label="Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q219575" start="30620" end="30647" title="United Nations peacekeeping" label="United Nations peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038047" start="30697" end="30701" title="Irish Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594652" start="30703" end="30716" title="Irish Naval Service" label="Naval Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q635303" start="30718" end="30727" title="Irish Air Corps" label="Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315242" start="30732" end="30753" title="Reserve Defence Forces" label="Reserve Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852207" start="30907" end="30925" title="Military aid to the civil power" label="aid to civil power"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="30992" end="30995" title="EEZ" label="EEZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="31039" end="31042" title="Partnership for Peace" label="PfP"/>
<link wikidata="Q331795" start="31359" end="31370" title="patrol ship" label="patrol ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137295" start="31514" end="31521" title="frogman" label="frogmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794231" start="31573" end="31585" title="Army Reserve (Ireland)" label="Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981923" start="31590" end="31611" title="Naval Service Reserve" label="Naval Service Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q689767" start="31681" end="31697" title="Army Ranger Wing" label="Army Ranger Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865781" start="31901" end="31921" title="Minister for Defence (Ireland)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="31967" end="32011" title="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="32096" end="32121" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="32182" end="32192" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="32197" end="32211" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435787" start="32250" end="32264" title="List of countries by GNI (nominal) per capita" label="GNI per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870091" start="32298" end="32334" title="Modified gross national income" label="modified Gross National Income (GNI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081788" start="32355" end="32380" title="Central Statistics Office (Ireland)" label="Central Statistics Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="33108" end="33124" title="Member states of the European Union" label="EU member states"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="33277" end="33292" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071741" start="33317" end="33338" title="Irish property bubble" label="Irish property bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="33645" end="33672" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="33933" end="33950" title="unemployment rate" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081788" start="33971" end="33974" title="Central Statistics Office (Ireland)" label="CSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058983" start="34200" end="34222" title="Census of Ireland 2011" label="Census of Ireland 2011"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35100" end="35124" title="Corporation tax in the Republic of Ireland#Corporate tax inversions" label="corporate tax inversions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152629" start="35444" end="35456" title="double Irish" label="double Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403012" start="35530" end="35573" title="EU illegal State aid case against Apple in Ireland" label="€13bn EU &amp;quot;illegal state aid&amp;quot; fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="35727" end="35748" title="special economic zone" label="special economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153255" start="35767" end="35806" title="International Financial Services Centre, Dublin" label="International Financial Services Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="36090" end="36099" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="36104" end="36119" title="service economy" label="service economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172542" start="36365" end="36385" title="Corporation tax in the Republic of Ireland" label="corporate tax system"/>
<link wikidata="Q54869992" start="36530" end="36550" title="leprechaun economics" label="leprechaun economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q283785" start="36646" end="36669" title="Central Bank of Ireland" label="Central Bank of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153255" start="36833" end="36837" title="International Financial Services Centre, Dublin" label="IFSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q855736" start="37037" end="37049" title="Celtic Tiger" label="Celtic Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q855736" start="37261" end="37273" title="Celtic Tiger" label="Celtic Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="37402" end="37431" title="financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="financial crisis of 2007–2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613071" start="37566" end="37596" title="Post-2008 Irish banking crisis" label="Post-2008 Irish banking crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="37704" end="37713" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q54911724" start="37829" end="37840" title="Conduit and Sink OFCs" label="Conduit OFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="37871" end="37881" title="tax havens" label="tax havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955478" start="37928" end="37957" title="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017" label="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138289" start="38099" end="38104" title="Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base" label="CCCTB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38157" end="38182" title="Corporation tax in the Republic of Ireland#Multinational tax schemes" label="multinational tax schemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="38236" end="38261" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="38667" end="38674" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q253967" start="38676" end="38687" title="Kerry Group" label="Kerry Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536176" start="38692" end="38705" title="Smurfit Kappa" label="Smurfit Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="38823" end="38829" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q184196" start="38878" end="38884" title="barite" label="barite"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="38890" end="38898" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829238" start="38900" end="38918" title="Tourism in Ireland" label="Tourism in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="39207" end="39225" title="Financial services" label="Financial services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153255" start="39278" end="39309" title="Irish Financial Services Centre" label="Irish Financial Services Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="39687" end="39693" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17074751" start="39931" end="39934" title="ESB Electric Ireland" label="ESB"/>
<link wikidata="Q23038143" start="39936" end="39952" title="Bord Gáis Energy" label="Bord Gáis Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q409271" start="39957" end="39967" title="Airtricity" label="Airtricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414240" start="40143" end="40155" title="Kinsale Head gas field" label="Kinsale Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q823006" start="40182" end="40198" title="Corrib gas field" label="Corrib gas field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864944" start="40250" end="40258" title="Barryroe" label="Barryroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024045" start="40619" end="40629" title="Wind power in the Republic of Ireland" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="40655" end="40664" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q30295503" start="40721" end="40760" title="Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland" label="Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="41182" end="41203" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q178021" start="41208" end="41214" title="Dublin Airport" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q584102" start="41216" end="41223" title="Shannon Airport" label="Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345361" start="41228" end="41232" title="Cork Airport" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074304" start="41300" end="41309" title="Air charter" label="chartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q83716" start="41601" end="41611" title="Aer Lingus" label="Aer Lingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="41653" end="41660" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="41908" end="41923" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044834" start="41966" end="41975" title="InterCity (Irish Rail)" label="intercity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="41977" end="41985" title="commuter" label="commuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="41990" end="41997" title="freight" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377845" start="42091" end="42106" title="Dublin Heuston railway station" label="Heuston station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543742" start="42111" end="42127" title="Dublin Connolly railway station" label="Connolly station"/>
<link wikidata="Q488724" start="42186" end="42196" title="Enterprise (train)" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="42230" end="42255" title="Northern Ireland Railways" label="Northern Ireland Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="42277" end="42284" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142419" start="42356" end="42364" title="Track gauge in Ireland" label="gauge of"/>
<link wikidata="Q839815" start="42496" end="42500" title="Dublin Area Rapid Transit" label="DART"/>
<link wikidata="Q612560" start="42502" end="42506" title="Luas" label="Luas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263090" start="42508" end="42518" title="Dublin Bus" label="Dublin Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311025" start="42524" end="42535" title="dublinbikes" label="dublinbikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374898" start="42538" end="42547" title="Motorways in the Republic of Ireland" label="Motorways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212112" start="42549" end="42570" title="national primary road" label="national primary road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257315" start="42576" end="42599" title="national secondary road" label="national secondary road"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838200" start="42616" end="42648" title="Transport Infrastructure Ireland" label="Transport Infrastructure Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622875" start="42656" end="42670" title="regional road (Ireland)" label="regional roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664523" start="42675" end="42686" title="Local roads in Ireland" label="local roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q987447" start="42968" end="42977" title="East-Link (Dublin)" label="East-Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984173" start="42982" end="42991" title="West-Link" label="West-Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q924978" start="43021" end="43039" title="Dublin Port Tunnel" label="Dublin Port Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113774" start="43045" end="43062" title="Jack Lynch Tunnel" label="Jack Lynch Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q917851" start="43074" end="43083" title="River Lee (Ireland)" label="River Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549277" start="43101" end="43116" title="Limerick Tunnel" label="Limerick Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="43128" end="43141" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="43269" end="43275" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="43302" end="43309" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="43321" end="43331" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="43333" end="43342" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="43347" end="43357" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="43381" end="43385" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="43489" end="43501" title="Irish people" label="Irish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="43503" end="43509" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908400" start="43611" end="43616" title="North Germanic peoples" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q541508" start="43618" end="43630" title="Anglo-Normans" label="Anglo-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822899" start="44022" end="44038" title="natural increase" label="natural increase"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="44190" end="44210" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q329823" start="44398" end="44408" title="median age" label="median age"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980642" start="44581" end="44592" title="2016 census of Ireland" label="2016 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980642" start="45326" end="45337" title="2016 census of Ireland" label="2016 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q158490" start="45628" end="45637" title="Gaeltacht" label="Gaeltacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252456" start="46045" end="46048" title="TG4" label="TG4"/>
<link wikidata="Q253599" start="46068" end="46092" title="RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta" label="RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q22092171" start="46114" end="46125" title="Tuairisc.ie" label="Tuairisc.ie"/>
<link wikidata="Q327063" start="46134" end="46154" title="Irish Defence Forces" label="Irish Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="46251" end="46257" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33136" start="46446" end="46462" title="Baltic languages" label="Baltic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36705" start="46569" end="46575" title="Shelta" label="Shelta"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="46622" end="46627" title="Ulster Scots dialects" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120476" start="46646" end="46665" title="Ulster Scots people" label="Ulster Scots people"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="46983" end="46996" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="46998" end="47004" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="47009" end="47014" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865864" start="47327" end="47346" title="Minister for Health (Ireland)" label="Minister for Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690681" start="47533" end="47557" title="Health Service Executive" label="Health Service Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500773" start="48004" end="48006" title="general practitioner" label="GP"/>
<link wikidata="Q569412" start="48114" end="48144" title="European Health Insurance Card" label="European Health Insurance Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="48521" end="48536" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48572" end="48581" title="List of countries by life expectancy#OECD (2022)" label="OECD list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543380" start="48797" end="48808" title="Live birth (human)" label="live births"/>
<link wikidata="Q5807606" start="48948" end="48974" title="Health Consumer Powerhouse" label="Health Consumer Powerhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865816" start="49295" end="49317" title="Minister for Education (Ireland)" label="Minister for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988575" start="49620" end="49638" title="Junior Certificate" label="Junior Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310228" start="50165" end="50184" title="Irish Leaving Certificate" label="Leaving Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q323481" start="50849" end="50895" title="Programme for International Student Assessment" label="Programme for International Student Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="50916" end="50920" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="51580" end="51594" title="college degree" label="college degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q859563" start="51774" end="51781" title="secular state" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q579417" start="51794" end="51806" title="Christianity in Ireland" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058983" start="52008" end="52019" title="2011 census of Ireland" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980642" start="52091" end="52102" title="2016 census of Ireland" label="2016 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="52114" end="52124" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="52204" end="52225" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q132612" start="52297" end="52301" title="Mass in the Catholic Church" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="52320" end="52333" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="52618" end="52635" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q653009" start="52909" end="52928" title="Presbyterian Church in Ireland" label="Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586039" start="52933" end="52949" title="Methodist Church in Ireland" label="Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595561" start="52994" end="52999" title="Hinduism in the Republic of Ireland" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="53068" end="53089" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="53094" end="53099" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q165479" start="53213" end="53226" title="Saint Patrick" label="Saint Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q80979" start="53228" end="53241" title="Brigid of Kildare" label="Saint Bridget"/>
<link wikidata="Q236326" start="53247" end="53260" title="Columba" label="Saint Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="53328" end="53352" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447458" start="53719" end="53734" title="Fifth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259273" start="54211" end="54271" title="Denominational education in the Republic of Ireland" label="schools in Ireland are patronised by religious organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327860" start="54526" end="54532" title="Gaelic Ireland" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q236626" start="54574" end="54588" title="Celtic nations" label="Celtic nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q541508" start="54604" end="54616" title="Anglo-Normans" label="Anglo-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="54889" end="54900" title="Anglosphere" label="Anglosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706060" start="54902" end="54917" title="Catholic Europe" label="Catholic Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574155" start="54949" end="54963" title="Irish diaspora" label="Irish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071490" start="55263" end="55276" title="Irish fiction" label="Irish fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q181488" start="55327" end="55350" title="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels" label="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="55360" end="55374" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q218960" start="55465" end="55480" title="Laurence Sterne" label="Laurence Sterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164083" start="55511" end="55562" title="The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman" label="The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q236236" start="55573" end="55589" title="Oliver Goldsmith" label="Oliver Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196205" start="55603" end="55625" title="The Vicar of Wakefield" label="The Vicar of Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243183" start="55642" end="55657" title="List of Irish novelists" label="Irish novelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q237575" start="55701" end="55716" title="Maria Edgeworth" label="Maria Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q460546" start="55718" end="55728" title="John Banim" label="John Banim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509898" start="55730" end="55744" title="Gerald Griffin" label="Gerald Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079785" start="55746" end="55761" title="Charles Kickham" label="Charles Kickham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554038" start="55763" end="55779" title="William Carleton" label="William Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q965927" start="55781" end="55793" title="George A. Moore" label="George Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559989" start="55799" end="55818" title="Somerville and Ross" label="Somerville and Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="55820" end="55831" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="55884" end="55891" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="55900" end="55911" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="55961" end="55968" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="56024" end="56031" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564832" start="56053" end="56069" title="Edith Anna Somerville" label="Edith Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568956" start="56119" end="56130" title="Violet Florence Martin" label="Martin Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769366" start="56154" end="56174" title="Annie M. P. Smithson" label="Annie M. P. Smithson"/>
<link wikidata="Q469093" start="56377" end="56395" title="Flann O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Flann O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q235308" start="56397" end="56412" title="Elizabeth Bowen" label="Elizabeth Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q444315" start="56418" end="56435" title="Kate O&amp;#x27;Brien (novelist)" label="Kate O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q178225" start="56483" end="56500" title="Edna O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Edna O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277641" start="56502" end="56515" title="John McGahern" label="John McGahern"/>
<link wikidata="Q152690" start="56517" end="56529" title="Maeve Binchy" label="Maeve Binchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q768106" start="56531" end="56551" title="Joseph O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Joseph O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q73506" start="56553" end="56564" title="Roddy Doyle" label="Roddy Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q470758" start="56566" end="56577" title="Colm Tóibín" label="Colm Tóibín"/>
<link wikidata="Q313077" start="56583" end="56596" title="John Banville" label="John Banville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145702" start="56629" end="56643" title="Patricia Lynch" label="Patricia Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q211893" start="56709" end="56720" title="Eoin Colfer" label="Eoin Colfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="56739" end="56755" title="New York Times Best Seller" label="NYT Best Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348153" start="56913" end="56927" title="Seán Ó Faoláin" label="Seán Ó Faoláin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351972" start="56929" end="56948" title="Frank O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Frank O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q528826" start="56953" end="56967" title="William Trevor" label="William Trevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q73418" start="57000" end="57016" title="Patrick Kavanagh" label="Patrick Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792268" start="57018" end="57033" title="Thomas McCarthy (poet)" label="Thomas McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q936734" start="57035" end="57048" title="Dermot Bolger" label="Dermot Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="57054" end="57079" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="57090" end="57110" title="W. B. Yeats" label="William Butler Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q93356" start="57115" end="57128" title="Seamus Heaney" label="Seamus Heaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278605" start="57223" end="57240" title="Pádraic Ó Conaire" label="Pádraic Ó Conaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q560494" start="57242" end="57259" title="Máirtín Ó Cadhain" label="Máirtín Ó Cadhain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399624" start="57261" end="57277" title="Séamus Ó Grianna" label="Séamus Ó Grianna"/>
<link wikidata="Q467612" start="57283" end="57302" title="Nuala Ní Dhomhnaill" label="Nuala Ní Dhomhnaill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186136" start="57320" end="57333" title="Irish theatre" label="Irish theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q236236" start="57941" end="57957" title="Oliver Goldsmith" label="Oliver Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q352725" start="57962" end="57987" title="Richard Brinsley Sheridan" label="Richard Brinsley Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="58449" end="58460" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="58495" end="58514" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="58526" end="58540" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q315170" start="58569" end="58586" title="Seán O&amp;#x27;Casey" label="Seán O&amp;#x27;Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q283227" start="58588" end="58599" title="Brian Friel" label="Brian Friel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178100" start="58601" end="58616" title="Sebastian Barry" label="Sebastian Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q313063" start="58618" end="58631" title="Brendan Behan" label="Brendan Behan"/>
<link wikidata="Q734207" start="58633" end="58648" title="Conor McPherson" label="Conor McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q863206" start="58653" end="58664" title="Billy Roche" label="Billy Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q516004" start="58746" end="58760" title="Denis Johnston" label="Denis Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767497" start="58762" end="58775" title="Thomas Kilroy" label="Thomas Kilroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816981" start="58777" end="58787" title="Tom Murphy (playwright)" label="Tom Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634447" start="58789" end="58801" title="Hugh Leonard" label="Hugh Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q370940" start="58803" end="58819" title="Frank McGuinness" label="Frank McGuinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398498" start="58825" end="58838" title="John B. Keane" label="John B. Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482056" start="58865" end="58888" title="Folk music of Ireland" label="Irish traditional music"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="59353" end="59355" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277943" start="59528" end="59549" title="RTÉ Performing Groups" label="RTÉ Performing Groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q42852394" start="59593" end="59613" title="Irish National Opera" label="Irish National Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463492" start="59640" end="59662" title="Wexford Festival Opera" label="Wexford Opera Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="59774" end="59797" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q237615" start="59842" end="59846" title="Dana Rosemary Scallon" label="Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q654023" start="59862" end="59885" title="All Kinds of Everything" label="All Kinds of Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q722693" start="59933" end="59947" title="Ireland in the Eurovision Song Contest" label="six more times"/>
<link wikidata="Q310516" start="60023" end="60033" title="Riverdance" label="Riverdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q211484" start="60089" end="60101" title="1994 Eurovision Song Contest" label="1994 contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209069" start="60144" end="60156" title="social dance" label="social dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020618" start="60161" end="60178" title="performance dance" label="performance dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="60260" end="60269" title="set dance" label="set dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="60275" end="60285" title="quadrilles" label="quadrilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150334" start="60335" end="60347" title="Ceili dance" label="céilí dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416037" start="60369" end="60379" title="Formation dance" label="formations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360620" start="60717" end="60726" title="step dance" label="stepdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865501" start="60728" end="60743" title="Irish stepdance" label="Irish stepdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q310516" start="60775" end="60785" title="Riverdance" label="Riverdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="61223" end="61232" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q339489" start="61255" end="61268" title="Brú na Bóinne" label="Brú na Bóinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q153645" start="61276" end="61294" title="Poulnabrone dolmen" label="Poulnabrone dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049676" start="61296" end="61315" title="Castlestrange stone" label="Castlestrange stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211479" start="61317" end="61328" title="Turoe stone" label="Turoe stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260144" start="61334" end="61354" title="Drombeg stone circle" label="Drombeg stone circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="61391" end="61403" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="61429" end="61440" title="Greco-Roman" label="Greco-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="61551" end="61559" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335799" start="61578" end="61595" title="Irish round tower" label="Irish round tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="61618" end="61632" title="Early Medieval" label="Early Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604720" start="61673" end="61688" title="List of monastic houses in Ireland" label="monastic houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q927223" start="61698" end="61710" title="Clonmacnoise" label="Clonmacnoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q207193" start="61712" end="61727" title="Skellig Michael" label="Skellig Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q640789" start="61732" end="61747" title="Scattery Island Cathedral and Monastery" label="Scattery Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243067" start="61804" end="61822" title="double monastery" label="double monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q146744" start="61840" end="61845" title="Copts" label="Copts"/>
<link wikidata="Q92383" start="61894" end="61902" title="ringfort" label="ringfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q91759" start="61913" end="61920" title="crannóg" label="crannóg"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="61976" end="61987" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercians"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="62031" end="62041" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q966426" start="62049" end="62058" title="Mellifont Abbey" label="Mellifont"/>
<link wikidata="Q896003" start="62060" end="62065" title="Boyle Abbey" label="Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435969" start="62070" end="62077" title="Tintern Abbey (County Wexford)" label="Tintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q917848" start="62158" end="62163" title="Kells, County Meath" label="Kells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259145" start="62376" end="62385" title="Longphort" label="Longphort"/>
<link wikidata="Q645623" start="62479" end="62487" title="Longford" label="Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q541508" start="62516" end="62529" title="Anglo-Normans" label="Anglo-Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="62568" end="62581" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453267" start="62586" end="62601" title="Kilkenny Castle" label="Kilkenny Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="62729" end="62736" title="Charter" label="Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="62743" end="62752" title="Feudalism" label="Feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="62976" end="62981" title="Tudor dynasty" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207223" start="63114" end="63122" title="Drogheda" label="Drogheda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012476" start="63127" end="63134" title="Youghal" label="Youghal"/>
<link wikidata="Q822871" start="63161" end="63171" title="Portlaoise" label="Portlaoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989246" start="63176" end="63189" title="Portarlington, County Laois" label="Portarlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017331" start="63241" end="63249" title="Westport, County Mayo" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q618056" start="63254" end="63265" title="Ballinasloe" label="Ballinasloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="63374" end="63380" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q846365" start="63401" end="63418" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Dublin" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="63457" end="63467" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q599132" start="63568" end="63583" title="Bunratty Castle" label="Bunratty Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="63680" end="63710" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="63739" end="63751" title="palladianism" label="palladianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="63756" end="63762" title="rococo" label="rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="63777" end="63791" title="country houses" label="country houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q527971" start="63839" end="63859" title="Edward Lovett Pearce" label="Edward Lovett Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662776" start="63870" end="63890" title="Irish Houses of Parliament" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300561" start="63959" end="63975" title="The Custom House" label="The Custom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439960" start="63977" end="63988" title="Four Courts" label="Four Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339254" start="63990" end="64009" title="General Post Office (Dublin)" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069586" start="64014" end="64030" title="King&amp;#x27;s Inns" label="King&amp;#x27;s Inns"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="64036" end="64048" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="64053" end="64061" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509345" start="64095" end="64101" title="Georgian Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="64181" end="64187" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="64189" end="64197" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="64202" end="64206" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="64218" end="64239" title="Catholic Emancipation" label="Catholic Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="64290" end="64304" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548801" start="64322" end="64338" title="Cobh Cathedral" label="St Colman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339141" start="64343" end="64361" title="Saint Finbarre&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Finbarre&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="64401" end="64414" title="thatched roof" label="thatched roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="64507" end="64515" title="art deco" label="art deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855982" start="64526" end="64545" title="Turners Cross, Cork" label="Turner&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="64547" end="64551" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563240" start="64725" end="64733" title="Ballymun" label="Ballymun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778876" start="64770" end="64779" title="Adamstown, Dublin" label="Adamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310880" start="64812" end="64850" title="Dublin Docklands Development Authority" label="Dublin Docklands Development Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916711" start="64864" end="64880" title="Dublin Docklands" label="Dublin Docklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916709" start="64962" end="64986" title="Convention Centre Dublin" label="Convention Centre Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944429" start="64991" end="65010" title="Grand Canal Theatre" label="Grand Canal Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q60773680" start="65031" end="65043" title="Capital Dock" label="Capital Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074694" start="65130" end="65140" title="Obel Tower" label="Obel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="65144" end="65151" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="65153" end="65169" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374333" start="65205" end="65249" title="Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland" label="Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="65342" end="65368" title="public service broadcaster" label="public service broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q25821" start="65382" end="65404" title="television licence fee" label="television licence fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096518" start="65469" end="65476" title="RTÉ One" label="RTÉ One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860150" start="65481" end="65488" title="RTÉ Two" label="RTÉ Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q774637" start="65545" end="65561" title="Virgin Media One" label="Virgin Media One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778100" start="65563" end="65579" title="Virgin Media Two" label="Virgin Media Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017925" start="65581" end="65599" title="Virgin Media Three" label="Virgin Media Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252456" start="65604" end="65607" title="TG4" label="TG4"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995451" start="65733" end="65741" title="Saorview" label="Saorview"/>
<link wikidata="Q848981" start="65756" end="65767" title="free-to-air" label="free-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="65768" end="65798" title="digital terrestrial television" label="digital terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828628" start="65856" end="65868" title="RTÉ News Now" label="RTÉ News Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277957" start="65870" end="65875" title="RTÉjr" label="RTÉjr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002039" start="65962" end="65974" title="Virgin Media Ireland" label="Virgin Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537355" start="65979" end="65982" title="Sky Ireland" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="65989" end="65992" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876741" start="66000" end="66023" title="BBC Northern Ireland" label="Northern Irish division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834885" start="66056" end="66080" title="BBC One Northern Ireland" label="BBC One Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835000" start="66085" end="66109" title="BBC Two Northern Ireland" label="BBC Two Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963195" start="66192" end="66208" title="signal overspill" label="signal overspill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156823" start="66212" end="66220" title="Freeview (UK)" label="Freeview"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070740" start="66259" end="66275" title="Irish Film Board" label="Irish Film Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q162729" start="66442" end="66452" title="Braveheart" label="Braveheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q165817" start="66469" end="66488" title="Saving Private Ryan" label="Saving Private Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277950" start="66703" end="66712" title="RTÉ Radio" label="RTÉ Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q632658" start="66746" end="66753" title="RTÉ Radio 1" label="Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q446928" start="66755" end="66758" title="RTÉ 2fm" label="2fm"/>
<link wikidata="Q632655" start="66760" end="66768" title="RTÉ lyric fm" label="Lyric fm"/>
<link wikidata="Q253599" start="66774" end="66778" title="RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta" label="RnaG"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157885" start="66876" end="66884" title="Today FM" label="Today FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q13653071" start="66889" end="66897" title="Newstalk" label="Newstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="67246" end="67254" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="67337" end="67339" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601887" start="67555" end="67560" title="boxty" label="boxty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107669" start="67562" end="67571" title="colcannon" label="colcannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981415" start="67573" end="67579" title="coddle" label="coddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q755730" start="67581" end="67585" title="Irish stew" label="stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839941" start="67591" end="67608" title="bacon and cabbage" label="bacon and cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q40853306" start="67635" end="67655" title="Full breakfast" label="full Irish breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q107675896" start="68233" end="68257" title="List of Irish counties by coastline" label="country&amp;#x27;s coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="68289" end="68295" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="68300" end="68303" title="cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336063" start="68332" end="68342" title="soda bread" label="soda bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336063" start="68347" end="68360" title="wheaten bread" label="wheaten bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993311" start="68362" end="68371" title="Barmbrack" label="Barmbrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="68377" end="68382" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="68385" end="68390" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898118" start="68402" end="68410" title="sultana (grape)" label="sultanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13186" start="68415" end="68421" title="raisin" label="raisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="68447" end="68456" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818294" start="68510" end="68513" title="Irish breakfast tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q622954" start="68518" end="68524" title="Irish coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315113" start="68575" end="68581" title="Poitín" label="Poitín"/>
<link wikidata="Q194297" start="68603" end="68611" title="Guinness" label="Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="68624" end="68633" title="dry stout" label="dry stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q454138" start="68668" end="68683" title="Arthur Guinness" label="Arthur Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319024" start="68687" end="68708" title="St. James&amp;#x27;s Gate" label="St. James&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q909747" start="68720" end="68733" title="Irish whiskey" label="Irish whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="68873" end="68888" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q213711" start="68893" end="68900" title="hurling" label="hurling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356073" start="68958" end="68974" title="spectator sports" label="spectator sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="69005" end="69033" title="Gaelic Athletics Association" label="Gaelic Athletics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727839" start="69040" end="69051" title="all-Ireland" label="all-Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447366" start="69065" end="69077" title="Gaelic games" label="Gaelic games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672856" start="69115" end="69130" title="Gaelic handball" label="Gaelic handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="69135" end="69143" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734534" start="69145" end="69165" title="Association football in the Republic of Ireland" label="Association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q312370" start="69274" end="69291" title="League of Ireland" label="League of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="69328" end="69342" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="69385" end="69427" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q497782" start="69484" end="69515" title="Football Association of Ireland" label="Football Association of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672926" start="69522" end="69548" title="Irish Rugby Football Union" label="Irish Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q654217" start="69574" end="69585" title="Rugby union in Ireland" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q912889" start="69695" end="69716" title="Brian O&amp;#x27;Driscoll" label="Brian O&amp;#x27;Driscoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q733831" start="69721" end="69738" title="Ronan O&amp;#x27;Gara" label="Ronan O&amp;#x27;Gara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359701" start="69774" end="69784" title="Grand Slam (rugby union)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520740" start="69788" end="69792" title="2009 Six Nations Championship" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q137660" start="69813" end="69831" title="Irish Cricket Team" label="Irish Cricket Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127675" start="69839" end="69861" title="2007 Cricket World Cup" label="2007 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185017" start="69906" end="69913" title="cricket in Ireland" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184969" start="69969" end="69984" title="Cricket Ireland" label="Cricket Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70005" end="70036" title="List of International Cricket Council members#Full Members" label="the twelve Test playing members"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="70044" end="70073" title="International Cricket Council" label="International Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="70095" end="70106" title="Test cricket" label="Test status"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70116" end="70145" title="Cricket in Ireland#Domestic cricket" label="Professional domestic matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519980" start="70193" end="70201" title="Leinster Cricket Union" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936921" start="70203" end="70210" title="Munster Cricket Union" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058274" start="70212" end="70220" title="Northern Cricket Union of Ireland" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057339" start="70226" end="70236" title="North West Cricket Union" label="North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="70238" end="70245" title="Netball" label="Netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068670" start="70268" end="70297" title="Republic of Ireland national netball team" label="Ireland national netball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="70300" end="70304" title="Golf" label="Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q381667" start="70454" end="70472" title="Pádraig Harrington" label="Pádraig Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736966" start="70474" end="70485" title="Shane Lowry (golfer)" label="Shane Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q369945" start="70490" end="70503" title="Paul McGinley" label="Paul McGinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="70505" end="70517" title="Horse racing" label="Horse racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15212201" start="70637" end="70659" title="The Curragh Racecourse" label="The Curragh Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q173332" start="70663" end="70677" title="County Kildare" label="County Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526888" start="70679" end="70702" title="Leopardstown Racecourse" label="Leopardstown Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="70728" end="70734" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094737" start="70781" end="70788" title="Galileo (horse)" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322808" start="70790" end="70797" title="Montjeu" label="Montjeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113288" start="70803" end="70816" title="Sea the Stars" label="Sea the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="70818" end="70824" title="Boxing" label="Boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070466" start="70906" end="70939" title="Irish Athletic Boxing Association" label="Irish Athletic Boxing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893092" start="71052" end="71065" title="Bernard Dunne" label="Bernard Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260667" start="71067" end="71075" title="Andy Lee (boxer)" label="Andy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q262699" start="71080" end="71092" title="Katie Taylor" label="Katie Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="71140" end="71149" title="sport of athletics" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="71171" end="71184" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q734425" start="71194" end="71208" title="Eamonn Coghlan" label="Eamonn Coghlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q237567" start="71213" end="71234" title="Sonia O&amp;#x27;Sullivan" label="Sonia O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263072" start="71247" end="71262" title="Dublin Marathon" label="Dublin Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311005" start="71267" end="71300" title="Dublin Women&amp;#x27;s Mini Marathon" label="Dublin Women&amp;#x27;s Mini Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="71362" end="71374" title="Rugby league" label="Rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589812" start="71397" end="71431" title="Ireland national rugby league team" label="Ireland national rugby league team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378214" start="71452" end="71472" title="Rugby League Ireland" label="Rugby League Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174842" start="71501" end="71533" title="Rugby League European Federation" label="Rugby League European Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376795" start="71584" end="71611" title="European Cup (rugby league)" label="European Cup (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639293" start="71620" end="71642" title="Rugby League World Cup" label="Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000717" start="71686" end="71713" title="2000 Rugby League World Cup" label="2000 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000722" start="71757" end="71784" title="2008 Rugby League World Cup" label="2008 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070704" start="71790" end="71808" title="Irish Elite League" label="Irish Elite League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969569" start="71877" end="71913" title="Australian rules football in Ireland" label="Australian rules football in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666862" start="71951" end="71979" title="International rules football" label="International rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866609" start="72125" end="72133" title="Baseball in Ireland" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="72138" end="72148" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215841" start="72320" end="72327" title="cycle sport" label="cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345388" start="72329" end="72345" title="greyhound racing" label="greyhound racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="72347" end="72359" title="horse riding" label="horse riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="72365" end="72375" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q892074" start="72401" end="72412" title="Global Gender Gap Report" label="ranks fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="72438" end="72453" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077064" start="72492" end="72502" title="Charity (practice)" label="charitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q640866" start="72654" end="72669" title="Catholic Church in Ireland" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="72697" end="72708" title="Secularism" label="secularised"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="72742" end="72749" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447443" start="72773" end="72783" title="Fifteenth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708125" start="73053" end="73061" title="Abortion in the Republic of Ireland" label="Abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079046" start="73152" end="73188" title="Offences Against the Person Act 1861" label="Offences Against the Person Act 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709646" start="73206" end="73250" title="Protection of Life During Pregnancy Act 2013" label="Protection of Life During Pregnancy Act 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126745" start="73325" end="73341" title="Eighth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Eighth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q54327853" start="73390" end="73400" title="Thirty-sixth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697516" start="73502" end="73558" title="Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018" label="Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="73703" end="73721" title="Capital punishment" label="Capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124525" start="73994" end="74070" title="Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010" label="Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600712" start="74130" end="74172" title="Children and Family Relationships Act 2015" label="Children and Family Relationships Act 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784739" start="74300" end="74333" title="Third-party reproduction" label="donor-assisted human reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q490812" start="74391" end="74400" title="coming into force" label="commenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876154" start="74414" end="74424" title="Thirty-fourth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070490" start="74487" end="74501" title="Marriage Act 2015" label="provide in law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="74506" end="74523" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196111" start="74651" end="74671" title="plastic shopping bag" label="plastic shopping bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q751734" start="74694" end="74705" title="smoking ban" label="smoking ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303391" start="74715" end="74735" title="Recycling in Ireland" label="Recycling in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="74834" end="74848" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180872" start="74892" end="74915" title="Banning of incandescent lightbulbs" label="incandescent lightbulbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582778" start="75083" end="75108" title="plain cigarette packaging" label="plain cigarette packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="75292" end="75309" title="island of Ireland" label="island of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420291" start="75347" end="75351" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Blue" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q38668" start="75373" end="75388" title="Irish wolfhound" label="Irish wolfhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="75393" end="75397" title="stag" label="stag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335799" start="75419" end="75431" title="Irish round tower" label="round towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q229788" start="75436" end="75448" title="celtic cross" label="celtic cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q242009" start="75472" end="75483" title="Celtic knot" label="Celtic knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q183534" start="75489" end="75496" title="Triple spiral" label="spirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247368" start="75502" end="75510" title="shamrock" label="shamrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q101538" start="75522" end="75528" title="clover" label="clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="75642" end="75664" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q82205" start="75770" end="75785" title="flag of Ireland" label="flag of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919464" start="75791" end="75800" title="tricolour (flag)" label="tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450559" start="75858" end="75871" title="Young Ireland" label="Young Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="75954" end="75967" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327860" start="76003" end="76009" title="Gaelic Ireland" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="76049" end="76066" title="William III of England" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881037" start="76279" end="76289" title="naval jack" label="naval jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544588" start="76525" end="76537" title="green ensign" label="green ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137588" start="77136" end="77155" title="Honors music" label="presidential salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q187385" start="77162" end="77177" title="arms of Ireland" label="arms of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="77309" end="77328" title="union of the crowns" label="union of the crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="77332" end="77339" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="77341" end="77349" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="77354" end="77361" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q719061" start="77390" end="77399" title="Quartering (heraldry)" label="quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q165762" start="77407" end="77447" title="royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom" label="royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q187385" start="77562" end="77583" title="Presidential Standard (Ireland)" label="presidential standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440590" start="77687" end="77719" title="seal of the president of Ireland" label="seal of the president of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574498" start="77738" end="77768" title="List of Ireland-related topics" label="List of Ireland-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112777" start="77771" end="77805" title="Outline of the Republic of Ireland" label="Outline of the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="77882" end="77905" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="78404" end="78422" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="78430" end="78457" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="78492" end="78525" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="78551" end="78570" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="78678" end="78686" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="78735" end="78756" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14561" wikidata="Q2574155" url="?curid=14561" title="Irish diaspora">
<text>The Irish diaspora () refers to ethnic Irish people and their descendants who live outside the island of Ireland.

The phenomenon of migration from Ireland is recorded since the Early Middle Ages, but it can be quantified only from around 1700. Since then, between 9 and 10 million people born in Ireland have emigrated. That is more than the population of Ireland itself, which at its historical peak was 8.5 million on the eve of the Great Famine. The poorest of them went to Great Britain, especially Liverpool. Those who could afford it went further, including almost 5 million to the United States.

After 1765, emigration from Ireland became a short, relentless and efficiently managed national enterprise. In 1890, 40% of Irish-born people were living abroad. By the 21st century, an estimated 80 million people worldwide claimed some Irish descent, which includes more than 36 million Americans claiming Irish as their primary ethnicity.

As recently as the second half of the 19th century, most Irish emigrants spoke Irish as their first language. That had social and cultural consequences for the cultivation of the language abroad, including innovations in journalism. The language continues to be cultivated abroad by a small minority as a literary and social medium. The Irish diaspora are largely assimilated in most countries outside Ireland after World War I. Seán Fleming is the Republic of Ireland&#x27;s Minister of State for the Diaspora and Overseas Aid, a post which was established in 2014.

==Definition==

The term Irish diaspora is open to many interpretations. The diaspora, broadly interpreted, contains all those known to have Irish ancestors, i.e., over 100 million people, which is more than fifteen times the population of the island of Ireland, which was about 6.4 million in 2011. It has been argued the idea of an Irish diaspora, as distinct from the old identification of Irishness with Ireland itself, was influenced by the perceived advent of global mobility and modernity. Irishness could now be identified with dispersed individuals and groups of Irish descent. But many of those individuals were the product of complex ethnic intermarriage in America and elsewhere, complicating the idea of a single line of descent. &quot;Irishness&quot; might then rely primarily on individual identification with an Irish diaspora.

The Government of Ireland defines the Irish diaspora as all persons of Irish nationality who habitually reside outside the island of Ireland. This includes Irish citizens who have emigrated abroad and their children, who are Irish citizens by descent under Irish law. It also includes their grandchildren in cases where they were registered as Irish citizens in the Foreign Births Register held in every Irish diplomatic mission. Under this legal definition, the Irish diaspora is considerably smaller—some 3 million persons, of whom 1.47 million are Irish-born emigrants. Given the island of Ireland&#x27;s estimated population of 6.8 million in 2018, this is still a large ratio.
However, the usage of &quot;Irish diaspora&quot; is generally not limited by citizenship status, thus leading to an estimated (and fluctuating) membership of up to 80 million persons—the second and more emotive definition. The Irish Government acknowledged this interpretation—although it did not acknowledge any legal obligations to persons in this larger diaspora—when Article 2 of the Constitution of Ireland was amended in 1998 to read &quot;[f]urthermore, the Irish nation cherishes its special affinity with people of Irish ancestry living abroad who share its cultural identity and heritage.&quot;

There are people of Irish descent abroad (including Irish speakers) who reject inclusion in an Irish &quot;diaspora&quot; and who designate their identity in other ways. They may see the diasporic label as something used by the Irish government for its own purposes.

==Causes==

The Irish, who were called by the Romans &quot;Scotti&quot; but called themselves Gaels, had raided and settled along the West Coast of Roman Britain, and numbers of them were allowed to settle within the province, where the Roman Army recruited many Irish into auxiliary units that were dispatched to the German frontier. The Attacotti, who were similarly recruited into the Roman army, may also have been Irish settlers in Britain. The movement between Ireland and the classical Britain may have been two-way as similarities between the medieval accounts of Túathal Techtmar and archaeological evidence indicate that the Romans may have supported the invasion and conquest of Ireland by Irish exiles from Britain with the hope of establishing a friendly ruler who could halt the raiding of Britain by the Irish, and some historians have also suggested that the Cruthin of the north of Ireland may have been Picts. After the departure of the Roman army, the Irish began increasing their footholds in Britain, with part of the north-West of the island annexed within the Irish kingdom of Dál Riata. In time, the Irish colonies became independent, merged with the Pictish kingdom and formed the basis of modern Scotland.

The traditionally Gaelic-speaking areas of Scotland (the Highlands and Hebrides) are still referred to in the Gaelic language as &quot;a&#x27; Ghàidhealtachd&quot; (&quot;the Gaeldom&quot;). Irish monks and the Celtic Church engineered a wave of Irish emigration to Great Britain and Continental Europe and were possibly the first inhabitants of the Faroe Islands and Iceland. Throughout the Early Middle Ages, Great Britain and Continental Europe experienced Irish immigration of varying intensity, mostly from clerics and scholars who are collectively known as &quot;peregrini&quot;. Irish emigration to Western Europe, especially to Great Britain, has continued at a greater or lesser pace since then. Today, the ethnic Irish are the single largest minority group in both England and Scotland, most of whom eventually made it back to Ireland.

The dispersal of the Irish has been mainly to Britain or to countries colonised by Britain. England&#x27;s political connection with Ireland began in 1155, when Pope Adrian IV issued a papal bull (known as &quot;Laudabiliter&quot;), which gave Henry II permission to invade Ireland as a means of strengthening the papacy&#x27;s control over the Irish Church. That was followed in 1169 by the Norman invasion of Ireland, which was led by the general Richard de Clare, or &quot;Strongbow&quot;.

The English Crown did not attempt to assert full control of the island until after Henry VIII&#x27;s repudiation of papal authority over the Church in England, and the subsequent rebellion of the Earl of Kildare in Ireland in 1534 threatened English hegemony there. Until the break with Rome, it was widely believed that Ireland was a papal possession, which was granted as a mere fiefdom to the English king and so in 1541, Henry VIII asserted England&#x27;s claim to Ireland free from the papal overlordship by proclaiming himself King of Ireland.

After the Nine Years&#x27; War (1594 to 1603), political power rested in the hands of a Protestant Ascendancy minority and was marked by a Crown policy of plantation, which involved the arrival of thousands of English and Scottish Protestant settlers and the consequent displacement of the pre-plantation Roman Catholic landholders. As the military and political defeat of Gaelic Ireland became more pronounced in the early 17th century, sectarian conflict became a recurrent theme in Irish history.

Roman Catholics and members of dissenting Protestant denominations suffered severe political and economic privations from Penal Laws. The Irish Parliament was abolished in 1801 in the wake of the republican United Irishmen Rebellion, and Ireland became an integral part of a new United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland under the Act of Union.

The Great Famine, during the 1840s saw a significant number of people flee from the island to all over the world. Between 1841 and 1851, as a result of death and mass emigration, mainly to Great Britain and North America, Ireland&#x27;s population fell by over 2 million. In Connacht alone, the population fell by almost 30%.

Robert E. Kennedy explains, however, that the common argument that the mass emigration from Ireland was a &quot;flight from famine&quot; is not entirely correct. Firstly, the Irish had been coming to Great Britain to build canals there since the 18th century, and as soon as conditions in Ireland improved, their emigration did not slow down. After the famine ended, the four years that followed it were marked by more emigration than the four years of the blight. Kennedy argues that the famine was considered the final straw because it convinced more people to move even though several other factors influenced their decision.

By 1900, the population of Ireland was about half of its 1840 peak, and it continued to fall during the 20th century.

In the decades that followed independence in the 1920s, emigration accelerated for economic and social reasons, and with the preferred destination switching from the United States to Great Britain, over 500,000 emigrated in the 1950s and 450,000 in the 1980s, and over 3 million Irish citizens resided outside Ireland in 2017.

Irish people who still lived in Ireland were subjected to discrimination by Great Britain based on their religion. Evictions increased after the repeal of the British Corn Laws in 1846, the passage of the Encumbered Estates&#x27; Court in 1849 and the removal of existing civil rights and class norms. Any remaining hope for change was squashed by the 1847 death of Daniel O&#x27;Connell, the political leader who championed liberal and reform causes and emancipation for Ireland&#x27;s Catholics, and the failed rising of the Young Irelanders in 1848. More was to be gained by immigrating to America from Ireland, and the 1848 discovery of gold in the Sierra Nevada lured away more.

==Genealogy==
==United Kingdom==

Irish migration to Great Britain has occurred since the early medieval period. The largest waves of Irish migration occurred in the 19th century, when a devastating famine broke out in Ireland, resulting in thousands of Irish immigrants settling down in Britain, primarily in the port cities of Liverpool and Glasgow. Other waves of Irish migration occurred during the 20th century, as Irish immigrants escaping poor economic conditions in Ireland following the establishment of the Irish Free State, came to Britain in response to labour shortages. These waves of migration have resulted in millions of British citizens being of Irish descent.

An article for &quot;The Guardian&quot; estimated that as many as six million people living in the United Kingdom have an Irish-born grandparent (around 10% of the British population).

The 2001 UK census states that 869,093 people born in Ireland are living in Great Britain. More than 10% of those born in the United Kingdom have at least one grandparent born in Ireland. The article &quot;More Britons applying for Irish passports&quot; states that 6 million Britons have either an Irish grandfather or grandmother and are thus able to apply for Irish citizenship. Almost a quarter claimed some Irish ancestry in one survey.

The Irish have traditionally been involved in the building trade and transport particularly as dockers, following an influx of Irish workers, or navvies, to build the British canal, road and rail networks in the 19th century. This is largely due to the flow of emigrants from Ireland during the Great Famine of 1845–1849. Many Irish servicemen, particularly sailors, settled in Britain: During the first half of the 19th century a third of the Army and Royal Navy were Irish. The Irish still represent a large contingent of foreign volunteers to the British military. Since the 1950s and 1960s in particular, the Irish have become assimilated into the British population. Emigration continued into the next century; over half a million Irish went to Britain in World War II to work in industry and serve in the British armed forces. In the post-war reconstruction era, the numbers of immigrants began to increase, many settling in the larger cities and towns of Britain. According to the 2001 census, around 850,000 people in Britain were born in Ireland.

The largest Irish communities in Britain are located predominantly in the cities and towns: in London, in particular Kilburn (which has one of the largest Irish-born communities outside Ireland) out to the west and north west of the city, in the large port cities such as Liverpool (which elected the first Irish nationalist members of parliament), Glasgow, Bristol, Sunderland and Portsmouth. Big industrial cities such as Salford, Manchester, Luton, Coventry, Birmingham, Sheffield, Wolverhampton, Cardiff and parts of Newcastle and Nottingham also have large diaspora populations due to the Industrial Revolution and, in the case of the first three, the strength of the motor industry in the 1960s and 1970s. The towns of Hebburn, Jarrow and Coatbridge have all earned the nickname &#x27;Little Ireland&#x27; due to their high Irish populations.

Central to the Irish community in Britain was the community&#x27;s relationship with the Roman Catholic Church, with which it maintained a strong sense of identity. The Church remains a crucial focus of communal life among some of the immigrant population and their descendants. The largest ethnic group among the Roman Catholic priesthood of Britain remains Irish (in the United States, the upper ranks of the Church&#x27;s hierarchy are of predominantly Irish descent). The former head of the Roman Catholic Church in Scotland is Cardinal Keith O&#x27;Brien.

Scotland experienced a significant amount of Irish immigration, particularly in Glasgow, Edinburgh and Coatbridge. This led to the formation of Celtic Football Club in 1888 by Marist Brother Walfrid, to raise money to help the community. In Edinburgh Hibernian were founded in 1875 and in 1909 another club with Irish links, Dundee United, was formed. Likewise the Irish community in London formed the London Irish rugby union club. The 2001 UK census states in Scotland 50,000 people identified as having Irish heritage.

The Irish have maintained a strong political presence in the UK (mostly in Scotland), in local government and at the national level. Former prime ministers David Cameron, Tony Blair, John Major and James Callaghan have been amongst the many in Britain of part-Irish ancestry; Blair&#x27;s mother, Hazel Elizabeth Rosaleen Corscaden, was born on 12 June 1923 in Ballyshannon, County Donegal. Former Chancellor George Osborne is a member of the Anglo-Irish aristocracy and heir to the baronetcies of Ballentaylor and Ballylemon.

Moreover, the UK holds official public St. Patrick&#x27;s Day celebrations. While many such celebrations were suspended in the 1970s because of The Troubles, the holiday is now widely celebrated by the UK public.

==The rest of Europe==

Irish links with the continent go back many centuries. During the early Middle Ages, 700–900 AD, many Irish religious figures went abroad to preach and found monasteries in what is known as the Hiberno-Scottish mission. Saint Brieuc founded the city that bears his name in Brittany, Saint Colmán founded the great monastery of Bobbio in northern Italy and one of his monks was Saint Gall for whom the Swiss town of St Gallen and canton of St Gallen are named.

During the Counter-Reformation, Irish religious and political links with Europe became stronger. An important centre of learning and training for Irish priests developed in Leuven (Lúbhan in Irish) in the Duchy of Brabant, now in Flanders (northern Belgium). The Flight of the Earls, in 1607, led much of the Gaelic nobility to flee the country, and after the wars of the 17th century many others fled to Spain, France, Austria, and other Roman Catholic lands. The lords and their retainers and supporters joined the armies of these countries, and were known as the Wild Geese. Some of the lords and their descendants rose to high ranks in their adoptive countries, such as the Spanish general and politician Leopoldo O&#x27;Donnell, 1st Duke of Tetuan, who became the president of the Government of Spain or the French general and politician Patrice de Mac-Mahon, Duke of Magenta, who became the president of the French Republic. The French Cognac brandy maker, Hennessy, was founded by Richard Hennessy, an Irish officer in the Clare Regiment of the Irish Brigade of the French Army. In Spain and its territories, many Irish descendants can be found with the name &quot;Obregón&quot; (&quot;O&#x27;Brien&quot;, Irish, &quot;Ó Briain&quot;), including Madrid-born actress &quot;Ana Victoria García Obregón&quot;.

During the 20th century, certain Irish intellectuals made their homes in continental Europe, particularly James Joyce, and later Samuel Beckett (who became a courier for the French Resistance). Eoin O&#x27;Duffy led a brigade of 700 Irish volunteers to fight for Franco during the Spanish Civil War, and Frank Ryan led the Connolly Column who fought on the opposite side, with the Republican International Brigades. William Joyce became an English-language propagandist for Nazi Germany, known colloquially as Lord Haw-Haw.

==The Americas==

Some of the first Irish people to travel to the New World did so as members of the Spanish garrison in Florida during the 1560s, and small numbers of Irish colonists were involved in efforts to establish colonies in the Amazon region, in Newfoundland, and in Virginia between 1604 and the 1630s. According to historian Donald Akenson, there were &quot;few if any&quot; Irish being forcibly transported to the New World during this period.

The Plantation of Ulster, by the Stuart monarchy of the early 17th century, primarily in the lands gained by the Flight of the Earls, with an equal number of loyal Lowland Scots and redundant English Border reivers, caused resentment, as did their transferring of all property owned by the Roman Catholic Church to the Church of Ireland, resulting in the Irish Rebellion of 1641. Following the rebellion&#x27;s failure the Commonwealth regime began to pacify Ireland, through the sentencing and transporting Irish rebels (known as “tories”), Catholic priests, friars and schoolmasters, to indentured servitude in the Crown&#x27;s New World colonies. This increased following the Cromwellian invasion of Ireland (1649–1653), of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms (1639–1653). Cromwell took Irish land both to repay investors who had financed the invasion and as payment for his soldiers, many of whom settled down in Ireland. As a result, Irish in Leinster, and Munster, with property worth more than £10, were ordered to move to Connaught, to land valued at no more than 1/3 the value of their current holding, or be banished on pain of death. In the 17th century 50,000 Irish people are estimated to have migrated to the New World colonies, 165,000 by 1775.

The population of Ireland fell from 1,466,000 to 616,000, between 1641 and 1652, over 550,000 attributed to famine and other war-related causes.

===Argentina===
In the 19th and early 20th centuries, over 38,000 Irish immigrated to Argentina. Very distinct Irish communities and schools existed until the Perón era in the 1950s.

Today there are an estimated 500,000 people of Irish ancestry in Argentina, approximately 15.5% of the Republic of Ireland&#x27;s current population; however, these numbers may be far higher, given that many Irish newcomers declared themselves to be British, as Ireland at the time was still part of the United Kingdom and today their descendants integrated into Argentine society with mixed bloodlines.

The modern Irish-Argentine community is composed of some of their descendants, and the total number is estimated at between 500,000 and 1,000,000.

Argentina is the home of the fifth largest Irish community in the world, the largest in a non-English speaking nation and the greatest in South America.

Despite the fact that Argentina was never the main destination for Irish emigrants it does form part of the Irish diaspora. The Irish-Argentine William Bulfin remarked as he travelled around Westmeath in the early 20th century that he came across many locals who had been to Buenos Aires. Several families from Bere island, County Cork were encouraged to send emigrants to Argentina by an islander who had been successful there in the 1880s.

Considered by some to be a national hero, William Brown is the most famous Irish citizen in Argentina. Creator of the Argentine Navy (&quot;Armada de la República Argentina&quot;, ARA) and leader of the Argentine Armed Forces in the wars against Brazil and Spain, he was born in Foxford, County Mayo on 22 June 1777 and died in Buenos Aires in 1857. The is named after him, as well as the Almirante Brown partido, part of the Gran Buenos Aires urban area, with a population of over 500.000 inhabitants.

The first entirely Roman Catholic English language publication published in Buenos Aires, &quot;The Southern Cross&quot; is an Argentine newspaper founded on 16 January 1875 by Dean Patricio Dillon, an Irish immigrant, a deputy for Buenos Aires Province and president of the Presidential Affairs Commission amongst other positions. The newspaper continues in print to this day and publishes a beginner&#x27;s guide to the Irish language, helping Irish Argentines keep in touch with their cultural heritage. Previously to &quot;The Southern Cross&quot; Dublin-born brothers Edward and Michael Mulhall successfully published &quot;The Standard&quot;, allegedly the first English-language daily paper in South America.

Between 1943 and 1946, the de facto President of Argentina was Edelmiro Farrell, whose paternal ancestry was Irish.

===Bermuda===
Early in its history, Bermuda had reputed connections with Ireland. It has been suggested that St. Brendan discovered it during his legendary voyage; a local psychiatric hospital (since renamed) was named after him. In 1616, an incident occurred in which five white settlers arrived in Ireland, having crossed the Atlantic (a distance of around ) in a two-ton boat. By the following year, one of Bermuda&#x27;s main islands was named after Ireland. By the mid-17th century, Irish prisoners of war and civilian captives were involuntarily shipped to Bermuda, condemned to indentured servitude. These people had become indentured as a result of the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland. The Cromwellian conquest led to Irish captives, from both military and civilian backgrounds, to be sent as indentured servants to the West Indies. The Puritan Commonwealth government saw sending indentured servants from Ireland to the Caribbean as both assisting in their conquest of the island (by removing the strongest resistance against their rule) and saving the souls of the Roman Catholic Irish servants by settling them in Protestant-dominated colonies where they would supposedly inevitably convert to the &quot;true faith&quot;.

These rapid demographic changes quickly began to alarm the dominant Anglo-Bermudian population, in particular the Irish indentured servants, most of whom were presumed to be secretly practising Catholicism (recusancy had been outlawed by the colonial government). Relationships between the Anglo-Bermudian community and Irish indentured servants consistently remained hostile, resulting in the Irish responding to ostracism by ultimately merging with the Scottish, African and Native American communities in Bermuda to form a new demographic: the coloureds, which in Bermuda meant anyone not entirely of European descent. In modern-day Bermuda, the term has been replaced by &#x27;Black&#x27;, in which wholly sub-Saharan African ancestry is erroneously implicit. The Irish quickly proved hostile to their new conditions in Bermuda, and colonial legislation soon stipulated:

In September, 1658, three Irishmen – John Chehen (Shehan, Sheehan, Sheene, or Sheen), David Laragen and Edmund Malony – were lashed for breaking curfew and being suspected of stealing a boat. Jeames Benninge (a Scottish indentured servant), black Franke (a servant to Mr John Devitt), and Tomakin, Clemento, and black Dick (servants of Mrs Anne Trimingham) were also punished.

In 1661, the colonial government alleged that a plot was being hatched by an alliance of Blacks and Irish, one which involved cutting the throats of all Bermudians of English descent. The governor of Bermuda, William Sayle (who had returned to Bermuda after the Bermudian colonial government acknowledged the authority of Parliament) countered the alleged plot with three edicts: The first was that a nightly watch be raised throughout the colony; second, that slaves and the Irish be disarmed of militia weapons; and third, that any gathering of two or more Irish or slaves be dispersed by whipping. There were no arrests, trials or executions connected to the plot, though an Irish woman named Margaret was found to be romantically involved with a Native American; she was voted to be stigmatised and he was whipped.

During the course of the seventeenth and eighteenth Centuries, the colony&#x27;s various demographic groups boiled down to free whites and mostly enslaved &quot;coloured&quot; Bermudians with a homogeneous Anglo-Bermudian culture. Little survived of the Irish culture brought by indentured servants from Ireland. Catholicism was outlawed in Bermuda by the colonial authorities, and all islanders were required by law to attend services of the established Anglican church. Some surnames that were common in Bermuda at this period, however, give lingering evidence of the Irish presence. For example, the area to the east of Bailey&#x27;s Bay, in Hamilton Parish, is named &quot;Callan Glen&quot; for a Scottish-born shipwright, &quot;Claude MacCallan&quot;, who settled in Bermuda after the vessel in which he was a passenger was wrecked off the North Shore in 1787. MacCallan swam to a rock from which he was rescued by a Bailey&#x27;s Bay fisherman named &quot;Daniel Seon&quot; (&quot;Sheehan&quot;). A later Daniel Seon was appointed Clerk of the House of Assembly and Prothonotary of the Court of General Assize in 1889 (he was also the Registrar of the Supreme Court, and died in 1909).

In 1803, Irish poet Thomas Moore arrived in Bermuda, having been appointed registrar to the Admiralty there. Robert Kennedy, born in Cultra, County Down, was the Government of Bermuda&#x27;s &quot;Colonial Secretary&quot;, and was the acting Governor of Bermuda on three occasions (1829, 1830 and 1835–1836). Irish prisoners were again sent to Bermuda in the 19th century, including participants in the ill-fated Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848, nationalist journalist and politician John Mitchel, and painter and convicted murderer William Burke Kirwan. Alongside English convicts, they were used to build the Royal Naval Dockyard on Ireland Island. Conditions for the convicts were harsh, and discipline was draconian. In April, 1830, convict James Ryan was shot and killed during rioting of convicts on Ireland Island. Another five convicts were given death sentences for their parts in the riots, with those of the youngest three being commuted to transportation (to Australia) for life. In June 1849 convict James Cronin, on the hulk Medway at Ireland Island, was placed in solitary confinement from the 25th to the 29th for fighting. On release, and being returned to work, he refused to be cross-ironed. He ran onto the breakwater, brandishing a poker threateningly. For this, he was ordered to receive punishment (presumably flogging) on Tuesday, 3 July 1849, with the other convicts aboard the hulk assembled behind a rail to witness. When ordered to strip, he hesitated. Thomas Cronin, his older brother, addressed him and, while brandishing a knife, rushed forward to the separating rail. He called out to the other prisoners in Irish and many joined him in attempting to free the prisoner and attack the officers. The officers opened fire. Two men were killed and twelve wounded. Punishment of James Cronin was then carried out. Three hundred men of the 42nd Regiment of Foot, in barracks on Ireland Island, responded to the scene under arms.
Although the Roman Catholic Church (which had been banned in Bermuda, as in the rest of England, since settlement) began to operate openly in Bermuda in the 19th century, its priests were not permitted to conduct baptisms, weddings or funerals. As the most important British naval and military base in the Western Hemisphere following US independence, large numbers of Irish Roman Catholic soldiers served in the British Army&#x27;s Bermuda Garrison (the Royal Navy had also benefitted from a shipload of Irish emigres wrecked on Bermuda, with most being recruited into the navy there). The first Roman Catholic services in Bermuda were conducted by British Army chaplains early in the 19th century. Mount Saint Agnes Academy, a private school operated by the Roman Catholic Church of Bermuda, opened in 1890 at the behest of officers of the 86th (Royal County Down) Regiment of Foot (which was posted to Bermuda from 1880 to 1883), who had requested from the Archbishop of Halifax, Nova Scotia, a school for the children of Irish Roman Catholic soldiers.

Not all Irish soldiers in Bermuda had happy lives there. Private Joseph McDaniel of the 30th Regiment of Foot (who was born in the East Indies to an Irish father and a Malay mother) was convicted of the murder of Mary Swears in June, 1837, after he had been found with a self-inflicted wound and her lifeless body. Although he maintained his innocence throughout the trial, after his conviction he confessed that they had made a pact to die together. Although he had succeeded in killing her, he had failed to kill himself. He was put to death on Wednesday, 29 November 1837. Private Patrick Shea of the 20th Regiment of Foot was sentenced to death in June 1846, for discharging his weapon at Sergeant John Evans. His sentence was commuted to transportation (to Australia) for life. In October, 1841, County Carlow-born Peter Doyle had also been transported to Australia for fourteen years for shooting at a picket. At his court martial he had explained that he had been drunk at the time.

Other Irish soldiers, taking discharge, made a home in Bermuda, remaining there for the rest of their lives. Dublin-born Sapper Cornelius Farrell was discharged in Bermuda from the Royal Engineers. His three Bermudian-born sons followed him into the army, fighting on the Western Front during the First World War in the Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps.

Although there is little surviving evidence of Irish culture, some elderly islanders can remember when the term &quot;cilig&quot; (or &quot;killick&quot;) was used to describe a common method of fishing for sea turtles by tricking them into swimming into prearranged nets (this was done by splashing a stone on a line—the cilig—into the water on the turtle&#x27;s opposite side). The word &quot;cilig&quot; appears to be meaningless in English, but in some dialects of Gaelic is used as an adjective meaning &quot;easily deceived&quot;. In Irish there is a word &quot;cílí&quot; meaning sly. It is used in the expression &quot;Is é an cílí ceart é&quot; (pronounced &quot;Shayeh kilic airtay&quot;) and means &quot;What a sly-boots&quot;. Alternatively, the word may be derived from an Irish word for a stone and wood anchor. Characteristics of older Bermudian accents, such as the pronunciation of the letter &#x27;d&#x27; as &#x27;dj&#x27;, as in &quot;Bermudjin&quot; (Bermudian), may indicate an Irish origin. Later Irish immigrants have continued to contribute to Bermuda&#x27;s makeup, with names like Crockwell (&quot;Ó Creachmhaoil&quot;) and O&#x27;Connor (&quot;Ó Conchobhair&quot;) now being thought of locally as Bermudian names. The strongest remaining Irish influence can be seen in the presence of bagpipes in the music of Bermuda, which stemmed from the presence of Scottish and Irish soldiers from the 18th through 20th centuries. Several prominent businesses in Bermuda have a clear Irish influence, such as the Irish Linen Shop, Tom Moore&#x27;s Tavern and Flanagan&#x27;s Irish Pub and Restaurant.

A succession of Irish Masonic lodges have existed in Bermuda, beginning with &quot;Military Lodge #192&quot;, established by soldiers of the 47th Regiment of Foot, and operating in Bermuda from 1793 to 1801. This was an ambulatory or travelling lodge, as with other military lodges, moving with its members. Irish Lodges #220 (also a military travelling lodge) was active in Bermuda from 1856 to 1861, and Irish Lodge #209 was established in Bermuda in 1881. Minder Lodge #63 of the Irish Constitution was in Bermuda with the 20th Regiment of Foot from 1841 to 1847. The Hannibal Lodge #224 of the Irish Constitution was warranted in 1867, and still exists, meeting in the Masonic Hall on Old Maid&#x27;s Lane, St. George&#x27;s. Another Hannibal Chapter, #123 of the Irish Constitution, was chartered in 1877, but lasted only until 1911.
===Brazil===

The first known Irish settler in Brazil was a missionary, Thomas Field, who arrived to Brazil in late 1577 and spent three years in Piratininga (present-day São Paulo). In 1612, the Irish brothers Philip and James Purcell established a colony in Tauregue, at the mouth of the Amazon river, where English, Dutch, and French settlements were also established. Many of the colonists traded in tobacco, dyes, and hardwoods. A second group of Irish settlers led by Bernardo O&#x27;Brien of County Clare arrived in 1620. The first recorded Saint Patrick&#x27;s Day celebration was on 17 March 1770.

During the Cisplatine War, Brazil sent recruiters to Ireland to recruit men as soldiers for the war against Argentina. Any Irish that signed up for the Brazilian army were promised that if they enlisted they would be given a grant of land after five years of service. Approximately 2,400 men were recruited and when they arrived in Brazil (many with their families), they were completely neglected by the government. The Irish mutinied together with a German regiment, and for a few days there was open warfare on the streets of Rio de Janeiro. While most were ultimately sent home or re-emigrated to Canada or Argentina, some did stay and were sent to form a colony in the province of Bahia.

Several attempts were made by Brazil to bring in more Irish immigrants to settle in the country, however, much of the land given to the settlers was porous or in extremely remote locations. Many of the Irish settlers died or re-emigrated to other countries. At the same time, several prominent Irish figures served in diplomatic posts in Brazil for the United Kingdom (as Ireland was part of the British Empire). Irish nationalist and British diplomat Roger Casement, served as British Consul in Santos, Belém, and in Rio de Janeiro.

===Canada===
The 2006 census by Statcan, Canada&#x27;s Official Statistical office revealed that the Irish were the 4th largest ethnic group with 4,354,155 Canadians with full or partial Irish descent or 14% of the nation&#x27;s total population. During the 2016 census by Statistics Canada, the Irish ethnicity retained its spot as the 4th largest ethnic group with 4,627,000 Canadians with full or partial Irish descent.

After the permanent settlement in Newfoundland by Irish in the late 18th and early 19th century, overwhelmingly from County Waterford, increased immigration of the Irish elsewhere in Canada began in the decades following the War of 1812 and formed a significant part of The Great Migration of Canada. Between 1825 and 1845, 60% of all immigrants to Canada were Irish; in 1831 alone, some 34,000 arrived in Montreal.

Between 1830 and 1850, 624,000 Irish arrived; in contextual terms, at the end of this period, the population of the provinces of Canada was 2.4 million. Besides Upper Canada (Ontario), Lower Canada (Quebec), the Maritime colonies of Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick, especially Saint John, were arrival points. Not all remained; many out-migrated to the United States or to Western Canada in the decades that followed. Few returned to Ireland.

Many Newfoundlanders are of Irish descent. It is estimated that about 80% of Newfoundlanders have Irish ancestry on at least one side of their family tree. The family names, the predominant Roman Catholic religion, the prevalence of Irish music – even the accents of the people – are so reminiscent of rural Ireland that Irish author Tim Pat Coogan has described Newfoundland as &quot;the most Irish place in the world outside Ireland&quot;. Newfoundland Irish, the dialect of the Irish language specific to the island was widely spoken until the mid-20th century. It is very similar to the language heard in the southeast of Ireland centuries ago, due to mass emigration from counties Tipperary, Waterford, Wexford, Kerry and Cork.

Saint John, New Brunswick, claims the distinction of being Canada&#x27;s most Irish city, according to census records. There have been Irish settlers in New Brunswick since at least the late 18th century, but during the peak of the Great Irish Famine (1845–1847), thousands of Irish emigrated through Partridge Island in the port of Saint John. Most of these Irish were Roman Catholic, who changed the complexion of the Loyalist city. A large, vibrant Irish community can also be found in the Miramichi region of New Brunswick.

Guysborough County, Nova Scotia has many rural Irish villages. Erinville (which means Irishville), Salmon River, Ogden, Bantry (named after Bantry Bay, County Cork, Ireland but now abandoned and grown up in trees) among others, where Irish last names are prevalent and the accent is reminiscent of the Irish as well as the music, traditions, religion (Roman Catholic), and the love of Ireland itself. Some of the Irish counties from which these people arrived were County Kerry (Dingle Peninsula), County Cork, and County Roscommon, along with others.

Quebec is also home to a large Irish community, especially in Montreal, where the Irish shamrock is featured on the municipal flag. Notably, thousands of Irish emigrants during the Famine passed through Grosse Isle near Québec City, where many succumbed to typhus. Most of the Irish who settled near Québec City are now French speakers.

Irish Catholic settlers also opened up new agricultural areas in the recently surveyed Eastern Townships, the Ottawa Valley, and Gatineau and Pontiac counties. Irish from Quebec would also settle in communities such as Frampton, Saint Sylvestre, and Saint Patrick in the Beauce region of southeastern Quebec.

Ontario has over 2 million people of Irish descent, who in greater numbers arrived in the 1820s and the decades that followed to work on colonial infrastructure and to settle land tracts in Upper Canada, the result today is a countryside speckled with the place names of Ireland. Ontario received a large number of those who landed in Quebec during the Famine years, many thousands died in Ontario&#x27;s ports. Irish-born became the majority in Toronto by 1851.

===Caribbean===
From the 1620s, many of the Irish Roman Catholic merchant class in this period migrated voluntarily to the West Indies to avail of the business opportunities there occasioned by the trade in sugar, tobacco and cotton. They were followed by landless Irish indentured labourers, who were recruited to serve a landowner for a specified time before receiving freedom and land. The descendants of some Irish immigrants are known today in the West Indies as redlegs. Most descendants of these Irishmen moved off the islands as African slavery was implemented and blacks began to replace whites. Many Barbadian-born Irishmen helped establish the Carolina colony in the United States.

After the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland Irish prisoners were forcibly transferred to English colonies in the Americas and sold into indentured servitude, a practice that came to be known as being &quot;Barbadosed&quot;, though Barbados was not the only colony to receive Irish prisoners, with those sent to Montserrat being the best known. To this day, Montserrat is the only country or territory in the world, apart from the Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland and the Canadian province of Newfoundland to observe a public holiday on St Patrick&#x27;s Day. The population is predominantly of mixed Irish and African descent.

====Puerto Rico====

Irish immigrants played an instrumental role in Puerto Rico&#x27;s economy. One of the most important industries of the island was the sugar industry. Among the successful businessmen in this industry were Miguel Conway, who owned a plantation in the town of Hatillo and Juan Nagle whose plantation was located in Río Piedras. General Alexander O&#x27;Reilly, &quot;Father of the Puerto Rican Militia&quot;, named Tomas O&#x27;Daly chief engineer of modernising the defences of San Juan, this included the fortress of San Cristóbal. Tomas O&#x27;Daly and Miguel Kirwan were partners in the &quot;Hacienda San Patricio&quot;, which they named after the patron saint of Ireland, Saint Patrick. A relative of O&#x27;Daly, Demetrio O&#x27;Daly, succeeded Captain Ramon Power y Giralt as the island&#x27;s delegate to the Spanish Courts. The plantation no longer exists; however, the land in which the plantation was located is now a San Patricio suburb with a shopping mall by the same name. The Quinlan family established two plantations, one in the town of Toa Baja and the other in Loíza. Puerto Ricans of Irish descent were also instrumental in the development of the island&#x27;s tobacco industry. Among them Miguel Conboy who was a founder of the tobacco trade in Puerto Rico.

Other notable places in the Caribbean include:
* Antigua and Barbuda 
* Barbados
* Jamaica
* Saint Kitts and Nevis
* Saint Lucia
* Trinidad and Tobago

=== Colombia ===
The presence and impact of the Irish in Colombia dates back to the time of Spanish rule, when in different historical periods they migrated to the Iberian Peninsula and from there to the American continent, enlisted in the colonization, trade, army and administration companies. One episode in which this group had a special impact was the colonization of the Darien (Gulf of Urabá) in 1788. In this place 64 families and 50 single individuals from North America were established, to which were added families from the interior. Of these families, 28 were of Irish origin, which shows their numerical importance and valuation as an emerging social group within the Hispanic world.

There is no doubt that the greatest concentration and contributions to the country occurred during the emancipation campaigns. It is enough to look at the list drawn up by researcher Matthew Brown to understand their importance and impact, for out of some 6,808 Europeans, the Irish represented 48%; we are talking about more than 3,000 Irish who fought to give freedom to Colombia. These would have come enlisted in the Irish Legion, where they were famous officers like: Casey, Devereux, Egan, Ferguson, Foley, Lanagan, Rooke, Larkin, McCarthy, Murphy, O&#x27;Leary, O&#x27;Connell, O&#x27;Connor and Sanders.

Once the wars of Independence were over, a good portion of them would have remained to form part of the Colombian army. Others, on the other hand, would have abandoned military life to integrate into society as businessmen, merchants, musicians, doctors, poets, miners and settlers. The economic sector in which the Irish participated the most was mining: they formed small mining colonies in the north and south of Antioquia. In the middle of the century, the English miner Tyrell Moore, presented to the Sovereign State of Antioquia a project to colonize with 200 Irish families in the north and lower Cauca, an intention that apparently met with local disapproval and added to other logistical problems made its materialization impossible. But the largest mining colony was established in the south (currently Caldas department), in towns such as Marmato and Supía. Among the hundreds of British, French, German and Swedish miners who moved there were some Irishmen such as Eduardo MacAllister, Joseph Raphson, Nicolas Fitzgerald, Juan O&#x27;Byrne, David Davis and the Nicholls.

In addition, this immigration has been highlighted in dozens of literary and academic works, the most important of which are: Irish Blood in Antioquia (&quot;Sangre irlandesa en Antioquia)&quot;, by Aquiles Echeverri, Irish descendant; The Mysters of the Mines (&quot;Los místeres de las minas)&quot;, by Alvaro Gartner and The Sanctuary: Global History of a Battle (&quot;El Santuario: Historia global de una batalla)&quot;, by Matthew Brown. For all of the above, it is evident that Irish immigration has not been alien to us and its presence, traces and impact also constitute an important part of our past and historical and cultural heritage.

===Chile===

Many of the Wild Geese, expatriate Irish soldiers who had gone to Spain, or their descendants, continued on to its colonies in South America. Many of them rose to prominent positions in the Spanish governments there. In the 1820s, some of them helped liberate the continent. Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins was the first Supreme director of Chile. When Chilean troops occupied Lima during the War of the Pacific in 1881, they put in charge certain Patricio Lynch, whose grandfather came from Ireland to Argentina and then moved to Chile. Other Latin American countries that have Irish settlement include Puerto Rico and Colombia.

===Mexico===

The County Wexford born William Lamport, better known to most Mexicans as Guillén de Lampart, was a precursor of the Independence movement and author of the first proclamation of independence in the New World. His statue stands today inside the column of the Angel of Independence in Mexico City, Mexico. Juan de O&#x27;Donojú y O&#x27;Ryan, of Irish descent, was the last Viceroy of New Spain (Mexico), died and is buried in Mexico City.

Among the most famous Irishmen in Mexican history are &quot;Los Patricios&quot; of Saint Patrick&#x27;s Battalion. Many communities existed in Mexican Texas until the revolution there, when they sided with Roman Catholic Mexico against Protestant pro-US elements. The &quot;Batallón de San Patricio&quot;, a battalion of US troops who deserted and fought alongside the Mexican Army against the United States in the Mexican–American War of 1846–1848, is well known in Mexican history. The most well known of these was Major John Riley. 

Mexico also has a large number of people of Irish ancestry, among them the actor Anthony Quinn. There are monuments in Mexico City paying tribute to those Irish who fought for Mexico in the 19th century. There is a monument to Los Patricios in the fort of Churubusco. During the Great Famine, thousands of Irish immigrants entered the country. Other notable Mexicans of Irish descent are Romulo O&#x27;Farril, Juan O&#x27;Gorman, and Edmundo O&#x27;Gorman.

===United States===

The first Irish came to modern day America during the 1600s mostly to Virginia and mostly indentured servants.
The diaspora to the United States was immortalised in the words of many songs including the Irish ballad, &quot;The Green Fields of America&quot;:

&lt;poem&gt;
So pack up your sea-stores, consider no longer,
Ten dollars a week is not very bad pay,
With no taxes or tithes to devour up your wages,
When you&#x27;re on the green fields of Americay.
&lt;/poem&gt;

The experience of Irish immigrants in the United States has not always been harmonious. The US did not have a good relationship with most of the incoming Irish because of their Roman Catholic faith, as the majority of the population was Protestant and had been originally formed by offshoots of the Protestant faith, many of whom were from the north of Ireland (Ulster). So it came as no surprise that the federal government issued new immigration acts, adding to previous ones which limited Eastern European immigration, ones which limited the immigration of the Irish.

Those who were successful in coming over from Ireland were for the most part already good farmers and other hard labour workers, so the jobs they were taking were plentiful in the beginning. However, as time went on and the land needed less cultivation, the jobs the new Irish immigrants were taking were those that Americans wanted as well. 
In most cases, Irish newcomers were sometimes uneducated and often found themselves competing with Americans for manual labour jobs or, in the 1860s, being recruited from the docks by the US Army to serve in the American Civil War and afterward to build the Union Pacific Railroad. This view of the Irish-American experience is depicted by another traditional song, &quot;Paddy&#x27;s Lamentation.&quot;

&lt;poem&gt;
Hear me boys, now take my advice,
To America I&#x27;ll have ye&#x27;s not be going,
There is nothing here but war, where the murderin&#x27; cannons roar,
And I wish I was at home in dear old Ireland.
&lt;/poem&gt;

The classic image of an Irish immigrant is led to a certain extent by racist and anti-Catholic stereotypes. In modern times, in the United States, the Irish are largely perceived as hard workers. Most notably they are associated with the positions of police officer, firefighter, Roman Catholic Church leaders and politicians in the larger Eastern Seaboard metropolitan areas. Irish Americans number over 35 million, making them the second largest reported ethnic group in the country, after German Americans. Historically, large Irish American communities have been found in Philadelphia; Chicago; Boston; New York City; New York; Detroit; New England; Washington, D.C.; Baltimore; Pittsburgh; Cleveland; St. Paul, Minnesota; Buffalo; Broome County; Butte; Dubuque; Quincy; Dublin; Hartford; New Haven; Waterbury; Providence; Kansas City; New Orleans; Savannah; Braintree; Weymouth; Norfolk; Nashville; Scranton; Wilkes-Barre; O&#x27;Fallon; Tampa; Hazleton; Worcester; Lowell; Los Angeles; and the San Francisco Bay Area. Many cities across the country have annual St Patrick&#x27;s Day parades; The nation&#x27;s largest is in New York City—one of the world&#x27;s largest parades. The parade in Boston is closely associated with Evacuation Day, when the British left Boston in 1776 during the American War of Independence.

Before the Great Hunger, in which over a million died and more emigrated, there had been the Penal Laws which had already resulted in significant emigration from Ireland.

According to the &quot;Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups&quot;, in 1790 there were 400,000 Americans of Irish birth or ancestry out of a total white population of 3,100,000. Half of these Irish Americans were descended from Ulster people, and half were descended from the people of Connacht, Leinster and Munster.

According to US census figures from 2000, 41,000,000 Americans claim to be wholly or partly of Irish ancestry, a group that represents more than one in five white Americans. Many African Americans are part of the Irish diaspora, as they are descended from Irish or Scots-Irish slave owners and overseers who arrived in America during the colonial era. The US Census Bureau&#x27;s data from 2016 reveals that Irish ancestry is one of the most common reported ancestries reported (in the top 3 most common ancestries reported). Even though Irish immigration is extremely small relative to the scope of current migration, Irish ancestry is one of the most common ancestries in the United States because of the events that took place over a century ago.

The enduring nature of Irish-American identity is exemplified by the widespread celebration of St.Patrick&#x27;s Day, the national day of Ireland, across the United States. The traditional St. Patrick&#x27;s Day parade having developed, in its modern form, in the United States itself. The largest such parade in the world is the New York City St. Patrick&#x27;s Day Parade which features in the region of 150,000 participants and 2,000,000 spectators annually, with thousands of parades of all sizes across the United States.

==Asia==

===Indian Subcontinent===

Irishmen have been known in India right from the days of the East India Company, which was founded in 1600. While most of the early Irish came as traders, some also came as soldiers. However, the majority of these traders and soldiers were from the Protestant Ascendancy. Prominent among them were the generals Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington (1769–1852) who became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1834 and his brother Richard Wellesley, 1st Marquess Wellesley (1760–1842), who was Governor-General of India (1798–1805). Later in the Victorian period, many thinkers, philosophers and Irish nationalists from the Roman Catholic majority too made it to India, prominent among the nationalists being the theosophist Annie Besant.

It is widely believed that there existed a secret alliance between the Irish and Indian independence movements. Some Indian intellectuals like Jawaharlal Nehru and V. V. Giri were certainly inspired by Irish nationalists when they studied in the United Kingdom. The Indian revolutionary group known as the Bengal Volunteers took this name in emulation of the Irish Volunteers.

*Derek O&#x27;Brien, quiz master turned Member of Parliament in Indian state of West Bengal.
*Michael John O&#x27;Brian is an eminent Air Vice-Marshall of Pakistan Air Force.

==Australia==

2,087,800 Australians, 10.4% of the population, self-reported some Irish ancestry in the 2011 census, second only to English and Australian.
The Australian government estimates the total figure may be around 7 million (30%).

In the 2006 census 50,255 Australian residents declared they were born in the Republic of Ireland and a further 21,291 declared to have been born in Northern Ireland. This gives Australia the third largest Irish-born population outside Ireland (after Britain and America).

Between the 1790s and 1920s, approximately 400,000 Irish settlers – both voluntary and forced – are thought to have arrived in Australia. They first came over in large numbers as convicts, with around 50,000 transported between 1791 and 1867. Even larger numbers of free settlers came during the 19th century due to famine, the Donegal Relief Fund, the discovery of gold in Victoria and New South Wales, and the increasing &quot;pull&quot; of a pre-existing Irish community. By 1871, Irish immigrants accounted for one quarter of Australia&#x27;s overseas-born population.

Irish Catholic immigrants – who made up about 75% of the total Irish population – were largely responsible for the establishment of a separate Catholic school system. About 20% of Australian children attend Catholic schools as of 2017.

It has also been argued that the Irish language was the source of a significant number of words in Australian English.

==South Africa==

Though they&#x27;ve never formed a substantial population, some Irish communities can be found in Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, Kimberley, and Johannesburg, with smaller communities in Pretoria, Barberton, Durban, and East London. A third of the Cape&#x27;s governors were Irish, as were many of the judges and politicians. Both the Cape Colony and the Colony of Natal had Irish prime ministers: Sir Thomas Upington, &quot;The Afrikaner from Cork&quot;; and Sir Albert Hime, from Kilcoole in County Wicklow. Irish Cape Governors included Lord Macartney, Lord Caledon and Sir John Francis Cradock.
Henry Nourse, a shipowner at the Cape, brought out a small party of Irish settlers in 1818. Many Irish were with the 1820 British settlers in the Eastern Cape frontier with the Xhosa. In 1823, John Ingram brought out 146 Irish from Cork. Single Irish women were sent to the Cape on a few occasions. Twenty arrived in November 1849 and 46 arrived in March 1851. The majority arrived in November 1857 aboard . A large contingent of Irish troops fought in the Anglo-Boer War on both sides and a few of them stayed in South Africa after the war. Others returned home but later came out to settle in South Africa with their families. Between 1902 and 1905, there were about 5,000 Irish immigrants. Places in South Africa named after Irish people include Upington, Porterville, Caledon, Cradock, Sir Lowry&#x27;s Pass, the Biggarsberg Mountains, Donnybrook, Himeville and Belfast.

James Rorke was of Irish parentage and was the founder of Rorkes&#x27;s drift.

==New Zealand==

The diaspora population of Ireland also got a fresh start on the islands of New Zealand during the 19th century. The possibility of striking it rich in the gold mines caused many Irish people to flock to the docks; risking their lives on the long voyage to potential freedom and more importantly self-sufficiency, many Irish also came with the British army during the New Zealand wars. Several places, including Gabriel&#x27;s Gully and Otago, were mining sites which, with the funding of large companies, allowed for the creation of wages and the appearance of mining towns. Women found jobs as housemaids cleaning the shacks of the single men at work thereby providing a second income to the Irish family household. The subsequent money accumulated with regards to this would allow for chain migration for the rest of the family left behind.

The transition to New Zealand was made easier due to the overexposure that the Irish had previously had with colonialism. They ventured upwards to the British ports, settling temporarily to accumulate the necessary finances before moving onwards towards the banks of the far away island. In doing so, they not only exposed themselves to the form of British form of government but likewise to capitalism. This aided to further the simplicity of the transition for the dispersed population.

The government aided through the use of both promissory notes and land grants. By promising to pay for the passage of a family the government ensured that the island would be populated and a British colony would be formed. Free passage was installed for women first between the ages of 15 and 35, while males between the ages of 18 and 40 years of age would be promised a certain number of acres of land upon arrival in the New World. This was attributed to the installment of the New Zealand Land act. To further aid with the financial burden, free passage to any immigrant was granted after 1874.

The Irish diaspora population in New Zealand also resulted in a diminished amount of prejudice against Roman Catholicism compared to that in other British colonies. The lack of embedded hierarchy and social structure allowed for previous sectarian tensions to be dissolved. This can also be attributed to the sheer amount of distance between the respective religions due to the sparseness of the unpopulated area and the sheer size of the islands.

== List of countries by population of Irish heritage ==

==Religion==
Paul Cardinal Cullen set out to spread Irish dominance over the English-speaking Roman Catholic Church in the 19th century. The establishment of an &#x27;Irish Episcopal Empire&#x27; involved three transnational entities – the British Empire, the Roman Catholic Church, and the Irish diaspora. Irish clergy, notably Cullen, made particular use of the reach of the British Empire to spread their influence. From the 1830s until his death in 1878, Cullen held several key positions near the top of the Irish hierarchy and influenced Rome&#x27;s appointment of Irish bishops on four continents.

Walker (2007) compares Irish immigrant communities in the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and Great Britain respecting issues of identity and &#x27;Irishness.&#x27; Religion remained the major cause of differentiation in all Irish diaspora communities and had the greatest impact on identity, followed by the nature and difficulty of socio-economic conditions faced in each new country and the strength of continued social and political links of Irish immigrants and their descendants with Ireland.

In the United States specifically, Irish immigrants were persecuted because of their religion. The Know Nothing Movement sprung up during the time of the Irish&#x27;s arrival. The Know Nothing Party was formed by Protestants and was the first political party in American history to push against Catholic immigration to the United States, particularly targeting Irish and German immigrants. The Know Nothings fought to limit immigration from traditional Catholic countries, prohibit non-English language speaking on US territory, and create a policy where you must spend 21 years in the US before gaining citizenship. The party faded out of existence relatively quickly, but they are a reminder of the persecution Irish immigrants faced. During the third and fourth waves of immigration, new arrivals faced similar discrimination and the now settled Irish would take part in this persecution of other groups.

From the late 20th century onward, Irish identity abroad became increasingly cultural, non-denominational, and non-political, although many emigrants from Northern Ireland stood apart from this trend. However, Ireland as religious reference point is now increasingly significant in neopagan contexts.

==Famous members of the diaspora==
===Politicians===
This listing is for politicians of Irish nationality or origin, who were or are engaged in the politics of a foreign country. The term Irish diaspora is open to many interpretations. One, preferred by the government of Ireland, is defined in legal terms: the Irish diaspora are those of Irish nationality, mostly but not exclusively Roman Catholic, residing outside the island of Ireland. This includes Irish citizens who have emigrated abroad and their children, who were Irish citizens by descent under Irish law. It also includes their grandchildren in cases. See also Irish military diaspora. (See also Notable Americans of Scotch-Irish descent).

*Timothy Anglin, County Cork-born Canadian politician; Speaker of the Canadian House of Commons.
*Joe Biden, former (46th) American President of English, French &amp; Irish ancestry
*Ed Broadbent, politician and political scientist
*Eamon Bulfin, Argentine-born Irish republican activist.
*Edmund Burke, Dublin born leading political figure in the House of Commons with the Whig Party
*Conor Burns, Northern Ireland-born British Conservative M.P.
*Charles Carroll, Maryland born catholic signer of Declaration of Independence 
*Patrick Collins, County Cork-born mayor of Boston
*Richard B. Connolly, County Cork-born Tammany Hall Democrat 
*James Callaghan, United Kingdom Labour Party Prime Minister, Chancellor and Foreign Secretary 1960s and 1970s.
*Richard Croker, County Cork-born leading New York Tammany Hall politician
*John Curtin, 14th Prime Minister of Australia.
*Richard J. Daley, Mayor of Chicago, 1955–76.
*Richard M. Daley, Mayor of Chicago, 1989–2011.
*Charles de Gaulle, French General and President of the Republic; of Irish descent (MacCartan)
*Bernard Devlin, 19th-century Irish-Canadian lawyer, journalist, and politician. 
*Thomas Dongan, governor of the province of New York
*James Duane, Mayor of New York City 1784; his father was from County Galway.
*Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, Irish-Australian nationalist, journalist, poet and politician, 8th Premier of Victoria
*Thomas Addis Emmet, County Cork-born American lawyer and politician.
*Edelmiro Farrell, 28th President of Argentina (&quot;de facto&quot;; 1944–46). 
*David Feeney, Northern Ireland-born Australian politician, M.P.
*William P. Fitzpatrick, Irish-born American politician, representing Cranston, Rhode Island in that state&#x27;s legislature.
*James Ambrose Gallivan U.S. Congressman from Massachusetts.
*Dorothy Kelly Gay, Irish-born American politician.
*Thomas Francis Gilroy, County Sligo-born 89th Mayor of New York City.
*Chaim Herzog, Belfast-born 6th President of Israel
*Albert Henry Hime, County Wicklow-born Royal Engineers, officer and later Premier in the Colony of Natal.
*Kate Hoey, Northern Ireland-born British Labour M.P.
*Paul Keating, 24th Prime Minister of Australia.
*John F. Kennedy, 35th President of the United States; also Robert F. Kennedy and Edward M. Kennedy, members of the Kennedy Family, originally from Wexford.
*John Kenny, long-time republican member of the Clan-na-Gael in New York.
*Peter Lalor, Irish-Australian rebel; later a politician who played a leading role in the Eureka Rebellion.
*Patrice MacMahon, duc de Magenta, first President of the Third French Republic.
*George Mathews, 17th &amp; 21st Governor of Georgia; also Henry M. Mathews, 5th Governor of West Virginia, and members of the Mathews family
*D&#x27;Arcy McGee, Young Irelander; father of Canadian Confederation, assassinated by Fenians.
*Dalton McGuinty, Premier of Ontario, Canada; only the second Roman Catholic to hold this office. 
*David McGuinty, Ontario, Canada politician.
*Santiago Mariño, Venezuelan-born of an Irish mother; aide de camp to Simón Bolívar.
*Paul Martin, 21st Prime Minister of Canada.
*Conor McGinn, County Armagh-born British Labour M.P. 
*Thomas Francis Meagher, Waterford born nationalist rebel, appointed acting governor of the Montana Territory.
*John Mitchel, Irish nationalist politician who supported the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War.
*Maurice T. Moloney, County Kerry-born Democrat who served as Illinois Attorney General and elected Mayor of Ottawa, Illinois.
*Tom Mulcair, politician; Leader of Official Opposition
*Brian Mulroney, 18th Prime Minister of Canada, born to Irish Quebecer parents.
*Ricardo López Murphy, Argentine politician and presidential candidate.
*Barack Obama, 44th American President of Kenyan &amp; Irish ancestry
*Álvaro Obregón, President of Mexico, 1920–24.
*Kolouei O&#x27;Brien, head of government of Tokelau.
*Detta O&#x27;Cathain, Baroness O&#x27;Cathain, Irish-born British businesswoman and peer.
*Arthur O&#x27;Connor, County Cork-born United Irishman who later served as General under Napoleon, after the revolution became mayor of Le Bignon-Mirabeau. 
*T.P. O&#x27;Connor, sat lifelong for Liverpool Scotland constituency of the UK House of Commons.
*Leopoldo O&#x27;Donnell, 1st Duke of Tetuan, Spanish general and statesman, a descendant of Calvagh O&#x27;Donnell, chieftain of Tyrconnell.
*Juan O&#x27;Donojú, last viceroy of New Spain.
*Paul O&#x27;Dwyer, County Mayo-born Irish-American politician and republican activist.
*William O&#x27;Dwyer, County Mayo-born Irish-American politician and diplomat who served as the 100th Mayor of New York City.
*Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins, second Supreme Director of Chile, and his father, Viceroy of Peru Ambrosio O&#x27;Higgins, Marquis of Osorno, a Sligoman.
*Andrés Ojeda Spitz, Uruguayan attorney and presidential candidate in 2024
*Joseph O&#x27;Lawlor, was an Irish-born Spanish general who fought under the Duke of Wellington during the Napoleonic Wars and later served as Governor of Granada.
*John Boyle O&#x27;Reilly, Irish Republican Brotherhood activist, prominent spokesperson for the Irish community through his editorship of the Boston newspaper, &quot;The Pilot&quot;. 
*John O&#x27;Shanassy, was an Irish-Australian politician who served as the 2nd Premier of Victoria, born near Thurles, County Tipperary.
*William Paterson, born in Country Antrim, a New Jersey statesman, signer of the United States Constitution, Judge of the Supreme Court and second governor of New Jersey
*Samantha Power, Irish-born American-reared author, political critic, and United Nations diplomat 
*Louis St. Laurent, 12th Prime Minister of Canada, mother an Irish Quebecer.
*James Scullin, 9th Prime Minister of Australia.
*James Smith, an Ulster-born American lawyer and a signer to the United States Declaration of Independence as a representative of Pennsylvania.
*John Sullivan, Irish American general and politician 
*Thomas Taggart, Irish immigrant American Democratic Party political boss in Indiana during the first quarter of the 20th century.
*George Taylor, was an Irish-born Colonial ironmaster and a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence as a representative of Pennsylvania.
*Sir John Thompson – 4th Prime Minister of Canada.
*Matthew Thornton, was an Irish-born signer of the United States Declaration of Independence as a representative of New Hampshire
*William Massey, born in Limavady was the 19th Prime Minister of New Zealand.
*Michael Walsh Youghal, County Cork-born Democratic United States Representative from New York.
*Derek O&#x27;Brien is a Member of Parliament from TMC Party, West Bengal, India. He is also a quiz master and has hosted several quiz shows

===Artists and musicians===

*Lucille Ball, actress and comedian
*Mischa Barton, actress
*David Bowie, singer/songwriter
*Lara Flynn Boyle, actress
*Edward Burns, actor / filmmaker
*Kate Bush, Singer and songwriter
*Mariah Carey, best selling female recording artist
*George Carlin, comedian, ranked second greatest of all time by Comedy Central.
*John Cena – WWE wrestler/ actor
*Raymond Chandler, writer of the Marlowe series. Irish mother.
*George Clooney, actor
*Kurt Cobain, lead singer of Nirvana
*Stephen Colbert, comedian
*Chris Colfer, actor / singer
*Steve Coogan, actor / comedian
*Tom Cruise, actor
*Kevin Dillon, actor
*Matt Dillon, actor
*Patrick Duff, singer-songwriter (Strangelove)
*Patty Duke, actress
*Isadora Duncan, dancer
*Everlast &amp; Danny Boy, successively members of Hip-Hop group House of Pain and of La Coka Nostra.
*Siobhán Fahey, singer and songwriter of the UK-based groups Bananarama and Shakespears Sister.
*Jimmy Fallon – television host
*Michael Flatley, dancer and creator of Riverdance
*Harrison Ford, actor and pilot
*Liam Gallagher and Noel Gallagher of Oasis.
*Patrick Gallagher, actor
*Judy Garland, actress and singer
*Mel Gibson, actor / filmmaker
*Thea Gilmore, singer-songwriter
*Merv Griffin, television host
*Lafcadio Hearn, American writer.
*Paul Hogan, actor.
*Marian Jordan, Molly of long-time hit radio program Fibber McGee and Molly.
*Mike Joyce, member of The Smiths.
*Gene Kelly actor and dancer
*Princess Grace of Monaco, actress (as Grace Kelly) and noblewoman.
*Kennedy family
*Jamie Kennedy, actor
*Kevin Kline, actor
*Denis Leary, actor, musician and comedian
*Mac Lethal, hip hop musician
*Lorde, New Zealand-born singer.
*John Lydon a.k.a. Johnny Rotten, singer with the Sex Pistols
*Jane Lynch, actress / comediam
*Bill Maher talk show host, comedian.
*Johnny Marr, member of The Smiths.
*Paul McCartney, John Lennon and George Harrison of The Beatles.
*Rose McGowan, actress, born in Italy to an Irish father and French mother
*Tom Meighan, lead singer of Kasabian
*Colin Meloy, lead singer and songwriter of The Decemberists.
*Steven Morrissey, singer, member of The Smiths.
*Brittany Murphy actress
*Mary Murphy, choreographer.
*Katie Noonan, Irish-Australian singer.
*Conan O&#x27;Brien, television host
*George O&#x27;Dowd, pop singer, also known as &quot;Boy George&quot;
*Juan O&#x27;Gorman, a 20th-century Mexican artist, both a painter and an architect.
*Georgia O&#x27;Keeffe, painter

*Maureen O&#x27;Hara, Irish-born actress and celebrated Hollywood beauty.
*Eugene O&#x27;Neill, writer.
*Peter O&#x27;Toole, Academy Award winner &amp; nominated actor. Considered himself Irish
*CM Punk – WWE wrestler
*Aidan Quinn, Emmy Award-nominated actor
*Anthony Quinn, Oscar-winning Mexican actor.
*Rihanna, R&#x27;n&#x27;B Barbados of African-Irish descent
*Saoirse Ronan, Irish American Golden Globes Award actress. Considers herself Irish
*Mickey Rooney, American actor, former child star
*Johnny Rotten (born John Lydon), singer of the Sex Pistols.
*Kevin Rowland, lead singer of Dexys Midnight Runners.
*Andy Rourke, member of The Smiths.
*Justin Sane, lead singer of Anti-Flag
*Dusty Springfield, English-born singer.
*Bruce Springsteen, songwriter, performer and political activist.
*Imelda Staunton, actress
*Spencer Tracy, actor
*John Wayne, actor, enduring American icon
*Julie Walters, actress
*Brian Whelan, painter and author
*Catherine Zeta-Jones, actress

===Scientists===
*Robert Boyle, philosopher and chemist.
*Kathleen Lonsdale, London-based 20th century Chemist.
*Ernest Walton, 1930s Cambridge-based researcher, co-winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics awarded in 1951.
*James D. Watson, co-discoverer of DNA Nobel Prize winner

===Others===
*Muhammad Ali, American boxer, his mother&#x27;s father (Ali&#x27;s grandfather) Abe Grady was from Ennis, Co. Clare
*Anne Boleyn, Queen consort to King Henry VIII of England; Irish paternal grandmother Margaret Butler
*Anne Bonney, pirate, born in Cork.
*James J. Braddock, boxer, also known as &quot;The Cinderella Man&quot;
*Molly Brown, the &quot;Unsinkable Molly Brown.&quot;
*Nellie Cashman, &quot;The Angel of Tombstone&quot;.
*George Croghan, Irish born colonial American fur trapper 
* U Dhammaloka (?Laurence Carroll), Buddhist monk and anti-missionary agitator in Burma, born in Dublin
*Diana, Princess of Wales, noblewoman, her mother, Frances Burke Roche was a descendant of the Earls of Fermoy&lt;ref name=&quot;markhumphrys.com/ni.html&quot;&gt;markhumphrys.com/ni.html&lt;/ref&gt;
*Arthur Conan Doyle, author known for his Sherlock Holmes stories. 
*John Dunlap, printer of the first copies of the United States Declaration of Independence
*Margaretta Eagar, governess to the last Russian royal family
*Sarah, Duchess of York, former wife of a British prince, her paternal ancestors came from Northern Ireland
*Thomas Fitzpatrick (trapper) American mountain man
*Henry Ford, businessman and founder of the Ford Foundation.
*Cardinal James Gibbons, Roman Catholic prelate
*Kathy Griffin, standup comic and TV personality (both parents Irish immigrants)
*Sean Hannity, American political commentator
*Mary Jemison, Irish captive adopted by Native American Seneca tribe.

*Dorothy Jordan, mistress to William IV of the United Kingdom
*Ned Kelly – Australian bushranger
*Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. – American civil rights activist
*Eliza Lynch, Irish-born mistress of President Francisco Solano López of Paraguay
*Martin Maher, instructor at the United States Military Academy at West Point
*Mary Mallon, also known as &quot;Typhoid Mary&quot;, a notorious cook
*Bat Masterson, lawman during the Wild West period.

*Lola Montez, mistress to Ludwig I of Bavaria
*Annie Moore, first immigrant to USA to be processed at Ellis Island
*George &#x27;Bugs&#x27; Moran, Prohibition era Chicago US gangster
*Anne Mortimer, Irish-born English noblewoman
*Michael Patrick Murphy, US Navy SEAL, Medal of Honor Recipient, Namesake for USS Michael Murphy
*Evelyn Nesbit, model and actress
*Mario O&#x27;Donnell, historian
*Marie-Louise O&#x27;Murphy, mistress to King Louis XV of France.
*Bill O&#x27;Reilly, American political commentator
*Count Joseph Cornelius O&#x27;Rourke, Lieutenant-General of the Russian Imperial Guard.
*Lee Harvey Oswald, assassin of John F. Kennedy, Irish great-grandmother Mary Tonry
*Pat Quinn, Canadian hockey coach (former coach of Toronto Maple Leafs and Team Canada)
*Frank Wallace, criminal
*James McLean, criminal
*Mickey Spillane, criminal
*James J. Bulger, criminal
*Mary O&#x27;Toole, first woman municipal judge of the United States

==See also==
;Irish Brigade
* Irish Brigade (French) formed from the Irish army after the flight of the Wild Geese in 1691.
* 1st Regiment Venezuelan Rifles – Irish regiment that took part in the Venezuelan War of Independence.
* The Irish Battalion, or &quot;Los San Patricio&quot;, who fought on the side of Mexico against the US invasion of 1846–48.
* Irish Brigade (Union Army) served on the Union side in the American Civil War in the 1860s.
* Tyneside Irish Brigade, World War I brigade serving in the British army at the Somme.
* Irish military diaspora, notable individuals, Irish by birth or extraction, who served in non-Irish military forces.
* Irish regiments, many Irish regiments served in non-Irish military forces and took part in several conflicts of world history.

;Causes of Irish emigration
* Flight of the Earls
* Cromwellian conquest of Ireland
* The Penal Laws affecting non-Conformists (c. 1715–1869)
* Irish Famine (1740–41)
* Great Irish Famine (1845–1851)
* Irish Famine (1879)
* Economic history of Ireland
* Economic history of the Republic of Ireland
* The Economic War, 1933–1938
* &quot;The Emergency&quot; (Ireland during World War II)
* &quot;The Troubles&quot; (c. 1969–1998)
* Post-2008 Irish economic downturn

; General
* List of expatriate Irish populations
* Irish Travellers
* Irish military diaspora
* List of Ireland-related topics
* Irish place names in other countries
* The Gathering Ireland 2013
* Liverpool Irish
* Coatbridge Irish
* &quot;Against the Wind&quot; (TV series)
* EPIC The Irish Emigration Museum

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Bibliography===

* Ronan, Gerard. &quot;The Irish Zorro: the Extraordinary Adventures of William Lamport (1615–1659)&quot;
*Murray, Thomas (1919). &quot;The Story of the Irish in Argentina&quot;
*Glazier, Michael (ed.) (1999). &quot;The Encyclopedia of the Irish in America&quot; Notre Dame IN: University of Notre Dame Press 
* Akenson, Donald. &quot;The Irish Diaspora: a Primer.&quot; (Belfast: Institute of Irish Studies, 1993)
* Bielenberg, Andy, ed. &quot;The Irish Diaspora&quot; (London: Pearson, 2000)
* Campbell, Malcolm. &quot;Ireland&#x27;s New Worlds: Immigrants, Politics, and Society in the United States and Australia, 1815–1922&quot; (2007)
* Coleman, Philip Coleman, James Byrne and Jason King, eds. &quot;Ireland and the Americas: Culture, Politics, and History&quot; (3 vol. ABC-CLIO, 2008), 967 pp excerpt and text search 
* Coogan, Tim Pat. &quot;Wherever Green Is Worn: The Story of the Irish Diaspora&quot; (2002)
* Darby, Paul, and David Hassan, eds. &quot;Sport and the Irish Diaspora: Emigrants at Play&quot; (2008)
* Delaney, Enda, Kevin Kenny, and Donald Mcraild. &quot;The Irish Diaspora&quot;, &quot;Irish Economic and Social History&quot; (2006): 33:35–58
* Fanning, Charles. &quot;New Perspectives on the Irish Diaspora&quot; (2000)
* Flechner, Roy, and Sven Meeder, eds., &quot;The Irish in Early Medieval Europe: Identity, Culture and Religion&quot; (2016), On Google Books
* Gallman, J. Matthew. &quot;Receiving Erin&#x27;s Children: Philadelphia, Liverpool, and the Irish Famine Migration, 1845–1855&quot; (2000)
* Glazier, Michael, ed. &quot;The Encyclopedia of the Irish in America&quot; (U. of Notre Dame Press, 1999) 988 pp
* Gray, Breda. &quot;Women and the Irish Diaspora&quot; (2003)
* Gribben, Arthur, and Ruth-Ann M. Harris. &quot;The Great Famine and the Irish Diaspora in America&quot; (1999)
* Kenny, Kevin. &quot;Diaspora and Comparison: the Global Irish as a Case Study&quot;, &quot;Journal of American History&quot; 2003 90(1): 134–62, In JSTOR 
* Kenny, Kevin. &quot;The American Irish: A History.&quot; (London/New York: Longman/Pearson, 2000).
* Lalor, Brian, ed. &quot;The Encyclopedia of Ireland&quot; (Dublin: Gill &amp; Macmillan, 2003)
* Mccaffrey, Lawrence. &quot;The Irish Catholic Diaspora in America&quot; (Catholic University of America Press, 1997)
* O&#x27;Day, Alan. &quot;Revising the Diaspora.&quot; in &quot;The Making of Modern Irish History&quot;, edited by D George Boyce and Alan O&#x27;Day. (Routledge, 1996), pp. 188–215.
* O&#x27;Farrell, Patrick. &quot;The Irish in Australia: 1798 to the Present Day&quot; (3rd ed. Cork University Press, 2001)
* O&#x27;sullivan, Patrick, ed. &quot;The Irish Worldwide: Religion and Identity&quot;, vol. 5. (Leicester University Press, 1994)
* Power, J O&#x27;Connor, &quot;The Irish in England&quot;, &quot;Fortnightly Review&quot;, no. 159, 1880, pps.410–421.
* Walker, Brian. &quot;&#x27;The Lost Tribes of Ireland&#x27;: Diversity, Identity and Loss among the Irish Diaspora&quot;, &quot;Irish Studies Review&quot;; 2007 15(3): 267–82.
* Whelan, Bernadette. &quot;Women on the Move: a review of the historiography of Irish emigration to the USA, 1750–1900.&quot; &quot;Women&#x27;s History Review&quot; 24.6 (2015): 900–16.
* Horner, Dan. &quot;&#x27;If the Evil Now Growing around Us Be Not Staid&#x27;: Montreal and Liverpool Confront the Irish Famine Migration as a Transnational Crisis in Urban Governance.&quot; Histoire Sociale/Social History 46, no. 92 (2013): 349–66.
==External links==
* The Irish in Europe Project at Maynooth University 
* The Irish in America by J. F. Maguire (1868)
*Irish Diaspora Studies Dept, Bradford University UK
*Society for Irish Latin American Studies\ 
* The Irish (In Countries Other Than Ireland) – Article in the Catholic Encyclopedia
*The Centre for Migration Studies - The Centre for Migration Studies, at the Ulster American Folk Park, Omagh, Northern Ireland
*The Shamrock and the Maple Leaf: Irish-Canadian Documentary Heritage at Library and Archives Canada
*Flight of the Earls</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2574155" start="4" end="18" title="Irish diaspora" label="Irish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="39" end="51" title="Irish people" label="Irish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="105" end="112" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="178" end="195" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071718" start="343" end="364" title="Irish population analysis" label="population of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="436" end="448" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="478" end="491" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="504" end="513" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="589" end="602" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="1026" end="1031" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1363" end="1374" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777436" start="1376" end="1388" title="Seán Fleming" label="Seán Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="1396" end="1415" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632935" start="1423" end="1440" title="Minister of State" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="1592" end="1600" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1769" end="1776" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="2364" end="2385" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259221" start="2431" end="2448" title="Irish nationality" label="Irish nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039797" start="2617" end="2626" title="Law of the Republic of Ireland" label="Irish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468226" start="2726" end="2749" title="Foreign Births Register" label="Foreign Births Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632031" start="2764" end="2788" title="Irish diplomatic missions" label="Irish diplomatic mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="3430" end="3453" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="3700" end="3714" title="Irish language" label="Irish speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292989" start="3975" end="3981" title="Scoti" label="Scotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="4010" end="4015" title="Gaels" label="Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="4064" end="4077" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="4153" end="4163" title="Roman Army" label="Roman Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521344" start="4255" end="4264" title="Attacotti" label="Attacotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282831" start="4488" end="4504" title="Túathal Techtmar" label="Túathal Techtmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672712" start="4791" end="4798" title="Cruthin" label="Cruthin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="4837" end="4842" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="5016" end="5025" title="Dál Riata" label="Dál Riata"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="5091" end="5095" title="Pict" label="Pict"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="5138" end="5146" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="5167" end="5173" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="5206" end="5228" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands and Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="5360" end="5373" title="Celtic Church" label="Celtic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="5499" end="5512" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="5517" end="5524" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="5541" end="5558" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="5755" end="5769" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132845" start="6157" end="6171" title="Pope Adrian IV" label="Pope Adrian IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="6181" end="6191" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319101" start="6208" end="6220" title="Laudabiliter" label="Laudabiliter"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="6240" end="6248" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q901714" start="6388" end="6414" title="Norman invasion of Ireland" label="Norman invasion of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q437952" start="6445" end="6461" title="Richard de Clare, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="Richard de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="6494" end="6507" title="English Crown" label="English Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="6573" end="6583" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="6606" end="6611" title="papacy" label="papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="6631" end="6648" title="Church in England" label="Church in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q180306" start="6686" end="6701" title="Earl of Kildare" label="Earl of Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="6740" end="6748" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="6777" end="6781" title="Holy See" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="6871" end="6878" title="fiefdom" label="fiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736547" start="7023" end="7038" title="King of Ireland" label="King of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361354" start="7051" end="7071" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War (Ireland)" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777934" start="7129" end="7150" title="Protestant Ascendancy" label="Protestant Ascendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262722" start="7196" end="7206" title="Plantations of Ireland" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="7263" end="7271" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251652" start="7272" end="7282" title="Protestantism in Ireland" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q640866" start="7346" end="7360" title="Catholicism in Ireland" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327860" start="7414" end="7428" title="Gaelic Ireland" label="Gaelic Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352121" start="7479" end="7488" title="sectarian" label="sectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q205157" start="7526" end="7539" title="Irish history" label="Irish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="7573" end="7608" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="dissenting Protestant denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738523" start="7664" end="7674" title="Penal Laws (Ireland)" label="Penal Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="7680" end="7696" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Irish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="7738" end="7748" title="Irish republicanism" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="7749" end="7774" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="United Irishmen Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="7821" end="7864" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="7875" end="7887" title="Act of Union 1800" label="Act of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="7894" end="7906" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="8165" end="8173" title="Connacht" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343807" start="8217" end="8234" title="Robert E. Kennedy (University president)" label="Robert E. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="9461" end="9470" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375634" start="9499" end="9529" title="Encumbered Estates&amp;#x27; Court" label="Encumbered Estates&amp;#x27; Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q314917" start="9660" end="9681" title="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450559" start="9821" end="9834" title="Young Ireland" label="Young Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="9917" end="9939" title="California Gold Rush" label="1848 discovery of gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="9947" end="9960" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071674" start="10013" end="10045" title="Irish migration to Great Britain" label="Irish migration to Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="10069" end="10090" title="early medieval period" label="early medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="10308" end="10317" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="10322" end="10329" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062" start="10430" end="10460" title="Economy of the Republic of Ireland" label="economic conditions in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="10496" end="10512" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10680" end="10692" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983621" start="10823" end="10841" title="Population of the United Kingdom" label="British population"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="10849" end="10863" title="2001 UK census" label="2001 UK census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779946" start="11433" end="11440" title="navvies" label="navvies"/>
<link wikidata="Q187668" start="11549" end="11558" title="emigrants" label="emigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="11579" end="11595" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="the Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="12099" end="12119" title="British armed forces" label="British armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q150214" start="12462" end="12469" title="Kilburn, London" label="Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="12617" end="12626" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="12694" end="12701" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="12703" end="12710" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q188304" start="12712" end="12722" title="Sunderland, Tyne and Wear" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="12727" end="12737" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q47952" start="12769" end="12776" title="Salford, Greater Manchester" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="12778" end="12788" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q203889" start="12790" end="12795" title="Luton" label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="12797" end="12805" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="12807" end="12817" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="12819" end="12828" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="12830" end="12843" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="12845" end="12852" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="12866" end="12875" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="12880" end="12890" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q984308" start="13070" end="13077" title="Hebburn" label="Hebburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q782155" start="13079" end="13085" title="Jarrow" label="Jarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018723" start="13090" end="13100" title="Coatbridge" label="Coatbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="13284" end="13305" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="13509" end="13534" title="Priesthood (Catholic Church)" label="Roman Catholic priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q547122" start="13736" end="13754" title="Keith O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Keith O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="13837" end="13844" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="13846" end="13855" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018723" start="13860" end="13870" title="Coatbridge" label="Coatbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="13901" end="13921" title="Celtic Football Club" label="Celtic Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q53769" start="13933" end="13939" title="Marist Brothers" label="Marist"/>
<link wikidata="Q428543" start="13940" end="13955" title="Brother Walfrid" label="Brother Walfrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192597" start="14008" end="14017" title="Hibernian F.C." label="Hibernian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192873" start="14082" end="14095" title="Dundee United F.C." label="Dundee United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193020" start="14159" end="14171" title="London Irish" label="London Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="14172" end="14183" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="14194" end="14208" title="2001 UK census" label="2001 UK census"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="14436" end="14449" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="14451" end="14461" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="14463" end="14473" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="14478" end="14493" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q805462" start="14641" end="14653" title="Ballyshannon" label="Ballyshannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="14655" end="14669" title="County Donegal" label="County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q332493" start="14689" end="14703" title="George Osborne" label="George Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="14763" end="14774" title="baronetcies" label="baronetcies"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="14847" end="14869" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="14952" end="14964" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q592459" start="15240" end="15264" title="Hiberno-Scottish mission" label="Hiberno-Scottish mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476943" start="15266" end="15278" title="Brioc" label="Saint Brieuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="15319" end="15327" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q319653" start="15329" end="15341" title="Columbanus" label="Saint Colmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q11498" start="15373" end="15379" title="Bobbio" label="Bobbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q180936" start="15423" end="15433" title="Saint Gall" label="Saint Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q25607" start="15461" end="15470" title="St. Gallen" label="St Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="15475" end="15481" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12746" start="15485" end="15494" title="Canton of St. Gallen" label="St Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="15518" end="15537" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="15680" end="15686" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="15712" end="15728" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Duchy of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="15737" end="15745" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430504" start="15770" end="15789" title="Flight of the Earls" label="Flight of the Earls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542152" start="16073" end="16083" title="Flight of the Wild Geese" label="Wild Geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="16185" end="16192" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q454265" start="16216" end="16259" title="Leopoldo O&amp;#x27;Donnell, 1st Duke of Tetuan" label="Leopoldo O&amp;#x27;Donnell, 1st Duke of Tetuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="16276" end="16312" title="president of the Government of Spain" label="president of the Government of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="16320" end="16326" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q158838" start="16350" end="16387" title="Patrice de Mac-Mahon, Duke of Magenta" label="Patrice de Mac-Mahon, Duke of Magenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="16404" end="16436" title="president of the French Republic" label="president of the French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q284" start="16449" end="16455" title="Cognac" label="Cognac"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="16456" end="16462" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229287" start="16470" end="16478" title="Hennessy" label="Hennessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430860" start="16495" end="16511" title="Richard Hennessy" label="Richard Hennessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455250" start="16537" end="16551" title="Clare Regiment" label="Clare Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q327343" start="16559" end="16572" title="Irish Brigade (France)" label="Irish Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="16720" end="16725" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="16928" end="16939" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="16951" end="16965" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="16996" end="17013" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q964276" start="17016" end="17033" title="Eoin O&amp;#x27;Duffy" label="Eoin O&amp;#x27;Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="17085" end="17091" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="17103" end="17120" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084833" start="17126" end="17136" title="Frank Ryan (Irish republican)" label="Frank Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126384" start="17145" end="17160" title="Connolly Column" label="Connolly Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="17203" end="17213" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q132518" start="17214" end="17236" title="International Brigades" label="International Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q76532" start="17238" end="17251" title="William Joyce" label="William Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="17262" end="17278" title="English language" label="English-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="17296" end="17308" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q543009" start="17332" end="17344" title="Lord Haw-Haw" label="Lord Haw-Haw"/>
<link wikidata="Q393046" start="17809" end="17829" title="Plantation of Ulster" label="Plantation of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="17838" end="17853" title="House of Stuart" label="Stuart monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430504" start="17918" end="17937" title="Flight of the Earls" label="Flight of the Earls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642413" start="18005" end="18019" title="Border reivers" label="Border reivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="18124" end="18141" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="18160" end="18183" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="Irish Rebellion of 1641"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135239" start="18394" end="18414" title="Irish indentured servants" label="indentured servitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="18422" end="18453" title="English colonization of the Americas" label="Crown&amp;#x27;s New World colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860257" start="18484" end="18515" title="Cromwellian invasion of Ireland" label="Cromwellian invasion of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="18536" end="18562" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="18576" end="18584" title="Cromwell" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="18830" end="18839" title="Connaught" label="Connaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="19293" end="19302" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="19973" end="20015" title="Irish people" label="fifth largest Irish community in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="20082" end="20095" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006110" start="20242" end="20256" title="William Bulfin" label="William Bulfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776168" start="20409" end="20420" title="Bere island" label="Bere island"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="20422" end="20433" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q966952" start="20583" end="20596" title="William Brown (admiral)" label="William Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777326" start="20659" end="20673" title="Argentine Navy" label="Argentine Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q628021" start="20744" end="20766" title="Military of Argentina" label="Argentine Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440225" start="20820" end="20827" title="Foxford" label="Foxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q178626" start="20829" end="20840" title="County Mayo" label="County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="20869" end="20881" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399432" start="20930" end="20953" title="Almirante Brown Partido" label="Almirante Brown partido"/>
<link wikidata="Q998798" start="20967" end="20984" title="Gran Buenos Aires" label="Gran Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765568" start="21141" end="21159" title="The Southern Cross (Argentina)" label="The Southern Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q44754" start="21277" end="21298" title="Buenos Aires Province" label="Buenos Aires Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="21467" end="21481" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777727" start="21491" end="21507" title="Irish settlement in Argentina" label="Irish Argentines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21618" end="21624" title="Edward Mulhall" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310063" start="21629" end="21644" title="Michael George Mulhall" label="Michael Mulhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969145" start="21798" end="21820" title="President of Argentina" label="President of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q356699" start="21825" end="21841" title="Edelmiro Farrell" label="Edelmiro Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="21915" end="21922" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q208961" start="21988" end="21999" title="Brendan the Navigator" label="St. Brendan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="22051" end="22071" title="psychiatric hospital" label="psychiatric hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q21790512" start="22321" end="22340" title="Ireland Island, Bermuda" label="named after Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="22373" end="22389" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="22464" end="22484" title="indentured servitude" label="indentured servitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860257" start="22540" end="22571" title="Cromwellian conquest of Ireland" label="Cromwellian conquest of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q640866" start="22954" end="22968" title="Catholic Church in Ireland" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q814997" start="23073" end="23080" title="Religious conversion" label="convert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="23094" end="23104" title="Protestantism" label="true faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="23307" end="23318" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q286321" start="23320" end="23329" title="recusancy" label="recusancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149038" start="23660" end="23668" title="Colored" label="coloured"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="23717" end="23733" title="Ethnic groups of Europe" label="European descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="23794" end="23799" title="Black people" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q223625" start="24134" end="24140" title="curfew" label="curfew"/>
<link wikidata="Q732859" start="24555" end="24574" title="governor of Bermuda" label="governor of Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568934" start="24576" end="24589" title="William Sayle" label="William Sayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="24689" end="24699" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="25642" end="25657" title="Church of England" label="Anglican church"/>
<link wikidata="Q108485389" start="25810" end="25827" title="Bailey&amp;#x27;s Bay, Bermuda" label="Bailey&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914694" start="26237" end="26254" title="House of Assembly of Bermuda" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q315346" start="26400" end="26412" title="Thomas Moore" label="Thomas Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="26472" end="26481" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071868" start="26513" end="26519" title="Cultra" label="Cultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q190684" start="26521" end="26532" title="County Down" label="County Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225212" start="26542" end="26563" title="Government of Bermuda" label="Government of Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q732859" start="26622" end="26641" title="Governor of Bermuda" label="Governor of Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321690" start="26793" end="26826" title="Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848" label="Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247240" start="26866" end="26878" title="John Mitchel" label="John Mitchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q56728862" start="26915" end="26935" title="William Burke Kirwan" label="William Burke Kirwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398678" start="26993" end="27013" title="Royal Naval Dockyard, Bermuda" label="Royal Naval Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="27353" end="27362" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21507590" start="27401" end="27407" title="Cronin" label="Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633335" start="27421" end="27427" title="HMS Medway (1812)" label="Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="28022" end="28027" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637813" start="28248" end="28269" title="42nd Regiment of Foot" label="42nd Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="28350" end="28371" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892622" start="28770" end="28786" title="Bermuda Garrison" label="Bermuda Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644915" start="29179" end="29220" title="86th (Royal County Down) Regiment of Foot" label="86th (Royal County Down) Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="29297" end="29307" title="Archbishop" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="29311" end="29331" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634567" start="29482" end="29503" title="30th Regiment of Foot" label="30th Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="29525" end="29536" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="29562" end="29567" title="Ethnic Malays" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q81925" start="29998" end="30019" title="20th Regiment of Foot" label="20th Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="30156" end="30165" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181882" start="30195" end="30208" title="County Carlow, Ireland" label="County Carlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="30566" end="30581" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="30682" end="30697" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892667" start="30705" end="30734" title="Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps" label="Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078694" start="31862" end="31876" title="Ó Creachmhaoil" label="Ó Creachmhaoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16583334" start="31888" end="31901" title="O&amp;#x27;Conor" label="O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942017" start="32066" end="32082" title="music of Bermuda" label="music of Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454597" start="32378" end="32391" title="Masonic lodge" label="Masonic lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638516" start="32497" end="32518" title="47th (Lancashire) Regiment of Foot" label="47th Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q28063" start="33067" end="33084" title="St. George&amp;#x27;s, Bermuda" label="St. George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789571" start="33267" end="33279" title="Thomas Field (Catholic priest)" label="Thomas Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="33366" end="33375" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q288251" start="33814" end="33828" title="Cisplatine War" label="Cisplatine War"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="33911" end="33920" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="34332" end="34346" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="34404" end="34410" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="34489" end="34494" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="34850" end="34864" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="34893" end="34907" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q311966" start="34949" end="34963" title="Roger Casement" label="Roger Casement"/>
<link wikidata="Q81882" start="34993" end="34999" title="Santos, São Paulo" label="Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829733" start="35001" end="35006" title="Belém" label="Belém"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="35015" end="35029" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q184594" start="35573" end="35589" title="County Waterford" label="County Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="35681" end="35692" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599571" start="35726" end="35755" title="The Great Migration of Canada" label="The Great Migration of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="36034" end="36046" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134180" start="36058" end="36070" title="Lower Canada" label="Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="36106" end="36117" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="36119" end="36139" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="36144" end="36157" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q203403" start="36170" end="36180" title="Saint John, New Brunswick" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="36342" end="36357" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778356" start="36671" end="36685" title="Tim Pat Coogan" label="Tim Pat Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235215" start="36779" end="36797" title="Newfoundland Irish" label="Newfoundland Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="36818" end="36832" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q184618" start="37023" end="37032" title="County Tipperary" label="Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q184594" start="37034" end="37043" title="County Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q184599" start="37045" end="37052" title="County Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="37054" end="37059" title="County Kerry" label="Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="37064" end="37068" title="County Cork" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q203403" start="37071" end="37096" title="Saint John, New Brunswick" label="Saint John, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="37224" end="37237" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="37303" end="37321" title="Great Irish Famine" label="Great Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872738" start="37564" end="37573" title="Miramichi Valley" label="Miramichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="37584" end="37597" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q501045" start="37600" end="37618" title="Guysborough County" label="Guysborough County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292350" start="37740" end="37750" title="Bantry Bay" label="Bantry Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="37752" end="37763" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="37902" end="37907" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="37952" end="37966" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="38065" end="38077" title="County Kerry" label="County Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127558" start="38079" end="38095" title="Dingle Peninsula" label="Dingle Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="38098" end="38109" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q179437" start="38115" end="38131" title="County Roscommon" label="County Roscommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="38153" end="38159" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="38215" end="38223" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247368" start="38241" end="38249" title="shamrock" label="shamrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426620" start="38269" end="38283" title="flag of Montreal" label="municipal flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117068" start="38356" end="38367" title="Grosse Isle" label="Grosse Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="38410" end="38416" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388366" start="38578" end="38595" title="Eastern Townships" label="Eastern Townships"/>
<link wikidata="Q14228338" start="38601" end="38614" title="Ottawa Valley" label="Ottawa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q141844" start="38620" end="38628" title="Gatineau" label="Gatineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397733" start="38633" end="38640" title="Pontiac, Quebec" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="38801" end="38808" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="39247" end="39254" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931533" start="39733" end="39740" title="redlegs" label="redlegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057915" start="39802" end="39817" title="African slavery" label="African slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044394" start="39920" end="39935" title="Province of Carolina" label="Carolina colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860257" start="39965" end="40000" title="the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland" label="the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135239" start="40093" end="40113" title="Irish indentured servants" label="indentured servitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="40268" end="40278" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="40454" end="40466" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="40498" end="40519" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412723" start="40870" end="40877" title="Hatillo, Puerto Rico" label="Hatillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q683206" start="40925" end="40936" title="Río Piedras" label="Río Piedras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651702" start="40946" end="40969" title="Alexander O&amp;#x27;Reilly" label="Alexander O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748608" start="41129" end="41142" title="Fort San Cristóbal (Puerto Rico)" label="San Cristóbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="41263" end="41275" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q165479" start="41288" end="41301" title="Saint Patrick" label="Saint Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255243" start="41330" end="41350" title="Demetrio O&amp;#x27;Daly" label="Demetrio O&amp;#x27;Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q332177" start="41370" end="41390" title="Ramon Power y Giralt" label="Ramon Power y Giralt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238070" start="41666" end="41674" title="Toa Baja, Puerto Rico" label="Toa Baja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853983" start="41692" end="41697" title="Loíza, Puerto Rico" label="Loíza"/>
<link wikidata="Q781" start="41941" end="41960" title="Antigua and Barbuda" label="Antigua and Barbuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154477" start="41964" end="41972" title="Irish immigration to Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202231" start="41975" end="41982" title="Irish people in Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211367" start="41985" end="42006" title="Irish immigration to Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="Saint Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="42009" end="42020" title="Saint Lucia" label="Saint Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="42023" end="42042" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="42208" end="42225" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q761784" start="42429" end="42442" title="Gulf of Urabá" label="Gulf of Urabá"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="42510" end="42523" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q123304" start="43772" end="43781" title="Antioquia Department" label="Antioquia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564493" start="43944" end="43949" title="Northern Antioquia" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q581842" start="43954" end="43959" title="Bajo Cauca Antioquia" label="lower"/>
<link wikidata="Q230607" start="44169" end="44186" title="Caldas Department" label="Caldas department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577890" start="44206" end="44213" title="Marmato, Caldas" label="Marmato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441985" start="44218" end="44223" title="Supía, Caldas" label="Supía"/>
<link wikidata="Q123304" start="44581" end="44590" title="Antioquia Department" label="Antioquia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542152" start="45114" end="45124" title="Flight of the Wild Geese" label="Wild Geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q28930" start="45377" end="45400" title="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q466956" start="45415" end="45431" title="President of Chile" label="Supreme director"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="45435" end="45440" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="45471" end="45475" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056896" start="45542" end="45556" title="Patricio Lynch" label="Patricio Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="45698" end="45709" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="45714" end="45722" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184599" start="45743" end="45757" title="County Wexford" label="County Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639329" start="45763" end="45778" title="William Lamport" label="William Lamport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="46023" end="46034" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q973289" start="46044" end="46079" title="Juan O&amp;#x27;Donojú" label="Juan de O&amp;#x27;Donojú y O&amp;#x27;Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546864" start="46262" end="46292" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Battalion" label="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315810" start="46322" end="46335" title="Mexican Texas" label="Mexican Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="46346" end="46356" title="Texas Revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546864" start="46453" end="46477" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Battalion" label="Batallón de San Patricio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862975" start="46548" end="46560" title="Mexican Army" label="Mexican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="46594" end="46614" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q212763" start="46646" end="46661" title="History of Mexico" label="Mexican history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270426" start="46696" end="46712" title="John Riley (soldier)" label="Major John Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83484" start="46797" end="46810" title="Anthony Quinn" label="Anthony Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="46995" end="47007" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788792" start="47104" end="47124" title="Romulo O&amp;#x27;Farril" label="Romulo O&amp;#x27;Farril"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378325" start="47126" end="47144" title="Juan O&amp;#x27;Gorman" label="Juan O&amp;#x27;Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109245" start="47150" end="47171" title="Edmundo O&amp;#x27;Gorman" label="Edmundo O&amp;#x27;Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="47404" end="47410" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="48796" end="48814" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="49303" end="49311" title="Roman Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="49484" end="49495" title="firefighter" label="firefighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="49497" end="49518" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="49557" end="49573" title="East Coast of the United States" label="Eastern Seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="49709" end="49724" title="German American" label="German American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="49793" end="49805" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="49816" end="49822" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="49839" end="49847" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="49858" end="49869" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="49871" end="49887" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="49889" end="49898" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="49900" end="49910" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="49912" end="49921" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="49923" end="49942" title="St. Paul, Minnesota" label="St. Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="49944" end="49951" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47894" start="49953" end="49966" title="Broome County" label="Broome County"/>
<link wikidata="Q467664" start="49968" end="49973" title="Butte, Montana" label="Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q493794" start="49975" end="49982" title="Dubuque, Iowa" label="Dubuque"/>
<link wikidata="Q49143" start="49984" end="49990" title="Quincy, Massachusetts" label="Quincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q988937" start="49992" end="49998" title="Dublin, Ohio" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="50000" end="50008" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="50010" end="50019" title="New Haven" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q49178" start="50021" end="50030" title="Waterbury" label="Waterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="50032" end="50042" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="50044" end="50055" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="50057" end="50068" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="50070" end="50078" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16101" start="50080" end="50089" title="Braintree, Massachusetts" label="Braintree"/>
<link wikidata="Q54195" start="50091" end="50099" title="Weymouth, Massachusetts" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="50101" end="50108" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="50110" end="50119" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="50121" end="50129" title="Scranton" label="Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q745594" start="50131" end="50143" title="Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania" label="Wilkes-Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q959924" start="50145" end="50158" title="O&amp;#x27;Fallon, Missouri" label="O&amp;#x27;Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="50160" end="50165" title="Tampa" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186937" start="50167" end="50175" title="Hazleton, Pennsylvania" label="Hazleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="50177" end="50186" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="50188" end="50194" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="50196" end="50207" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="50217" end="50239" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50315" end="50360" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day#Parades" label="The nation&amp;#x27;s largest is in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186762" start="50450" end="50464" title="Evacuation Day (Massachusetts)" label="Evacuation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="50514" end="50542" title="American War of Independence" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="50556" end="50568" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738523" start="50638" end="50648" title="Penal Laws (Ireland)" label="Penal Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="51012" end="51020" title="Connacht" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q159736" start="51022" end="51030" title="Leinster" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q131438" start="51035" end="51042" title="Munster" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="51224" end="51241" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="51310" end="51321" title="Scotch-Irish American" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="51819" end="51833" title="Irish-American" label="Irish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q12067953" start="51861" end="51887" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day in the United States" label="the widespread celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="51891" end="51912" title="St.Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St.Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950040" start="52126" end="52169" title="New York City St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day Parade" label="New York City St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="52422" end="52440" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777934" start="52610" end="52631" title="Protestant Ascendancy" label="Protestant Ascendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="52672" end="52712" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="52736" end="52772" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q335205" start="52797" end="52838" title="Richard Wellesley, 1st Marquess Wellesley" label="Richard Wellesley, 1st Marquess Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="52860" end="52885" title="Governor-General of India" label="Governor-General of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q464318" start="53091" end="53103" title="Annie Besant" label="Annie Besant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="53249" end="53265" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q312557" start="53270" end="53280" title="V. V. Giri" label="V. V. Giri"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="53352" end="53366" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887662" start="53412" end="53429" title="Bengal Volunteers" label="Bengal Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074958" start="53465" end="53481" title="Irish Volunteers" label="Irish Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262233" start="53485" end="53503" title="Derek O&amp;#x27;Brien (politician)" label="Derek O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q17324844" start="53524" end="53544" title="Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="53564" end="53575" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831656" start="53578" end="53603" title="Michael John O&amp;#x27;Brian" label="Michael John O&amp;#x27;Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639447" start="53639" end="53657" title="Pakistan Air Force" label="Pakistan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="53979" end="53998" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="54050" end="54066" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q913919" start="54354" end="54362" title="Convicts in Australia" label="convicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="54441" end="54454" title="free settlers" label="free settlers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54503" end="54522" title="Donegal Relief Fund" label="Donegal Relief Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914928" start="54528" end="54545" title="Australian gold rushes" label="discovery of gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="54549" end="54557" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="54562" end="54577" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053290" start="54892" end="54914" title="Catholic education in Australia" label="Catholic school system"/>
<link wikidata="Q44679" start="55085" end="55103" title="Australian English" label="Australian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="55222" end="55231" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q125434" start="55233" end="55247" title="Port Elizabeth, Eastern Cape" label="Port Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q125905" start="55249" end="55258" title="Kimberley, Northern Cape" label="Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="55264" end="55276" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="55306" end="55314" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q807828" start="55316" end="55325" title="Barberton, Mpumalanga" label="Barberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="55327" end="55333" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q209537" start="55339" end="55350" title="East London, Eastern Cape" label="East London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301901" start="55474" end="55489" title="Colony of Natal" label="Colony of Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642919" start="55521" end="55536" title="Thomas Upington" label="Thomas Upington"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="55548" end="55557" title="Afrikaner" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="55563" end="55567" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710454" start="55579" end="55594" title="Albert Henry Hime" label="Sir Albert Hime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437185" start="55601" end="55609" title="Kilcoole" label="Kilcoole"/>
<link wikidata="Q182591" start="55613" end="55627" title="County Wicklow" label="County Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q335019" start="55659" end="55673" title="George Macartney, 1st Earl Macartney" label="Lord Macartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310067" start="55675" end="55687" title="Du Pré Alexander, 2nd Earl of Caledon" label="Lord Caledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227458" start="55692" end="55716" title="Sir John Francis Cradock" label="Sir John Francis Cradock"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="56175" end="56189" title="Second Boer War" label="Anglo-Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q575780" start="56467" end="56475" title="Upington, Northern Cape" label="Upington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003379" start="56477" end="56488" title="Porterville, Western Cape" label="Porterville"/>
<link wikidata="Q777884" start="56490" end="56497" title="Caledon, Western Cape" label="Caledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138465" start="56499" end="56506" title="Cradock, Eastern Cape" label="Cradock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031524" start="56508" end="56529" title="Sir Lowry&amp;#x27;s Pass" label="Sir Lowry&amp;#x27;s Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296759" start="56558" end="56568" title="Donnybrook, KwaZulu-Natal" label="Donnybrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619054" start="56570" end="56579" title="Himeville" label="Himeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q301107" start="56584" end="56591" title="Belfast, Mpumalanga" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q108036921" start="56594" end="56605" title="James Rorke" label="James Rorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="56767" end="56778" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515501" start="57103" end="57123" title="Gabriel&amp;#x27;s Gully" label="Gabriel&amp;#x27;s Gully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573076" start="57128" end="57133" title="Otago gold rush" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972373" start="57479" end="57494" title="chain migration" label="chain migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="58729" end="58746" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005947" start="59145" end="59165" title="Paul Cardinal Cullen" label="Paul Cardinal Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="61444" end="61452" title="neopaganism" label="neopagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="61552" end="61557" title="Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="61722" end="61743" title="government of Ireland" label="government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071671" start="62089" end="62112" title="Irish military diaspora" label="Irish military diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62124" end="62165" title="Scotch-Irish American#Notable people" label="Notable Americans of Scotch-Irish descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529084" start="62170" end="62184" title="Timothy Anglin" label="Timothy Anglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="62186" end="62197" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="62267" end="62276" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q717744" start="62352" end="62364" title="Ed Broadbent" label="Ed Broadbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325509" start="62402" end="62414" title="Eamon Bulfin" label="Eamon Bulfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="62459" end="62471" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="62543" end="62553" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q269925" start="62555" end="62566" title="Conor Burns" label="Conor Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q466009" start="62617" end="62632" title="Charles Carroll of Carrollton" label="Charles Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q976524" start="62697" end="62712" title="Patrick Collins (mayor)" label="Patrick Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323845" start="62748" end="62767" title="Richard B. Connolly" label="Richard B. Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="62786" end="62798" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="62810" end="62825" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324972" start="62922" end="62936" title="Richard Croker" label="Richard Croker"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="62972" end="62984" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23375" start="62997" end="63008" title="John Curtin" label="John Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q295267" start="63045" end="63061" title="Richard J. Daley" label="Richard J. Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760078" start="63063" end="63079" title="Mayor of Chicago" label="Mayor of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q539814" start="63091" end="63107" title="Richard M. Daley" label="Richard M. Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760078" start="63109" end="63125" title="Mayor of Chicago" label="Mayor of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="63139" end="63156" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897802" start="63234" end="63248" title="Bernard Devlin" label="Bernard Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789018" start="63316" end="63329" title="Thomas Dongan" label="Thomas Dongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="63347" end="63367" title="province of New York" label="province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q339274" start="63369" end="63380" title="James Duane" label="James Duane"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="63382" end="63404" title="Mayor of New York City" label="Mayor of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q167386" start="63451" end="63470" title="Charles Gavan Duffy (Australian politician)" label="Charles Gavan Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710897" start="63560" end="63578" title="Thomas Addis Emmet" label="Thomas Addis Emmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q356699" start="63630" end="63646" title="Edelmiro Farrell" label="Edelmiro Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969145" start="63653" end="63675" title="President of Argentina" label="President of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213376" start="63711" end="63723" title="David Feeney" label="David Feeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016456" start="63776" end="63798" title="William P. Fitzpatrick" label="William P. Fitzpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q49197" start="63845" end="63867" title="Cranston, Rhode Island" label="Cranston, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679893" start="63903" end="63925" title="James Ambrose Gallivan" label="James Ambrose Gallivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106264" start="63964" end="63981" title="Dorothy Kelly Gay" label="Dorothy Kelly Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789768" start="64016" end="64037" title="Thomas Francis Gilroy" label="Thomas Francis Gilroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q295141" start="64087" end="64099" title="Chaim Herzog" label="Chaim Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="64101" end="64108" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q327948" start="64118" end="64137" title="President of Israel" label="President of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710454" start="64139" end="64156" title="Albert Henry Hime" label="Albert Henry Hime"/>
<link wikidata="Q182591" start="64158" end="64172" title="County Wicklow" label="County Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="64178" end="64193" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301901" start="64228" end="64243" title="Colony of Natal" label="Colony of Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q689166" start="64246" end="64255" title="Kate Hoey" label="Kate Hoey"/>
<link wikidata="Q242654" start="64300" end="64312" title="Paul Keating" label="Paul Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="64349" end="64364" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="64408" end="64425" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="64430" end="64447" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Edward M. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="64464" end="64478" title="Kennedy Family" label="Kennedy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="64496" end="64503" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242913" start="64506" end="64516" title="John Kenny (Clan-na-Gael)" label="John Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125628" start="64553" end="64565" title="Clan-na-Gael" label="Clan-na-Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076561" start="64580" end="64591" title="Peter Lalor" label="Peter Lalor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164870" start="64669" end="64685" title="Eureka Rebellion" label="Eureka Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q158838" start="64688" end="64720" title="Patrice MacMahon, duc de Magenta" label="Patrice MacMahon, duc de Magenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="64745" end="64766" title="Third French Republic" label="Third French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q887630" start="64769" end="64783" title="George Mathews (Georgia)" label="George Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q364053" start="64827" end="64843" title="Henry M. Mathews" label="Henry M. Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787056" start="64895" end="64909" title="Mathews family" label="Mathews family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119451" start="64911" end="64928" title="D&amp;#x27;Arcy McGee" label="D&amp;#x27;Arcy McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450559" start="64930" end="64943" title="Young Ireland" label="Young Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q568204" start="65007" end="65022" title="Dalton McGuinty" label="Dalton McGuinty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018407" start="65106" end="65120" title="David McGuinty" label="David McGuinty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256182" start="65151" end="65166" title="Santiago Mariño" label="Santiago Mariño"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="65220" end="65233" title="Simón Bolívar" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128529" start="65236" end="65247" title="Paul Martin" label="Paul Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q927338" start="65249" end="65278" title="Prime Ministers of Canada" label="21st Prime Minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162256" start="65281" end="65293" title="Conor McGinn" label="Conor McGinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="65295" end="65308" title="County Armagh" label="County Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q522396" start="65336" end="65358" title="Thomas Francis Meagher" label="Thomas Francis Meagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q878613" start="65404" end="65444" title="List of Governors of Montana Territory" label="acting governor of the Montana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247240" start="65447" end="65459" title="John Mitchel" label="John Mitchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="65508" end="65537" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="65549" end="65567" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q20880691" start="65570" end="65588" title="Maurice T. Moloney" label="Maurice T. Moloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="65608" end="65616" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406491" start="65631" end="65656" title="Illinois Attorney General" label="Illinois Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q576209" start="65678" end="65694" title="Ottawa, Illinois" label="Ottawa, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892814" start="65697" end="65708" title="Tom Mulcair" label="Tom Mulcair"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="65753" end="65767" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="65774" end="65798" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q957748" start="65833" end="65853" title="Ricardo López Murphy" label="Ricardo López Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="65905" end="65917" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="65975" end="65989" title="Álvaro Obregón" label="Álvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="65991" end="66010" title="President of Mexico" label="President of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526132" start="66022" end="66042" title="Kolouei O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Kolouei O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775997" start="66044" end="66062" title="List of heads of government of Tokelau" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="66066" end="66073" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201565" start="66076" end="66121" title="Detta O&amp;#x27;Cathain, Baroness O&amp;#x27;Cathain" label="Detta O&amp;#x27;Cathain, Baroness O&amp;#x27;Cathain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865279" start="66167" end="66187" title="Arthur O&amp;#x27;Connor (United Irishman)" label="Arthur O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="66189" end="66200" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887886" start="66206" end="66221" title="United Irishman" label="United Irishman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101832" start="66303" end="66321" title="Le Bignon-Mirabeau" label="Le Bignon-Mirabeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064625" start="66325" end="66343" title="T.P. O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="T.P. O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658555" start="66362" end="66380" title="Liverpool Scotland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Liverpool Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q454265" start="66423" end="66446" title="Leopoldo O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Leopoldo O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024122" start="66515" end="66537" title="Calvagh O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Calvagh O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274522" start="66552" end="66562" title="Tyrconnell" label="Tyrconnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q973289" start="66565" end="66583" title="Juan O&amp;#x27;Donojú" label="Juan O&amp;#x27;Donojú"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152778" start="66613" end="66630" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Dwyer" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178626" start="66632" end="66643" title="County Mayo" label="County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q441554" start="66701" end="66721" title="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer" label="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178626" start="66723" end="66734" title="County Mayo" label="County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="66803" end="66825" title="Mayor of New York City" label="Mayor of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q28930" start="66828" end="66851" title="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155734" start="66860" end="66885" title="Supreme Director of Chile" label="Supreme Director of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q886517" start="66903" end="66918" title="Viceroy of Peru" label="Viceroy of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388469" start="66919" end="66961" title="Ambrosio O&amp;#x27;Higgins, Marquis of Osorno" label="Ambrosio O&amp;#x27;Higgins, Marquis of Osorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q179325" start="66965" end="66973" title="County Sligo" label="Sligoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q109929987" start="66976" end="66994" title="Andrés Ojeda" label="Andrés Ojeda Spitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285880" start="67051" end="67071" title="Joseph O&amp;#x27;Lawlor" label="Joseph O&amp;#x27;Lawlor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="67128" end="67146" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="67158" end="67173" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="67206" end="67213" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064924" start="67216" end="67240" title="John Boyle O&amp;#x27;Reilly" label="John Boyle O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062580" start="67242" end="67270" title="Irish Republican Brotherhood" label="Irish Republican Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="67358" end="67364" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757141" start="67382" end="67391" title="The Pilot (Massachusetts newspaper)" label="The Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182205" start="67401" end="67421" title="John O&amp;#x27;Shanassy" label="John O&amp;#x27;Shanassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154488" start="67430" end="67446" title="Irish-Australian" label="Irish-Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527909" start="67480" end="67499" title="Premier of Victoria" label="Premier of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q383188" start="67511" end="67536" title="Thurles" label="Thurles, County Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q729054" start="67539" end="67555" title="William Paterson (judge)" label="William Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q454970" start="67709" end="67723" title="Samantha Power" label="Samantha Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q128626" start="67808" end="67825" title="Louis St. Laurent" label="Louis St. Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154489" start="67868" end="67882" title="Irish Quebecer" label="Irish Quebecer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23362" start="67885" end="67898" title="James Scullin" label="James Scullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q721599" start="67934" end="67945" title="James Smith (delegate)" label="James Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="67998" end="68039" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="68063" end="68075" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q886420" start="68078" end="68091" title="John Sullivan (general)" label="John Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805476" start="68133" end="68147" title="Thomas Taggart" label="Thomas Taggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="68174" end="68190" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="68209" end="68216" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369216" start="68264" end="68277" title="George Taylor (Pennsylvania politician)" label="George Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="68297" end="68305" title="Colonial history of the United States" label="Colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303297" start="68306" end="68316" title="ironmaster" label="ironmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="68337" end="68378" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="68402" end="68414" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q128686" start="68417" end="68434" title="John Sparrow David Thompson" label="Sir John Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q927338" start="68437" end="68465" title="Prime Ministers of Canada" label="4th Prime Minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368351" start="68468" end="68484" title="Matthew Thornton" label="Matthew Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="68493" end="68503" title="Irish people" label="Irish-born"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="68518" end="68559" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="68583" end="68596" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q923806" start="68598" end="68612" title="William Massey" label="William Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002115" start="68622" end="68630" title="Limavady" label="Limavady"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="68662" end="68673" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q613554" start="68676" end="68689" title="Michael Walsh (New York politician)" label="Michael Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012476" start="68690" end="68710" title="Youghal" label="Youghal, County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="68727" end="68755" title="United States Representative" label="United States Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846938" start="68761" end="68769" title="NYCongDel" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262233" start="68772" end="68790" title="Derek O&amp;#x27;Brien (politician)" label="Derek O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q17324844" start="68796" end="68816" title="Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q912899" start="68822" end="68825" title="All India Trinamool Congress" label="TMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="68833" end="68844" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="68846" end="68851" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q209662" start="68943" end="68955" title="Lucille Ball" label="Lucille Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q207458" start="68979" end="68992" title="Mischa Barton" label="Mischa Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="69003" end="69014" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q486103" start="69035" end="69051" title="Lara Flynn Boyle" label="Lara Flynn Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q314485" start="69062" end="69074" title="Edward Burns" label="Edward Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q636" start="69095" end="69104" title="Kate Bush" label="Kate Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="69129" end="69141" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q150651" start="69181" end="69194" title="George Carlin" label="George Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="69244" end="69258" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="69261" end="69270" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q180377" start="69294" end="69310" title="Raymond Chandler" label="Raymond Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q623732" start="69326" end="69333" title="Philip Marlowe" label="Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="69357" end="69371" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="69380" end="69391" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q212886" start="69417" end="69432" title="Stephen Colbert" label="Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q211566" start="69444" end="69456" title="Chris Colfer" label="Chris Colfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q316709" start="69474" end="69486" title="Steve Coogan" label="Steve Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="69506" end="69516" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q517405" start="69525" end="69537" title="Kevin Dillon" label="Kevin Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193070" start="69546" end="69557" title="Matt Dillon" label="Matt Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146409" start="69566" end="69578" title="Patrick Duff" label="Patrick Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621507" start="69599" end="69610" title="Strangelove (band)" label="Strangelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q232538" start="69613" end="69623" title="Patty Duke" label="Patty Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q483512" start="69634" end="69648" title="Isadora Duncan" label="Isadora Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q453048" start="69658" end="69666" title="Everlast (musician)" label="Everlast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164523" start="69673" end="69682" title="Danny Boy" label="Danny Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q752410" start="69722" end="69735" title="House of Pain" label="House of Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55809" start="69743" end="69757" title="La Coka Nostra" label="La Coka Nostra"/>
<link wikidata="Q467621" start="69760" end="69773" title="Siobhan Fahey" label="Siobhán Fahey"/>
<link wikidata="Q725926" start="69820" end="69830" title="Bananarama" label="Bananarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q527789" start="69835" end="69853" title="Shakespears Sister" label="Shakespears Sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="69856" end="69868" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q316685" start="69888" end="69903" title="Michael Flatley" label="Michael Flatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q310516" start="69927" end="69937" title="Riverdance" label="Riverdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q81328" start="69939" end="69952" title="Harrison Ford" label="Harrison Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q216708" start="69971" end="69985" title="Liam Gallagher" label="Liam Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q193459" start="69990" end="70004" title="Noel Gallagher" label="Noel Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="70008" end="70013" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q119966" start="70016" end="70033" title="Patrick Gallagher (actor)" label="Patrick Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="70042" end="70054" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="70076" end="70086" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777206" start="70107" end="70119" title="Thea Gilmore" label="Thea Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q598344" start="70140" end="70152" title="Merv Griffin" label="Merv Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313638" start="70171" end="70185" title="Lafcadio Hearn" label="Lafcadio Hearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q296641" start="70205" end="70215" title="Paul Hogan" label="Paul Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19857104" start="70225" end="70238" title="Marian Jordan" label="Marian Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355416" start="70277" end="70299" title="Fibber McGee and Molly" label="Fibber McGee and Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933243" start="70302" end="70312" title="Mike Joyce (musician)" label="Mike Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="70324" end="70334" title="The Smiths" label="The Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q73089" start="70337" end="70347" title="Gene Kelly" label="Gene Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="70366" end="70390" title="Grace Kelly" label="Princess Grace of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="70434" end="70448" title="Kennedy family" label="Kennedy family"/>
<link wikidata="Q355133" start="70450" end="70463" title="Jamie Kennedy" label="Jamie Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105817" start="70472" end="70483" title="Kevin Kline" label="Kevin Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q310283" start="70492" end="70503" title="Denis Leary" label="Denis Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722307" start="70535" end="70545" title="Mac Lethal" label="Mac Lethal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="70547" end="70554" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476175" start="70565" end="70570" title="Lorde" label="Lorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="70598" end="70608" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="70647" end="70658" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q228852" start="70660" end="70670" title="Jane Lynch" label="Jane Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q489" start="70692" end="70702" title="Bill Maher" label="Bill Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q317742" start="70730" end="70741" title="Johnny Marr" label="Johnny Marr"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="70753" end="70763" title="The Smiths" label="The Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="70766" end="70780" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="70782" end="70793" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="70798" end="70813" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="70817" end="70828" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q211040" start="70831" end="70843" title="Rose McGowan" label="Rose McGowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420007" start="70906" end="70917" title="Tom Meighan" label="Tom Meighan"/>
<link wikidata="Q272517" start="70934" end="70942" title="Kasabian" label="Kasabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q505568" start="70944" end="70955" title="Colin Meloy" label="Colin Meloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q930112" start="70987" end="71003" title="The Decemberists" label="The Decemberists"/>
<link wikidata="Q202246" start="71006" end="71022" title="Morrissey" label="Steven Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="71042" end="71052" title="The Smiths" label="The Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q168847" start="71055" end="71070" title="Brittany Murphy" label="Brittany Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441690" start="71080" end="71091" title="Mary Murphy (choreographer)" label="Mary Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377523" start="71109" end="71121" title="Katie Noonan" label="Katie Noonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q486740" start="71149" end="71167" title="Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q312883" start="71186" end="71204" title="George O&amp;#x27;Dowd" label="George O&amp;#x27;Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378325" start="71256" end="71274" title="Juan O&amp;#x27;Gorman" label="Juan O&amp;#x27;Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q46408" start="71341" end="71362" title="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe" label="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q229276" start="71374" end="71393" title="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q93157" start="71448" end="71467" title="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q103876" start="71478" end="71496" title="Peter O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Peter O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q215447" start="71568" end="71575" title="CM Punk" label="CM Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q403902" start="71592" end="71603" title="Aidan Quinn" label="Aidan Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="71605" end="71615" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q83484" start="71633" end="71646" title="Anthony Quinn" label="Anthony Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="71648" end="71653" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="71678" end="71685" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q228603" start="71738" end="71751" title="Saoirse Ronan" label="Saoirse Ronan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104081" start="71822" end="71835" title="Mickey Rooney" label="Mickey Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="71872" end="71885" title="Johnny Rotten" label="Johnny Rotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="71919" end="71930" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q335788" start="71933" end="71946" title="Kevin Rowland" label="Kevin Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q247259" start="71963" end="71985" title="Dexys Midnight Runners" label="Dexys Midnight Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q527320" start="71988" end="71999" title="Andy Rourke" label="Andy Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="72011" end="72021" title="The Smiths" label="The Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q377813" start="72024" end="72035" title="Justin Sane" label="Justin Sane"/>
<link wikidata="Q574663" start="72052" end="72061" title="Anti-Flag" label="Anti-Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q219782" start="72063" end="72080" title="Dusty Springfield" label="Dusty Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="72104" end="72121" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q234798" start="72170" end="72185" title="Imelda Staunton" label="Imelda Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q71275" start="72196" end="72209" title="Spencer Tracy" label="Spencer Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="72218" end="72228" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="72261" end="72274" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965617" start="72285" end="72297" title="Brian Whelan" label="Brian Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47664" start="72319" end="72339" title="Catherine Zeta-Jones" label="Catherine Zeta-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="72368" end="72380" title="Robert Boyle" label="Robert Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513" start="72408" end="72425" title="Kathleen Lonsdale" label="Kathleen Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="72427" end="72433" title="University College, London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q183631" start="72463" end="72476" title="Ernest Walton" label="Ernest Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="72484" end="72493" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="72529" end="72551" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83333" start="72570" end="72585" title="James D. Watson" label="James D. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="72642" end="72654" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="72759" end="72770" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="72794" end="72815" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q231549" start="72861" end="72872" title="Anne Bonney" label="Anne Bonney"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="72890" end="72894" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q317017" start="72897" end="72914" title="James J. Braddock" label="James J. Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q229631" start="72969" end="72980" title="Molly Brown" label="Molly Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q602294" start="73023" end="73037" title="Nellie Cashman" label="Nellie Cashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538228" start="73076" end="73090" title="George Croghan" label="George Croghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876197" start="73136" end="73148" title="U Dhammaloka" label="U Dhammaloka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="73239" end="73263" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="73439" end="73457" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="73480" end="73495" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230421" start="73507" end="73518" title="John Dunlap" label="John Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="73555" end="73596" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197339" start="73598" end="73614" title="Margaretta Eagar" label="Margaretta Eagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720" start="73660" end="73682" title="Sarah, Duchess of York" label="Sarah, Duchess of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362388" start="73768" end="73796" title="Thomas Fitzpatrick (trapper)" label="Thomas Fitzpatrick (trapper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="73820" end="73830" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="73863" end="73878" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q712605" start="73890" end="73903" title="James Gibbons" label="James Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q432437" start="73929" end="73942" title="Kathy Griffin" label="Kathy Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q557730" start="74010" end="74022" title="Sean Hannity" label="Sean Hannity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779917" start="74056" end="74068" title="Mary Jemison" label="Mary Jemison"/>
<link wikidata="Q213422" start="74111" end="74117" title="Seneca nation" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q262755" start="74127" end="74141" title="Dorothea Jordan" label="Dorothy Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="74155" end="74187" title="William IV of the United Kingdom" label="William IV of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q301816" start="74189" end="74198" title="Ned Kelly" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627286" start="74212" end="74222" title="bushranger" label="bushranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="74224" end="74250" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Dr. Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2915387" start="74285" end="74296" title="Eliza Lynch" label="Eliza Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q37677" start="74331" end="74353" title="Francisco Solano López" label="Francisco Solano López"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776113" start="74367" end="74379" title="Martin Maher (soldier)" label="Martin Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="74399" end="74429" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q238948" start="74445" end="74456" title="Mary Mallon" label="Mary Mallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q704265" start="74516" end="74529" title="Bat Masterson" label="Bat Masterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161154" start="74569" end="74580" title="Lola Montez" label="Lola Montez"/>
<link wikidata="Q44361" start="74594" end="74613" title="Ludwig I, King of Bavaria" label="Ludwig I of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q529195" start="74615" end="74626" title="Annie Moore (immigrant)" label="Annie Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q202175" start="74670" end="74682" title="Ellis Island" label="Ellis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q979329" start="74684" end="74713" title="Bugs Moran" label="George &amp;#x27;Bugs&amp;#x27; Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q256983" start="74752" end="74765" title="Anne Mortimer" label="Anne Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q520584" start="74798" end="74820" title="Michael Patrick Murphy" label="Michael Patrick Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="74825" end="74834" title="Navy SEAL" label="Navy SEAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="74836" end="74850" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676216" start="74875" end="74893" title="USS Michael Murphy" label="USS Michael Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q434304" start="74895" end="74908" title="Evelyn Nesbit" label="Evelyn Nesbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122059" start="74929" end="74949" title="Pacho O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Mario O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q234291" start="74962" end="74988" title="Marie-Louise O&amp;#x27;Murphy" label="Marie-Louise O&amp;#x27;Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="75002" end="75015" title="King Louis XV" label="King Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q310953" start="75028" end="75046" title="Bill O&amp;#x27;Reilly (political commentator)" label="Bill O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997544" start="75086" end="75116" title="Joseph Cornelius O&amp;#x27;Rourke" label="Joseph Cornelius O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049772" start="75144" end="75166" title="Russian Imperial Guard" label="Russian Imperial Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q48745" start="75169" end="75186" title="Lee Harvey Oswald" label="Lee Harvey Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="75253" end="75262" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490202" start="75341" end="75354" title="Frank Wallace (gangster)" label="Frank Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806677" start="75366" end="75378" title="James McLean (mobster)" label="James McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555711" start="75390" end="75405" title="Mickey Spillane (mobster)" label="Mickey Spillane"/>
<link wikidata="Q557801" start="75417" end="75432" title="James J. Bulger" label="James J. Bulger"/>
<link wikidata="Q28940783" start="75444" end="75461" title="Mary O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Mary O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134890" start="75475" end="75484" title="Municipal court" label="municipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="75498" end="75511" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q327343" start="75543" end="75565" title="Irish Brigade (French)" label="Irish Brigade (French)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542152" start="75603" end="75627" title="flight of the Wild Geese" label="flight of the Wild Geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596664" start="75639" end="75669" title="1st Venezuelan Rifles" label="1st Regiment Venezuelan Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8934" start="75709" end="75739" title="Venezuelan War of Independence" label="Venezuelan War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546864" start="75773" end="75789" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Battalion" label="Los San Patricio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="75842" end="75864" title="Mexican–American War" label="US invasion of 1846–48"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820375" start="75868" end="75894" title="Irish Brigade (Union Army)" label="Irish Brigade (Union Army)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="75927" end="75945" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546473" start="75962" end="75984" title="Tyneside Irish Brigade" label="Tyneside Irish Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="76021" end="76033" title="British army" label="British army"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="76041" end="76046" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071671" start="76050" end="76073" title="Irish military diaspora" label="Irish military diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071671" start="76169" end="76183" title="Irish regiment" label="Irish regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430504" start="76327" end="76346" title="Flight of the Earls" label="Flight of the Earls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860257" start="76349" end="76380" title="Cromwellian conquest of Ireland" label="Cromwellian conquest of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738523" start="76383" end="76397" title="Penal Laws (Ireland)" label="The Penal Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517366" start="76441" end="76463" title="Irish Famine (1740–41)" label="Irish Famine (1740–41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="76466" end="76496" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Irish Famine (1845–1851)"/>
<link wikidata="Q493814" start="76499" end="76518" title="Irish Famine (1879)" label="Irish Famine (1879)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333482" start="76521" end="76548" title="Economic history of Ireland" label="Economic history of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333505" start="76551" end="76594" title="Economic history of the Republic of Ireland" label="Economic history of the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q541086" start="76601" end="76613" title="Economic War" label="Economic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337549" start="76627" end="76682" title="The Emergency (Ireland)" label="&amp;quot;The Emergency&amp;quot; (Ireland during World War II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="76685" end="76724" title="The Troubles" label="&amp;quot;The Troubles&amp;quot; (c. 1969–1998)"/>
<link wikidata="Q972891" start="76727" end="76760" title="Post-2008 Irish economic downturn" label="Post-2008 Irish economic downturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619118" start="76774" end="76810" title="List of expatriate Irish populations" label="List of expatriate Irish populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q875651" start="76813" end="76828" title="Irish Traveller" label="Irish Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071671" start="76832" end="76855" title="Irish military diaspora" label="Irish military diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574498" start="76858" end="76888" title="List of Ireland-related topics" label="List of Ireland-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574571" start="76891" end="76927" title="Irish place names in other countries" label="Irish place names in other countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735962" start="76930" end="76956" title="The Gathering Ireland 2013" label="The Gathering Ireland 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658482" start="76959" end="76974" title="Liverpool Irish" label="Liverpool Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988066" start="76977" end="76993" title="Coatbridge Irish" label="Coatbridge Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129648" start="76996" end="77036" title="Against the Wind (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Against the Wind&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29831711" start="77039" end="77071" title="EPIC The Irish Emigration Museum" label="EPIC The Irish Emigration Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15766888" start="80293" end="80320" title="Women&amp;#x27;s History Review" label="Women&amp;#x27;s History Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601879" start="80652" end="80671" title="Maynooth University" label="Maynooth University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133615" start="80979" end="81004" title="Ulster American Folk Park" label="Ulster American Folk Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q510513" start="81006" end="81011" title="Omagh" label="Omagh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14563" wikidata="Q12503" url="?curid=14563" title="Integer">
<text>An integer is the number zero (0), a positive natural number (1, 2, 3, . . .), or the negation of a positive natural number (−1, −2, −3, . . .). The negations or additive inverses of the positive natural numbers are referred to as negative integers. The set of all integers is often denoted by the boldface or blackboard bold 

The set of natural numbers formula_1 is a subset of formula_2, which in turn is a subset of the set of all rational numbers formula_3, itself a subset of the real numbers formula_4. Like the set of natural numbers, the set of integers formula_2 is countably infinite. An integer may be regarded as a real number that can be written without a fractional component. For example, 21, 4, 0, and −2048 are integers, while 9.75, , 5/4, and  are not.

The integers form the smallest group and the smallest ring containing the natural numbers. In algebraic number theory, the integers are sometimes qualified as rational integers to distinguish them from the more general algebraic integers. In fact, (rational) integers are algebraic integers that are also rational numbers.

== History ==

The word integer comes from the Latin meaning &quot;whole&quot; or (literally) &quot;untouched&quot;, from &quot;in&quot; (&quot;not&quot;) plus &quot;tangere&quot; (&quot;to touch&quot;). &quot;&quot; derives from the same origin via the French word &quot;&quot;, which means both &quot;entire&quot; and &quot;integer&quot;. Historically the term was used for a number that was a multiple of 1, or to the whole part of a mixed number. Only positive integers were considered, making the term synonymous with the natural numbers. The definition of integer expanded over time to include negative numbers as their usefulness was recognized. For example Leonhard Euler in his 1765 &quot;Elements of Algebra&quot; defined integers to include both positive and negative numbers.

The phrase &quot;the set of the integers&quot; was not used before the end of the 19th century, when Georg Cantor introduced the concept of infinite sets and set theory. The use of the letter Z to denote the set of integers comes from the German word &quot;&quot; (&quot;numbers&quot;) and has been attributed to David Hilbert. The earliest known use of the notation in a textbook occurs in Algèbre written by the collective Nicolas Bourbaki, dating to 1947. The notation was not adopted immediately. For example, another textbook used the letter J, and a 1960 paper used Z to denote the non-negative integers. But by 1961, Z was generally used by modern algebra texts to denote the positive and negative integers.

The symbol formula_2 is often annotated to denote various sets, with varying usage amongst different authors: formula_7, formula_8, or formula_9 for the positive integers, formula_10 or formula_11 for non-negative integers, and formula_12 for non-zero integers. Some authors use formula_13 for non-zero integers, while others use it for non-negative integers, or for {–1,1} (the group of units of formula_2). Additionally, formula_15 is used to denote either the set of integers modulo (i.e., the set of congruence classes of integers), or the set of -adic integers.
The &quot;whole numbers&quot; were synonymous with the integers up until the early 1950s. In the late 1950s, as part of the New Math movement, American elementary school teachers began teaching that &quot;whole numbers&quot; referred to the natural numbers, excluding negative numbers, while &quot;integer&quot; included the negative numbers. The &quot;whole numbers&quot; remain ambiguous to the present day.

== Algebraic properties ==


Like the natural numbers, formula_2 is closed under the operations of addition and multiplication, that is, the sum and product of any two integers is an integer. However, with the inclusion of the negative natural numbers (and importantly, ), formula_2, unlike the natural numbers, is also closed under subtraction.

The integers form a ring which is the most basic one, in the following sense: for any ring, there is a unique ring homomorphism from the integers into this ring. This universal property, namely to be an initial object in the category of rings, characterizes the ring formula_2.

formula_2 is not closed under division, since the quotient of two integers (e.g., 1 divided by 2) need not be an integer. Although the natural numbers are closed under exponentiation, the integers are not (since the result can be a fraction when the exponent is negative).

The following table lists some of the basic properties of addition and multiplication for any integers , , and :
The first five properties listed above for addition say that formula_2, under addition, is an abelian group. It is also a cyclic group, since every non-zero integer can be written as a finite sum or . In fact, formula_2 under addition is the &quot;only&quot; infinite cyclic group—in the sense that any infinite cyclic group is isomorphic to formula_2.

The first four properties listed above for multiplication say that formula_2 under multiplication is a commutative monoid. However, not every integer has a multiplicative inverse (as is the case of the number 2), which means that formula_2 under multiplication is not a group.

All the rules from the above property table (except for the last), when taken together, say that formula_2 together with addition and multiplication is a commutative ring with unity. It is the prototype of all objects of such algebraic structure. Only those equalities of expressions are true in formula_2 for all values of variables, which are true in any unital commutative ring. Certain non-zero integers map to zero in certain rings.

The lack of zero divisors in the integers (last property in the table) means that the commutative ring formula_2 is an integral domain.

The lack of multiplicative inverses, which is equivalent to the fact that formula_2 is not closed under division, means that formula_2 is &quot;not&quot; a field. The smallest field containing the integers as a subring is the field of rational numbers. The process of constructing the rationals from the integers can be mimicked to form the field of fractions of any integral domain. And back, starting from an algebraic number field (an extension of rational numbers), its ring of integers can be extracted, which includes formula_2 as its subring.

Although ordinary division is not defined on formula_2, the division &quot;with remainder&quot; is defined on them. It is called Euclidean division, and possesses the following important property: given two integers and with , there exist unique integers and such that and , where denotes the absolute value of . The integer is called the &quot;quotient&quot; and is called the &quot;remainder&quot; of the division of by . The Euclidean algorithm for computing greatest common divisors works by a sequence of Euclidean divisions.

The above says that formula_2 is a Euclidean domain. This implies that formula_2 is a principal ideal domain, and any positive integer can be written as the products of primes in an essentially unique way. This is the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.

==Order-theoretic properties==
formula_2 is a totally ordered set without upper or lower bound. The ordering of formula_2 is given by:
An integer is &quot;positive&quot; if it is greater than zero, and &quot;negative&quot; if it is less than zero. Zero is defined as neither negative nor positive.

The ordering of integers is compatible with the algebraic operations in the following way:
# If and , then 
# If and , then 

Thus it follows that formula_2 together with the above ordering is an ordered ring.

The integers are the only nontrivial totally ordered abelian group whose positive elements are well-ordered. This is equivalent to the statement that any Noetherian valuation ring is either a field—or a discrete valuation ring.

==Construction==
=== Traditional development ===
In elementary school teaching, integers are often intuitively defined as the union of the (positive) natural numbers, zero, and the negations of the natural numbers. This can be formalized as follows. First construct the set of natural numbers according to the Peano axioms, call this formula_37. Then construct a set formula_38 which is disjoint from formula_37 and in one-to-one correspondence with formula_37 via a function formula_41. For example, take formula_38 to be the ordered pairs formula_43 with the mapping formula_44. Finally let 0 be some object not in formula_37 or formula_38, for example the ordered pair (0,0). Then the integers are defined to be the union formula_47. 

The traditional arithmetic operations can then be defined on the integers in a piecewise fashion, for each of positive numbers, negative numbers, and zero. For example negation is defined as follows:

formula_48

The traditional style of definition leads to many different cases (each arithmetic operation needs to be defined on each combination of types of integer) and makes it tedious to prove that integers obey the various laws of arithmetic. 

=== Equivalence classes of ordered pairs ===
In modern set-theoretic mathematics, a more abstract construction allowing one to define arithmetical operations without any case distinction is often used instead. The integers can thus be formally constructed as the equivalence classes of ordered pairs of natural numbers .

The intuition is that stands for the result of subtracting from . To confirm our expectation that and denote the same number, we define an equivalence relation on these pairs with the following rule:
:formula_49
precisely when
:formula_50.

Addition and multiplication of integers can be defined in terms of the equivalent operations on the natural numbers; by using to denote the equivalence class having as a member, one has:
:formula_51.
:formula_52.

The negation (or additive inverse) of an integer is obtained by reversing the order of the pair:
:formula_53.

Hence subtraction can be defined as the addition of the additive inverse:
:formula_54.

The standard ordering on the integers is given by:
:formula_55 if and only if formula_56

=== Other approaches ===

In theoretical computer science, other approaches for the construction of integers are used by automated theorem provers and term rewrite engines. Integers are represented as algebraic terms built using a few basic operations (e.g., zero, succ, pred) and using natural numbers, which are assumed to be already constructed (using the Peano approach).

There exist at least ten such constructions of signed integers. These constructions differ in several ways: the number of basic operations used for the construction, the number (usually, between 0 and 2), and the types of arguments accepted by these operations; the presence or absence of natural numbers as arguments of some of these operations, and the fact that these operations are free constructors or not, i.e., that the same integer can be represented using only one or many algebraic terms.

The technique for the construction of integers presented in the previous section corresponds to the particular case where there is a single basic operation pairformula_57 that takes as arguments two natural numbers formula_58 and formula_59, and returns an integer (equal to formula_60). This operation is not free since the integer 0 can be written pair(0,0), or pair(1,1), or pair(2,2), etc.. This technique of construction is used by the proof assistant Isabelle; however, many other tools use alternative construction techniques, notable those based upon free constructors, which are simpler and can be implemented more efficiently in computers.

==Computer science==

An integer is often a primitive data type in computer languages. However, integer data types can only represent a subset of all integers, since practical computers are of finite capacity. Also, in the common two&#x27;s complement representation, the inherent definition of sign distinguishes between &quot;negative&quot; and &quot;non-negative&quot; rather than &quot;negative, positive, and 0&quot;. (It is, however, certainly possible for a computer to determine whether an integer value is truly positive.) Fixed length integer approximation data types (or subsets) are denoted &quot;int&quot; or Integer in several programming languages (such as Algol68, C, Java, Delphi, etc.).

Variable-length representations of integers, such as bignums, can store any integer that fits in the computer&#x27;s memory. Other integer data types are implemented with a fixed size, usually a number of bits which is a power of 2 (4, 8, 16, etc.) or a memorable number of decimal digits (e.g., 9 or 10).

==Cardinality==
The set of integers is countably infinite, meaning it is possible to pair each integer with a unique natural number. An example of such a pairing is

More technically, the cardinality of formula_2 is said to equal (aleph-null). The pairing between elements of formula_2 and formula_1 is called a bijection.

== See also ==

* Canonical factorization of a positive integer
* Complex integer
* Hyperinteger
* Integer complexity
* Integer lattice
* Integer part
* Integer sequence
* Integer-valued function
* Mathematical symbols
* Parity (mathematics)
* Profinite integer
== Footnotes ==

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
== External links ==
* The Positive Integers – divisor tables and numeral representation tools
* On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences cf OEIS</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="3" end="10" title="Integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="18" end="24" title="number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="31" end="32" title="0" label="0"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="46" end="60" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q310395" start="125" end="127" title="−1" label="−1"/>
<link wikidata="Q715358" start="162" end="178" title="additive inverse" label="additive inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="231" end="248" title="Integer" label="negative integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="254" end="257" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q920915" start="298" end="306" title="boldface" label="boldface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142171" start="310" end="325" title="blackboard bold" label="blackboard bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="370" end="376" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="435" end="450" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="486" end="497" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="576" end="594" title="Countable set" label="countably infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="670" end="690" title="fraction" label="fractional component"/>
<link wikidata="Q389813" start="762" end="762" title="Square root of 2" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="804" end="809" title="Group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="827" end="831" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="847" end="861" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q613048" start="867" end="890" title="algebraic number theory" label="algebraic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="932" end="949" title="Integer" label="rational integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q646245" start="992" end="1009" title="algebraic integer" label="algebraic integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="1078" end="1093" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1144" end="1149" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1351" end="1357" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="1475" end="1481" title="number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="1534" end="1546" title="mixed number" label="mixed number"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="1624" end="1638" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q200227" start="1697" end="1712" title="negative number" label="negative number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="1762" end="1776" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358925" start="1795" end="1814" title="Elements of Algebra" label="Elements of Algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="1987" end="1999" title="Georg Cantor" label="Georg Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="2026" end="2038" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="2044" end="2054" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2125" end="2131" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="2199" end="2212" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588113" start="2277" end="2284" title="Éléments de mathématique" label="Algèbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q190529" start="2311" end="2327" title="Nicolas Bourbaki" label="Nicolas Bourbaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="2981" end="2995" title="group of units" label="group of units"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="3072" end="3087" title="integers modulo n" label="integers modulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349849" start="3106" end="3124" title="congruence relation" label="congruence classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="3153" end="3167" title="p-adic integer" label="-adic integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q336700" start="3293" end="3301" title="New Math" label="New Math"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="3410" end="3424" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="3618" end="3633" title="natural numbers" label="natural numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720939" start="3648" end="3654" title="closure (mathematics)" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q164307" start="3665" end="3675" title="binary operation" label="operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q40276" start="3692" end="3706" title="multiplication" label="multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q40754" start="3913" end="3924" title="subtraction" label="subtraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="3947" end="3951" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194212" start="4037" end="4054" title="ring homomorphism" label="ring homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417809" start="4094" end="4112" title="universal property" label="universal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q529752" start="4130" end="4144" title="initial object" label="initial object"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051859" start="4152" end="4169" title="category of rings" label="category of rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226939" start="4236" end="4244" title="division (mathematics)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="4374" end="4388" title="exponentiation" label="exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="4687" end="4700" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="4715" end="4727" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q742064" start="4921" end="4931" title="group isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208237" start="5050" end="5068" title="commutative monoid" label="commutative monoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="5379" end="5395" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q185813" start="5401" end="5406" title="multiplicative identity" label="unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q205464" start="5451" end="5470" title="algebraic structure" label="algebraic structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q842346" start="5483" end="5493" title="equality (mathematics)" label="equalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724001" start="5497" end="5508" title="algebraic expression" label="expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q126695" start="5531" end="5538" title="for all" label="for all"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767837" start="5640" end="5644" title="additive identity" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="5676" end="5688" title="zero divisor" label="zero divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="5783" end="5798" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="5957" end="5962" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q929536" start="6012" end="6019" title="subring" label="subring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="6036" end="6051" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q774579" start="6142" end="6160" title="field of fractions" label="field of fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q616608" start="6212" end="6234" title="algebraic number field" label="algebraic number field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358313" start="6275" end="6291" title="ring of integers" label="ring of integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q929536" start="6342" end="6349" title="subring" label="subring"/>
<link wikidata="Q181054" start="6481" end="6499" title="Euclidean division" label="Euclidean division"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="6645" end="6659" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q846677" start="6736" end="6745" title="remainder" label="remainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q230848" start="6780" end="6799" title="Euclidean algorithm" label="Euclidean algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="6814" end="6837" title="greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q867345" start="6919" end="6935" title="Euclidean domain" label="Euclidean domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143969" start="6970" end="6992" title="principal ideal domain" label="principal ideal domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="7053" end="7059" title="prime number" label="primes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399590" start="7066" end="7084" title="essentially unique" label="essentially unique"/>
<link wikidata="Q670235" start="7102" end="7135" title="fundamental theorem of arithmetic" label="fundamental theorem of arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="7184" end="7203" title="total order" label="totally ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="7212" end="7232" title="upper and lower bounds" label="upper or lower bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="7330" end="7334" title="0" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782642" start="7633" end="7645" title="ordered ring" label="ordered ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="7685" end="7700" title="totally ordered" label="totally ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="7701" end="7714" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q659746" start="7743" end="7755" title="well-ordered" label="well-ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q582271" start="7802" end="7812" title="Noetherian ring" label="Noetherian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013681" start="7813" end="7827" title="valuation ring" label="valuation ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="7840" end="7845" title="Field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q986694" start="7851" end="7874" title="discrete valuation ring" label="discrete valuation ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="8044" end="8048" title="zero" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q842755" start="8187" end="8199" title="Peano axioms" label="Peano axioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="8264" end="8272" title="Disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="8404" end="8416" title="ordered pair" label="ordered pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037833" start="8695" end="8704" title="piecewise" label="piecewise"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="8784" end="8792" title="negation" label="negation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="9329" end="9346" title="equivalence class" label="equivalence class"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="9352" end="9364" title="ordered pair" label="ordered pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="9369" end="9383" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="9527" end="9547" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="10105" end="10119" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q431667" start="10253" end="10278" title="Automated theorem proving" label="automated theorem provers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668499" start="10283" end="10303" title="Rewriting" label="term rewrite engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q21998744" start="10333" end="10348" title="Term algebra" label="algebraic terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="10419" end="10433" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q842755" start="10491" end="10505" title="Peano axioms" label="Peano approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387554" start="11450" end="11465" title="proof assistant" label="proof assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q460340" start="11466" end="11474" title="Isabelle (proof assistant)" label="Isabelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="11714" end="11723" title="data type" label="data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q629206" start="11727" end="11744" title="computer language" label="computer language"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="11796" end="11802" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q232577" start="11890" end="11911" title="two&amp;#x27;s complement" label="two&amp;#x27;s complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193832" start="11955" end="11959" title="sign (mathematics)" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166735" start="12332" end="12339" title="Algol68" label="Algol68"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="12341" end="12342" title="C (computer language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="12344" end="12348" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q633894" start="12350" end="12356" title="Object Pascal" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q527381" start="12419" end="12425" title="bignum" label="bignum"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="12712" end="12730" title="countably infinite" label="countably infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="12861" end="12872" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q908627" start="12904" end="12914" title="Aleph number" label="aleph-null"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="12985" end="12994" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q670235" start="13015" end="13060" title="Canonical representation of a positive integer" label="Canonical factorization of a positive integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q724975" start="13063" end="13078" title="Complex integer" label="Complex integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958146" start="13081" end="13093" title="Hyperinteger" label="Hyperinteger"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304002" start="13096" end="13114" title="Integer complexity" label="Integer complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252145" start="13117" end="13132" title="Integer lattice" label="Integer lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="13135" end="13147" title="Integer part" label="Integer part"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297602" start="13150" end="13166" title="Integer sequence" label="Integer sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q19856468" start="13169" end="13192" title="Integer-valued function" label="Integer-valued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q180159" start="13195" end="13215" title="Mathematical symbols" label="Mathematical symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="13218" end="13238" title="Parity (mathematics)" label="Parity (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018462" start="13241" end="13258" title="Profinite integer" label="Profinite integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="13455" end="13459" title="OEIS" label="OEIS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14566" wikidata="Q837182" url="?curid=14566" title="Impressionism in music">
<text>Impressionism in music was a movement among various composers in Western classical music (mainly during the late 19th and early 20th centuries) whose music focuses on mood and atmosphere, &quot;conveying the moods and emotions aroused by the subject rather than a detailed tone‐picture&quot;. &quot;Impressionism&quot; is a philosophical and aesthetic term borrowed from late 19th-century French painting after Monet&#x27;s &quot;Impression, Sunrise&quot;. Composers were labeled Impressionists by analogy to the Impressionist painters who use starkly contrasting colors, effect of light on an object, blurry foreground and background, flattening perspective, etc. to make the observer focus their attention on the overall impression.

The most prominent feature in musical Impressionism is the use of &quot;color&quot;, or in musical terms, timbre, which can be achieved through orchestration, harmonic usage, texture, etc. Other elements of musical Impressionism also involve new chord combinations, ambiguous tonality, extended harmonies, use of modes and exotic scales, parallel motion, extra-musicality, and evocative titles such as “&quot;Reflets dans l&#x27;eau&quot;”
(“Reflections on the water”), “&quot;Brouillards&quot;” (“Mists”), etc.

==History==
Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel are two leading figures in Impressionism, though Debussy rejected this label (in a 1908 letter he wrote &quot;imbeciles call [what I am trying to write in &quot;Images&quot;] &#x27;impressionism&#x27;, a term employed with the utmost inaccuracy, especially by art critics who use it as a label to stick on Turner, the finest creator of mystery in the whole of art!&quot;) and Ravel displayed discomfort with it, at one point claiming that it could not be adequately applied to music at all. Debussy&#x27;s Impressionist works typically &quot;evoke a mood, feeling, atmosphere, or scene&quot; by creating musical images through characteristic motifs, harmony, exotic scales (e.g., whole-tone and pentatonic scales), instrumental timbre, large unresolved chords (e.g., 9ths, 11ths, 13ths), parallel motion, ambiguous tonality, extreme chromaticism, heavy use of the piano pedals, and other elements. “The perception of Debussy’s compositional language as decidedly post-romantic/Impressionistic—nuanced, understated, and subtle—is firmly solidified among today’s musicians and well-informed audiences.&quot; Some Impressionist composers, Debussy and Ravel in particular, are also labeled as symbolist composers. One trait shared with both aesthetic trends is &quot;a sense of detached observation: rather than expressing deeply felt emotion or telling a story&quot;; as in symbolist poetry, the normal syntax is usually disrupted and individual images that carry the work&#x27;s meaning are evoked.

In 1912, the French composer Ernest Fanelli (1860–1917) received significant attention and coverage in the Parisian press following a performance of a symphonic poem he wrote in 1886, titled &quot;Thèbes&quot;, incorporating elements associated with Impressionism, such as extended chords and whole-tone scales. Ravel was unimpressed by Fanelli&#x27;s novelties, maintaining that these were already utilized by past composers such as Franz Liszt. He also opined that Fanelli&#x27;s Impressionism stemmed from Hector Berlioz rather than Liszt or Russian composers.

Other composers linked to Impressionism include Lili Boulanger, Isaac Albéniz, Frederick Delius, Paul Dukas, Alexander Scriabin, Manuel de Falla, John Alden Carpenter, Ottorino Respighi, Albert Roussel, Karol Szymanowski, Charles Tomlinson Griffes, and Federico Mompou. The Finnish composer Jean Sibelius is also associated with Impressionism, and his tone poem &quot;The Swan of Tuonela&quot; (1893) predates Debussy&#x27;s &quot;Prélude à l&#x27;après-midi d&#x27;un faune&quot; (regarded as a seminal work of musical Impressionism) by a year. The American composer Howard Hanson also borrowed from both Sibelius and Impressionism generally in works such as his Second Symphony.

== Characteristics ==
One of the most important tools of musical Impressionism was the tensionless harmony. The dissonance of chords was not resolved, but was used as timbre. These chords were often shifted parallel. In the melodic field the whole tone scale, the pentatonic and church tonal turns were used. The melodics were characterized by their circular melodic movements. The timbre became the stylistic device of Impressionism instead of concise themes or other traditional forms.

==See also==

* History of music

==References==
==Further reading==
* Fulcher, Jane. &quot;Debussy and His World&quot;. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001. . 
* Machlis, Joseph, and Kristine Forney. &quot;The Enjoyment of Music&quot;, seventh edition. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company, 1995. .
* Pasler, Jann. &quot;Impressionism&quot;. &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot;, second edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell. London: Macmillan Publishers, 2001.
*Thompson, Oscar. &quot;Debussy, Man and Artist&quot;. New York: Dodd, Mead &amp; company, 1937.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q837182" start="0" end="22" title="Impressionism in music" label="Impressionism in music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="73" end="88" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="411" end="423" title="Claude Monet" label="Monet&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q328523" start="430" end="449" title="Impression, Sunrise" label="Impression, Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="842" end="848" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367000" start="880" end="893" title="orchestration" label="orchestration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1002" end="1020" title="Tonality#19th century" label="ambiguous tonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421879" start="1022" end="1040" title="Extended chord" label="extended harmonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q731978" start="1049" end="1054" title="Mode (music)" label="modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q378090" start="1074" end="1089" title="Parallel harmony" label="parallel motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q209741" start="1091" end="1107" title="Program music" label="extra-musicality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307341" start="1145" end="1168" title="Reflets dans l&amp;#x27;eau" label="Reflets dans l&amp;#x27;eau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975860" start="1213" end="1224" title="Brouillards" label="Brouillards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="1261" end="1275" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="1280" end="1293" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="1600" end="1606" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="Turner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2483" end="2502" title="Symbolism_(arts)#Music" label="symbolist composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="2665" end="2681" title="Symbolism_(arts)" label="symbolist poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q648944" start="2821" end="2835" title="Ernest Fanelli" label="Ernest Fanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="2943" end="2957" title="symphonic poem" label="symphonic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421879" start="3065" end="3079" title="extended chord" label="extended chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q844877" start="3085" end="3101" title="whole-tone scale" label="whole-tone scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="3226" end="3237" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="3301" end="3315" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q230412" start="3405" end="3419" title="Lili Boulanger" label="Lili Boulanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q185812" start="3421" end="3434" title="Isaac Albéniz" label="Isaac Albéniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q312698" start="3436" end="3452" title="Frederick Delius" label="Frederick Delius"/>
<link wikidata="Q215556" start="3454" end="3464" title="Paul Dukas" label="Paul Dukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q185647" start="3466" end="3484" title="Alexander Scriabin" label="Alexander Scriabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193283" start="3486" end="3501" title="Manuel de Falla" label="Manuel de Falla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699111" start="3503" end="3523" title="John Alden Carpenter" label="John Alden Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q243837" start="3525" end="3542" title="Ottorino Respighi" label="Ottorino Respighi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313376" start="3544" end="3558" title="Albert Roussel" label="Albert Roussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q295400" start="3560" end="3577" title="Karol Szymanowski" label="Karol Szymanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q477571" start="3579" end="3604" title="Charles Tomlinson Griffes" label="Charles Tomlinson Griffes"/>
<link wikidata="Q457178" start="3610" end="3625" title="Federico Mompou" label="Federico Mompou"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="3648" end="3661" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Jean Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="3709" end="3718" title="tone poem" label="tone poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237270" start="3725" end="3744" title="The Swan of Tuonela" label="The Swan of Tuonela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471875" start="3788" end="3831" title="Prélude à l&amp;#x27;après-midi d&amp;#x27;un faune" label="Prélude à l&amp;#x27;après-midi d&amp;#x27;un faune"/>
<link wikidata="Q382748" start="3925" end="3938" title="Howard Hanson" label="Howard Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925795" start="4021" end="4036" title="Symphony No. 2 (Hanson)" label="Second Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="4151" end="4161" title="Consonance and dissonance" label="dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q846047" start="4544" end="4560" title="History of music" label="History of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="4885" end="4932" title="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians" label="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335317" start="4966" end="4979" title="Stanley Sadie" label="Stanley Sadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217713" start="4984" end="4996" title="John Tyrrell (musicologist)" label="John Tyrrell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14567" wikidata="Q178803" url="?curid=14567" title="International trade">
<text>International trade is the exchange of capital, goods, and services across international borders or territories because there is a need or want of goods or services. (See: World economy.)

In most countries, such trade represents a significant share of gross domestic product (GDP). While international trade has existed throughout history (for example Uttarapatha, Silk Road, Amber Road, salt roads), its economic, social, and political importance has been on the rise in recent centuries.

Carrying out trade at an international level is a complex process when compared to domestic trade. When trade takes place between two or more states, factors like currency, government policies, economy, judicial system, laws, and markets influence trade.

To ease and justify the process of trade between countries of different economic standing in the modern era, some international economic organizations were formed, such as the World Trade Organization. These organizations work towards the facilitation and growth of international trade. Statistical services of intergovernmental and supranational organizations and governmental statistical agencies publish official statistics on international trade.

== Characteristics of global trade ==
A product that is transferred or sold from a party in one country to a party in another country is an export from the originating country, and an import to the country receiving that product. Imports and exports are accounted for in a country&#x27;s current account in the balance of payments.

Trading globally may give consumers and countries the opportunity to be exposed to new markets and products. Almost every kind of product can be found in the international market, for example: food, clothes, spare parts, oil, jewellery, wine, stocks, currencies, and water. Services are also traded, such as in tourism, banking, consulting, and transportation.

Advanced technology (including transportation), globalization, industrialization, outsourcing and multinational corporations have major impacts on the international trade systems.

== Differences from domestic trade ==

International trade is, in principle, not different from domestic trade as the motivation and the behavior of parties involved in a trade do not change fundamentally regardless of whether trade is across a border or not.

However, in practical terms, carrying out trade at an international level is typically a more complex process than domestic trade. The main difference is that international trade is typically more costly than domestic trade. This is due to the fact that cross-border trade typically incurs additional costs such as explicit tariffs as well as explicit or implicit non-tariff barriers such as time costs (due to border delays), language and cultural differences, product safety, the legal system, and so on.

Another difference between domestic and international trade is that factors of production such as capital and labor are often more mobile within a country than across countries. Thus, international trade is mostly restricted to trade in goods and services, and only to a lesser extent to trade in capital, labour, or other factors of production. Trade in goods and services can serve as a substitute for trade in factors of production. Instead of importing a factor of production, a country can import goods that make intensive use of that factor of production and thus embody it. An example of this is the import of labor-intensive goods by the United States from China. Instead of importing Chinese labor, the United States imports goods that were produced with Chinese labor. One report in 2010, suggested that international trade was increased when a country hosted a network of immigrants, but the trade effect was weakened when the immigrants became assimilated into their new country.

==History==
The history of international trade chronicles notable events that have affected trading among various economies.

==Theories and models==

There are several models that seek to explain the factors behind international trade, the welfare consequences of trade and the pattern of trade.

==Most traded export products==
==Largest countries or regions by total international trade==

The following table is a list of the 25 largest trading states according to the World Trade Organization in 2021 and 2022.

==Top traded commodities by value (exports)==
Source: International Trade Centre

==Observances==
In the US, starting in 1935 the various U.S. Presidents have held &quot;World Trade Week&quot; observances to promote big and small companies to be more involved with the export and import of goods and services. This tradition was preceded by a local observance of &quot;Foreign Trade Week&quot; by the Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce that originated in 1927 as an expansion of United States National Maritime Day.

President George W. Bush observed World Trade Week on May 18, 2001, and May 17, 2002. On May 13, 2016, President Barack Obama proclaimed May 15 through May 21, 2016, World Trade Week, 2016. On May 19, 2017, President Donald Trump proclaimed May 21 through May 27, 2017, World Trade Week, 2017. World Trade Week is the third week of May. Every year the President declares that week to be World Trade Week.
==International trade versus local production==
===Food security===

The trade-offs between local food production and distant food production are controversial, with limited studies comparing environmental impact and scientists cautioning that regionally specific environmental impacts should be considered. A 2020 study indicated that local food crop production alone cannot meet the demand for most food crops with &quot;current production and consumption patterns&quot; and the locations of food production at the time of the study for 72–89% of the global population and 100 km radiuses as of early 2020. Studies found that food miles are a relatively minor factor for carbon emissions, albeit increased food localization may also enable additional, more significant, environmental benefits such as recycling of energy, water, and nutrients. For specific foods regional differences in harvest seasons may make it more environmentally friendly to import from distant regions than more local production and storage or local production in greenhouses.

===Qualitative differences and economic aspects===
Qualitative differences between substitutive products of different production regions may exist due to different legal requirements and quality standards or different levels of controllability by local production- and governance-systems which may have aspects of security beyond resource security, environmental protection, product quality and product design and health. The process of transforming supply as well as labor rights may differ as well.

Local production has been reported to increase local employment in many cases. A 2018 study claimed that international trade can increase local employment. A 2016 study found that local employment and total labor income in both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing were negatively affected by rising exposure to imports.

Local production in high-income countries, rather than distant regions may require higher wages for workers. Higher wages incentivize automation which could allow for automated workers&#x27; time to be reallocated by society and its economic mechanisms or be converted into leisure-like time.

====Specialization, production efficiency and regional differences====
Local production may require knowledge transfer, technology transfer and may not be able to compete in efficiency initially with specialized, established industries and businesses, or in consumer demand without policy measures such as eco-tariffs. Regional differences may cause specific regions to be more suitable for a specific production, thereby increasing the advantages of specific trade over specific local production. Forms of local products that are highly localized may not be able to meet the efficiency of more large-scale, highly consolidated production in terms of efficiency, including environmental impact.

===Resource security===

A systematic, and possibly first large-scale, cross-sectoral analysis of water, energy and land in security in 189 countries that links total and sectorial consumption to sources showed that countries and sectors are highly exposed to over-exploited, insecure, and degraded such resources with economic globalization having decreased security of global supply chains. The 2020 study finds that most countries exhibit greater exposure to resource risks via international trade – mainly from remote production sources – and that diversifying trading partners is unlikely to help countries and sectors to reduce these or to improve their resource self-sufficiency.

== Illicit trade ==
=== Illegal gold trade ===
A number of people in Africa, including children, were using informal or &quot;artisanal&quot; methods to produce gold. While millions were making a livelihood through this small-scale mining, governments of Ghana, Tanzania and Zambia complained about the increase in illegal production and gold smuggling. Sometimes the procedure involved criminal operations and even human and environmental cost. Investigative reports based on Africa&#x27;s export data revealed that gold in large quantities is smuggled out of the country through the United Arab Emirates, without any taxes being paid to the producing states. Analysis also reflected discrepancies in the amount exported from Africa and the total gold imported into the UAE.

In July 2020, a report by Swissaid highlighted that the Dubai-based precious metal refining firms, including Kaloti Jewellery International Group and Trust One Financial Services (T1FS), received most of their gold from poor African states like Sudan. The gold mines in Sudan were seldom under the militias involved in war crimes and human rights abuses. The Swissaid report also highlighted that the illicit gold coming into Dubai from Africa is imported in large quantities by the world&#x27;s largest refinery in Switzerland, Valcambi. 

Another report in March 2022 revealed the contradiction between the lucrative gold trade of West African countries and the illicit dealings. Like Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Ghana and other states, discrepancies were recorded between the gold production in Mali and its trade with Dubai, UAE. The third largest gold exporter in Africa, Mali imposed taxes only on the first of gold exports per month, which allowed several small-scale miners to enjoy tax exemptions and smuggle gold worth millions. In 2014, Mali&#x27;s gold production was 45.8 tonnes, while the UAE&#x27;s gold imports were 59.9 tonnes. 

==See also==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
=== Lists ===
* List of countries by current account balance
* List of countries by imports
* List of countries by exports
* List of countries by merchandise exports
* List of countries by service exports
* List of international trade topics

==References==
==Further reading==
* Nelson, Scott Reynolds. &quot;Oceans of Grain: How American Wheat Remade the World&quot; (2022) excerpt
* Linsi, Lukas; Burgoon, Brian; Mügge, Daniel K (2023). &quot;&quot;. &quot;International Studies Quarterly&quot;. 67 (2).

==Sources==
* 


==External links==
===Data===

====Statistics from intergovernmental sources====
Data on the value of exports and imports and their quantities often broken down by detailed lists of products are available in statistical collections on international trade published by the statistical services of intergovernmental and supranational organisations and national statistical institutes. The definitions and methodological concepts applied for the various statistical collections on international trade often differ in terms of definition (e.g. special trade vs. general trade) and coverage (reporting thresholds, inclusion of trade in services, estimates for smuggled goods and cross-border provision of illegal services). Metadata providing information on definitions and methods are often published along with the data.
* United Nations Commodity Trade Database
* Trade Map, trade statistics for international business development
* WTO Statistics Portal
* Statistical Portal: OECD
* European Union International Trade in Goods Data
* Food and Agricultural Trade Data by FAO

===Other external links===
* The MIT Observatory of Economic Complexity
* The McGill Faculty of Law runs a Regional Trade Agreements Database that contains the text of almost all preferential and regional trade agreements in the world. ptas.mcgill.ca
* Historical documents on international trade available on FRASER (St Louis Fed)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="0" end="19" title="International trade" label="International trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="39" end="46" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877" start="48" end="53" title="goods" label="goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="59" end="67" title="Service (economics)" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="75" end="96" title="international borders" label="international borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q473750" start="172" end="185" title="World economy" label="World economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="213" end="218" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="253" end="275" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321347" start="353" end="364" title="Uttarapatha" label="Uttarapatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="366" end="375" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q239574" start="377" end="387" title="Amber Road" label="Amber Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754087" start="389" end="398" title="salt road" label="salt road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047494" start="575" end="589" title="domestic trade" label="domestic trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="634" end="640" title="State (polity)" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="695" end="710" title="Judiciary" label="judicial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="924" end="948" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079603" start="1155" end="1174" title="official statistics" label="official statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="1240" end="1247" title="Product (business)" label="product"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="1340" end="1346" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q62955" start="1384" end="1390" title="import" label="import"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="1511" end="1530" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="1559" end="1567" title="consumer" label="consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="1620" end="1626" title="Market (economics)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746910" start="1691" end="1711" title="international market" label="international market"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="1844" end="1851" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="1853" end="1860" title="banking" label="banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978655" start="1862" end="1872" title="consulting" label="consulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="1878" end="1887" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="1904" end="1914" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="1926" end="1940" title="transportation" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="1943" end="1956" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="1958" end="1975" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="1977" end="1988" title="outsourcing" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="1993" end="2018" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="2066" end="2073" title="system" label="systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047494" start="2172" end="2186" title="domestic trade" label="domestic trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="2661" end="2667" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316162" start="2701" end="2720" title="non-tariff barriers" label="non-tariff barriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="2913" end="2934" title="factors of production" label="factors of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="2955" end="2960" title="Labour economics" label="labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3510" end="3515" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="3783" end="3793" title="Immigration" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128854" start="3854" end="3884" title="timeline of international trade" label="history of international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="4311" end="4335" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184878" start="4409" end="4435" title="International Trade Centre" label="International Trade Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="4493" end="4508" title="United States President" label="U.S. Presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681970" start="4756" end="4792" title="Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce" label="Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859165" start="4836" end="4871" title="United States National Maritime Day" label="United States National Maritime Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="4884" end="4898" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="4987" end="4999" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="5091" end="5103" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674120" start="5371" end="5381" title="local food" label="local food"/>
<link wikidata="Q962606" start="5907" end="5916" title="food mile" label="food mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553864" start="6602" end="6612" title="governance" label="governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526135" start="6647" end="6655" title="security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q832237" start="6682" end="6706" title="environmental protection" label="environmental protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q185957" start="6708" end="6723" title="product quality" label="product quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043226" start="6728" end="6742" title="product design" label="product design"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147" start="6747" end="6753" title="health" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="6801" end="6813" title="labor rights" label="labor rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="7289" end="7299" title="automation" label="automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586354" start="7549" end="7567" title="knowledge transfer" label="knowledge transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061910" start="7569" end="7588" title="technology transfer" label="technology transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="7649" end="7660" title="Division of labor" label="specialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039667" start="7755" end="7765" title="eco-tariff" label="eco-tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973735" start="8243" end="8248" title="water security" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700433" start="8250" end="8256" title="energy security" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="8261" end="8265" title="land degradation" label="land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526135" start="8269" end="8277" title="security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339766" start="8464" end="8486" title="economic globalization" label="economic globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995994" start="8516" end="8536" title="Global supply chain management" label="global supply chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="8616" end="8621" title="Risk management" label="risks"/>
<link wikidata="Q739302" start="8667" end="8677" title="production (economics)" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="8814" end="8830" title="self-sufficiency" label="self-sufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="8902" end="8908" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746365" start="8959" end="8968" title="Artisanal mining" label="artisanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="8994" end="8998" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="9088" end="9093" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="9095" end="9103" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="9108" end="9114" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="9176" end="9185" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="9418" end="9438" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="9855" end="9860" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="9929" end="9939" title="war crimes" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="9944" end="9963" title="human rights abuses" label="human rights abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="10036" end="10041" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="10126" end="10137" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638005" start="10139" end="10147" title="Valcambi" label="Valcambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="10297" end="10302" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="10304" end="10332" title="Democratic Republic of Congo" label="Democratic Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="10340" end="10345" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="10423" end="10427" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="10821" end="10871" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095372" start="10897" end="10941" title="List of countries by current account balance" label="List of countries by current account balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053969" start="10944" end="10972" title="List of countries by imports" label="List of countries by imports"/>
<link wikidata="Q383715" start="10975" end="11003" title="List of countries by exports" label="List of countries by exports"/>
<link wikidata="Q122212620" start="11006" end="11046" title="List of countries by merchandise exports" label="List of countries by merchandise exports"/>
<link wikidata="Q117336735" start="11049" end="11085" title="List of countries by service exports" label="List of countries by service exports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018913" start="11088" end="11122" title="List of international trade topics" label="List of international trade topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="12475" end="12478" title="FAO" label="FAO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14569" wikidata="Q187631" url="?curid=14569" title="Interpolation">
<text>In the mathematical field of numerical analysis, interpolation is a type of estimation, a method of constructing (finding) new data points based on the range of a discrete set of known data points.

In engineering and science, one often has a number of data points, obtained by sampling or experimentation, which represent the values of a function for a limited number of values of the independent variable. It is often required to interpolate; that is, estimate the value of that function for an intermediate value of the independent variable.

A closely related problem is the approximation of a complicated function by a simple function. Suppose the formula for some given function is known, but too complicated to evaluate efficiently. A few data points from the original function can be interpolated to produce a simpler function which is still fairly close to the original. The resulting gain in simplicity may outweigh the loss from interpolation error and give better performance in calculation process.

==Example==
This table gives some values of an unknown function formula_1.
Interpolation provides a means of estimating the function at intermediate points, such as formula_2

We describe some methods of interpolation, differing in such properties as: accuracy, cost, number of data points needed, and smoothness of the resulting interpolant function.
===Piecewise constant interpolation===
The simplest interpolation method is to locate the nearest data value, and assign the same value. In simple problems, this method is unlikely to be used, as linear interpolation (see below) is almost as easy, but in higher-dimensional multivariate interpolation, this could be a favourable choice for its speed and simplicity.
===Linear interpolation===
One of the simplest methods is linear interpolation (sometimes known as lerp). Consider the above example of estimating &quot;f&quot;(2.5). Since 2.5 is midway between 2 and 3, it is reasonable to take &quot;f&quot;(2.5) midway between &quot;f&quot;(2) = 0.9093 and &quot;f&quot;(3) = 0.1411, which yields 0.5252.

Generally, linear interpolation takes two data points, say (&quot;x&quot;&quot;a&quot;,&quot;y&quot;&quot;a&quot;) and (&quot;x&quot;&quot;b&quot;,&quot;y&quot;&quot;b&quot;), and the interpolant is given by:
:formula_3

:formula_4

:formula_5

This previous equation states that the slope of the new line between formula_6 and formula_7 is the same as the slope of the line between formula_6 and formula_9

Linear interpolation is quick and easy, but it is not very precise. Another disadvantage is that the interpolant is not differentiable at the point &quot;x&quot;&quot;k&quot;.

The following error estimate shows that linear interpolation is not very precise. Denote the function which we want to interpolate by &quot;g&quot;, and suppose that &quot;x&quot; lies between &quot;x&quot;&quot;a&quot; and &quot;x&quot;&quot;b&quot; and that &quot;g&quot; is twice continuously differentiable. Then the linear interpolation error is

:formula_10

In words, the error is proportional to the square of the distance between the data points. The error in some other methods, including polynomial interpolation and spline interpolation (described below), is proportional to higher powers of the distance between the data points. These methods also produce smoother interpolants.
===Polynomial interpolation===
Polynomial interpolation is a generalization of linear interpolation. Note that the linear interpolant is a linear function. We now replace this interpolant with a polynomial of higher degree.

Consider again the problem given above. The following sixth degree polynomial goes through all the seven points:
:formula_11

Substituting &quot;x&quot; = 2.5, we find that &quot;f&quot;(2.5) = ~0.59678.

Generally, if we have &quot;n&quot; data points, there is exactly one polynomial of degree at most &quot;n&quot;−1 going through all the data points. The interpolation error is proportional to the distance between the data points to the power &quot;n&quot;. Furthermore, the interpolant is a polynomial and thus infinitely differentiable. So, we see that polynomial interpolation overcomes most of the problems of linear interpolation.

However, polynomial interpolation also has some disadvantages. Calculating the interpolating polynomial is computationally expensive (see computational complexity) compared to linear interpolation. Furthermore, polynomial interpolation may exhibit oscillatory artifacts, especially at the end points (see Runge&#x27;s phenomenon).

Polynomial interpolation can estimate local maxima and minima that are outside the range of the samples, unlike linear interpolation. For example, the interpolant above has a local maximum at &quot;x&quot; ≈ 1.566, &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) ≈ 1.003 and a local minimum at &quot;x&quot; ≈ 4.708, &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) ≈ −1.003. However, these maxima and minima may exceed the theoretical range of the function; for example, a function that is always positive may have an interpolant with negative values, and whose inverse therefore contains false vertical asymptotes.

More generally, the shape of the resulting curve, especially for very high or low values of the independent variable, may be contrary to commonsense; that is, to what is known about the experimental system which has generated the data points. These disadvantages can be reduced by using spline interpolation or restricting attention to Chebyshev polynomials.
===Spline interpolation===

Linear interpolation uses a linear function for each of intervals [&quot;x&quot;&quot;k&quot;,&quot;x&quot;&quot;k+1&quot;]. Spline interpolation uses low-degree polynomials in each of the intervals, and chooses the polynomial pieces such that they fit smoothly together. The resulting function is called a spline.

For instance, the natural cubic spline is piecewise cubic and twice continuously differentiable. Furthermore, its second derivative is zero at the end points. The natural cubic spline interpolating the points in the table above is given by

: formula_12

In this case we get &quot;f&quot;(2.5) = 0.5972.

Like polynomial interpolation, spline interpolation incurs a smaller error than linear interpolation, while the interpolant is smoother and easier to evaluate than the high-degree polynomials used in polynomial interpolation. However, the global nature of the basis functions leads to ill-conditioning. This is completely mitigated by using splines of compact support, such as are implemented in Boost.Math and discussed in Kress.
=== Mimetic interpolation ===

Depending on the underlying discretisation of fields, different interpolants may be required. In contrast to other interpolation methods, which estimate functions on target points, mimetic interpolation evaluates the integral of fields on target lines, areas or volumes, depending on the type of field (scalar, vector, pseudo-vector or pseudo-scalar).

A key feature of mimetic interpolation is that vector calculus identities are satisfied, including Stokes&#x27; theorem and the divergence theorem. As a result, mimetic interpolation conserves line, area and volume integrals. Conservation of line integrals might be desirable when interpolating the electric field, for instance, since the line integral gives the electric potential difference at the endpoints of the integration path. Mimetic interpolation ensures that the error of estimating the line integral of an electric field is the same as the error obtained by interpolating the potential at the end points of the integration path, regardless of the length of the integration path. 

Linear, bilinear and trilinear interpolation are also considered mimetic, even if it is the field values that are conserved (not the integral of the field). Apart from linear interpolation, area weighted interpolation can be considered one of the first mimetic interpolation methods to have been developed.

==Functional interpolation==
The Theory of Functional Connections (TFC) is a mathematical framework specifically developed for functional interpolation. Given any interpolant that satisfies a set of constraints, TFC derives a functional that represents the entire family of interpolants satisfying those constraints, including those that are discontinuous or partially defined. These functionals identify the subspace of functions where the solution to a constrained optimization problem resides. Consequently, TFC transforms constrained optimization problems into equivalent unconstrained formulations. This transformation has proven highly effective in the solution of differential equations. TFC achieves this by constructing a constrained functional (a function of a free function), that inherently satisfies given constraints regardless of the expression of the free function. This simplifies solving various types of equations and significantly improves the efficiency and accuracy of methods like Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs). TFC offers advantages over traditional methods like Lagrange multipliers and spectral methods by directly addressing constraints analytically and avoiding iterative procedures, although it cannot currently handle inequality constraints.

==Function approximation==
Interpolation is a common way to approximate functions. Given a function formula_13 with a set of points formula_14 one can form a function formula_15 such that formula_16 for formula_17 (that is, that formula_18 interpolates formula_19 at these points). In general, an interpolant need not be a good approximation, but there are well known and often reasonable conditions where it will. For example, if formula_20 (four times continuously differentiable) then cubic spline interpolation has an error bound given by formula_21 where formula_22 and formula_23 is a constant.

==Via Gaussian processes==
Gaussian process is a powerful non-linear interpolation tool. Many popular interpolation tools are actually equivalent to particular Gaussian processes. Gaussian processes can be used not only for fitting an interpolant that passes exactly through the given data points but also for regression; that is, for fitting a curve through noisy data. In the geostatistics community Gaussian process regression is also known as Kriging.

==Other forms==
Other forms of interpolation can be constructed by picking a different class of interpolants. For instance, rational interpolation is interpolation by rational functions using Padé approximant, and trigonometric interpolation is interpolation by trigonometric polynomials using Fourier series. Another possibility is to use wavelets.

The Whittaker–Shannon interpolation formula can be used if the number of data points is infinite or if the function to be interpolated has compact support.

Sometimes, we know not only the value of the function that we want to interpolate, at some points, but also its derivative. This leads to Hermite interpolation problems.

When each data point is itself a function, it can be useful to see the interpolation problem as a partial advection problem between each data point. This idea leads to the displacement interpolation problem used in transportation theory.

==In higher dimensions==
Multivariate interpolation is the interpolation of functions of more than one variable. 
Methods include nearest-neighbor interpolation, bilinear interpolation and bicubic interpolation in two dimensions, and trilinear interpolation in three dimensions.
They can be applied to gridded or scattered data. Mimetic interpolation generalizes to formula_24 dimensional spaces where formula_25.

==In digital signal processing==
In the domain of digital signal processing, the term interpolation refers to the process of converting a sampled digital signal (such as a sampled audio signal) to that of a higher sampling rate (Upsampling) using various digital filtering techniques (for example, convolution with a frequency-limited impulse signal). In this application there is a specific requirement that the harmonic content of the original signal be preserved without creating aliased harmonic content of the original signal above the original Nyquist limit of the signal (that is, above fs/2 of the original signal sample rate). An early and fairly elementary discussion on this subject can be found in Rabiner and Crochiere&#x27;s book &quot;Multirate Digital Signal Processing&quot;.

==Related concepts==
The term &quot;extrapolation&quot; is used to find data points outside the range of known data points.

In curve fitting problems, the constraint that the interpolant has to go exactly through the data points is relaxed. It is only required to approach the data points as closely as possible (within some other constraints). This requires parameterizing the potential interpolants and having some way of measuring the error. In the simplest case this leads to least squares approximation.

Approximation theory studies how to find the best approximation to a given function by another function from some predetermined class, and how good this approximation is. This clearly yields a bound on how well the interpolant can approximate the unknown function.

==Generalization==
If we consider formula_26 as a variable in a topological space, and the function formula_1 mapping to a Banach space, then the problem is treated as &quot;interpolation of operators&quot;. The classical results about interpolation of operators are the Riesz–Thorin theorem and the Marcinkiewicz theorem. There are also many other subsequent results.

==See also==

* Barycentric coordinates – for interpolating within on a triangle or tetrahedron
* Brahmagupta&#x27;s interpolation formula
* Discretization
* Fractal interpolation
* Imputation (statistics)
* Lagrange interpolation
* Missing data
* Newton–Cotes formulas
* Radial basis function interpolation
* Simple rational approximation
* Smoothing
==References==
==External links==

* Online tools for linear , quadratic , cubic spline , and polynomial interpolation with visualisation and JavaScript source code.
* Sol Tutorials - Interpolation Tricks 
* Barycentric rational interpolation in Boost.Math
* Interpolation via the Chebyshev transform in Boost.Math</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="7" end="19" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="29" end="47" title="numerical analysis" label="numerical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187631" start="49" end="62" title="Interpolation" label="interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q791801" start="76" end="86" title="estimation" label="estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13611879" start="127" end="138" title="data points" label="data points"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142889" start="163" end="175" title="discrete set" label="discrete set"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="202" end="213" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="218" end="225" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="278" end="286" title="sampling (statistics)" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="290" end="305" title="experimentation" label="experimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="386" end="406" title="Dependent and independent variables" label="independent variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q187631" start="432" end="443" title="Interpolation" label="interpolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445816" start="579" end="592" title="function approximation" label="approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="1206" end="1213" title="algorithm" label="methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q868473" start="1315" end="1325" title="smooth function" label="smoothness"/>
<link wikidata="Q187631" start="1343" end="1354" title="interpolant" label="interpolant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753188" start="1561" end="1567" title="linear" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334079" start="1639" end="1665" title="multivariate interpolation" label="multivariate interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="2601" end="2615" title="derivative" label="differentiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q637347" start="3157" end="3181" title="polynomial interpolation" label="polynomial interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854269" start="3489" end="3504" title="linear function" label="linear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="3545" end="3555" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473607" start="3566" end="3572" title="degree of a polynomial" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="4355" end="4379" title="Computational complexity theory" label="computational complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990319" start="4522" end="4545" title="Runge&amp;#x27;s phenomenon" label="Runge&amp;#x27;s phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q848539" start="5106" end="5125" title="division by zero" label="vertical asymptotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q619511" start="5464" end="5485" title="Chebyshev polynomials" label="Chebyshev polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q545002" start="5849" end="5869" title="natural cubic spline" label="natural cubic spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037833" start="5873" end="5882" title="piecewise" label="piecewise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066266" start="6998" end="7024" title="vector calculus identities" label="vector calculus identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q467756" start="7050" end="7070" title="Stokes&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Stokes&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q338886" start="7079" end="7097" title="divergence theorem" label="divergence theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="7250" end="7264" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q55451" start="7314" end="7332" title="electric potential" label="electric potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266329" start="7644" end="7650" title="Linear interpolation" label="Linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q612143" start="7652" end="7660" title="Bilinear interpolation" label="bilinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q861176" start="7665" end="7688" title="trilinear interpolation" label="trilinear interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131311587" start="7985" end="8017" title="Theory of functional connections" label="Theory of Functional Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="8623" end="8645" title="Differential equation" label="differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q107285102" start="8956" end="8988" title="Physics-informed neural networks" label="Physics-Informed Neural Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q598870" start="9050" end="9070" title="Lagrange multiplier" label="Lagrange multipliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308831" start="9075" end="9090" title="spectral method" label="spectral method"/>
<link wikidata="Q545002" start="9724" end="9750" title="spline interpolation" label="cubic spline interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496376" start="9865" end="9881" title="Gaussian process" label="Gaussian process"/>
<link wikidata="Q225926" start="10285" end="10292" title="Kriging" label="Kriging"/>
<link wikidata="Q41237" start="10462" end="10479" title="rational function" label="rational function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452504" start="10487" end="10503" title="Padé approximant" label="Padé approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q464356" start="10509" end="10536" title="trigonometric interpolation" label="trigonometric interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969650" start="10557" end="10581" title="trigonometric polynomial" label="trigonometric polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="10589" end="10603" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q831390" start="10635" end="10642" title="wavelet" label="wavelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018853" start="10650" end="10689" title="Whittaker–Shannon interpolation formula" label="Whittaker–Shannon interpolation formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q44451" start="10941" end="10962" title="Hermite interpolation" label="Hermite interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q379788" start="11080" end="11089" title="advection" label="advection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11146" end="11172" title="displacement interpolation" label="displacement interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929885" start="11189" end="11210" title="Transportation theory (mathematics)" label="transportation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202129" start="11343" end="11373" title="nearest-neighbor interpolation" label="nearest-neighbor interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q612143" start="11375" end="11397" title="bilinear interpolation" label="bilinear interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q611705" start="11402" end="11423" title="bicubic interpolation" label="bicubic interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q861176" start="11447" end="11470" title="trilinear interpolation" label="trilinear interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143270" start="11857" end="11867" title="Upsampling" label="Upsampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501757" start="12178" end="12191" title="Nyquist frequency" label="Nyquist limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q744069" start="12458" end="12471" title="extrapolation" label="extrapolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q603159" start="12550" end="12563" title="curve fitting" label="curve fitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="12903" end="12916" title="least squares" label="least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q774123" start="12933" end="12953" title="Approximation theory" label="Approximation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="13263" end="13280" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="13322" end="13334" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q245902" start="13470" end="13490" title="Riesz–Thorin theorem" label="Riesz–Thorin theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757284" start="13499" end="13520" title="Marcinkiewicz theorem" label="Marcinkiewicz theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q738422" start="13585" end="13608" title="Barycentric coordinate system" label="Barycentric coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003778" start="13667" end="13707" title="Brahmagupta&amp;#x27;s interpolation formula" label="Brahmagupta&amp;#x27;s interpolation formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007827" start="13710" end="13724" title="Discretization" label="Discretization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13727" end="13748" title="Fractal compression#Fractal interpolation" label="Fractal interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660484" start="13751" end="13774" title="Imputation (statistics)" label="Imputation (statistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q861606" start="13777" end="13799" title="Lagrange polynomial" label="Lagrange interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878417" start="13802" end="13814" title="Missing data" label="Missing data"/>
<link wikidata="Q944241" start="13817" end="13838" title="Newton–Cotes formulas" label="Newton–Cotes formulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063433" start="13841" end="13876" title="Radial basis function interpolation" label="Radial basis function interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520822" start="13879" end="13908" title="Simple rational approximation" label="Simple rational approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q775963" start="13911" end="13920" title="Smoothing" label="Smoothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="14063" end="14073" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14570" wikidata="Q1923256" url="?curid=14570" title="Intension">
<text>In any of several fields of study that treat the use of signs—for example, in linguistics, logic, mathematics, semantics, semiotics, and philosophy of language—an intension is any property or quality connoted by a word, phrase, or another symbol. In the case of a word, the word&#x27;s definition often implies an intension. For instance, the intensions of the word &quot;plant&quot; include properties such as &quot;being composed of cellulose (not always true)&quot;, &quot;alive&quot;, and &quot;organism&quot;, among others. A &quot;comprehension&quot; is the collection of all such intensions.

==Overview==
The meaning of a word can be thought of as the bond between the &quot;idea the word means&quot; and the &quot;physical form of the word&quot;. Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913) contrasts three concepts:

# the &quot;signifier&quot; – the &quot;sound image&quot; or the string of letters on a page that one recognizes as the form of a sign
# the &quot;signified&quot; – the meaning, the concept or idea that a sign expresses or evokes
# the &quot;referent&quot; – the actual thing or set of things a sign refers to. See &quot;Dyadic signs&quot; and &quot;Reference (semantics)&quot;.

Without intension of some sort, a word has no meaning. For instance, the terms &quot;rantans&quot; or &quot;brillig&quot; have no intension and hence no meaning. Such terms may be suggestive, but a term can be &quot;suggestive&quot; without being meaningful. For instance, &quot;ran tan&quot; is an archaic onomatopoeia for chaotic noise or din and may suggest to English speakers a din or meaningless noise, and &quot;brillig&quot; though made up by Lewis Carroll may be suggestive of &#x27;brilliant&#x27; or &#x27;frigid&#x27;. Such terms, it may be argued, are always intensional since they connote the property &#x27;meaningless term&#x27;, but this is only an apparent paradox and does not constitute a counterexample to the claim that without intension a word has no meaning. Part of its intension is that it has no extension. Intension is analogous to the signified in the Saussurean system, extension to the referent.

In philosophical arguments about dualism versus monism, it is noted that thoughts have intensionality and physical objects do not (S. E. Palmer, 1999), but rather have extension in space and time.

==Statement forms==

A statement-form is simply a form obtained by putting blanks into a sentence where one or more expressions with extensions occur—for instance, &quot;The quick brown ___ jumped over the lazy ___&#x27;s back.&quot; An instance of the form is a statement obtained by filling the blanks in.

=== Intensional statement form ===

An &quot;intensional statement-form&quot; is a statement-form with at least one instance such that substituting co-extensive expressions into it does not always preserve logical value. An &quot;intensional statement&quot; is a statement that is an instance of an intensional statement-form. Here co-extensive expressions are expressions with the same extension.

That is, a statement-form is intensional if it has, as one of its instances, a statement for which there are two co-extensive expressions (in the relevant language) such that one of them occurs in the statement, and if the other one is put in its place (uniformly, so that it replaces the former expression wherever it occurs in the statement), the result is a (different) statement with a different logical value. An intensional statement, then, is an instance of such a form; it has the same form as a statement in which substitution of co-extensive terms fails to preserve logical value.

==== Examples ====
#Everyone who has read &quot;Huckleberry Finn&quot; knows that Mark Twain wrote it.
#It is possible that Aristotle did not tutor Alexander the Great.
#Aristotle was pleased that he had a sister.

To see that these are intensional, make the following substitutions: (1) &quot;Mark Twain&quot; → &quot;The author of &#x27;Corn-pone Opinions&#x27;&quot;; (2) &quot;Aristotle&quot; → &quot;the tutor of Alexander the Great&quot;; (3) can be seen to be intensional given &quot;had a sister&quot; → &quot;had a sibling with two X-chromosomes.&quot; 

The intensional statements above feature expressions like &quot;knows&quot;, &quot;possible&quot;, and &quot;pleased&quot;. Such expressions always, or nearly always, produce intensional statements when added (in some intelligible manner) to an extensional statement, and thus they (or more complex expressions like &quot;It is possible that&quot;) are sometimes called &quot;intensional operators&quot;. A large class of intensional statements, but by no means all, can be spotted from the fact that they contain intensional operators.

=== Extensional statement form ===
An &quot;extensional&quot; statement is a non-intensional statement. Substitution of co-extensive expressions into it always preserves logical value. A language is intensional if it contains intensional statements, and extensional otherwise. All natural languages are intensional. The only extensional languages are artificially constructed languages used in mathematical logic or for other special purposes and small fragments of natural languages.

==== Examples ====
#Mark Twain wrote &quot;Huckleberry Finn&quot;.
#Aristotle had a sister.

Note that if &quot;Samuel Clemens&quot; is put into (1) in place of &quot;Mark Twain&quot;, the result is as true as the original statement. It should be clear that no matter what is put for &quot;Mark Twain&quot;, so long as it is a singular term picking out the same man, the statement remains true. Likewise, we can put in place of the predicate any other predicate belonging to Mark Twain and only to Mark Twain, without changing the logical value. For (2), likewise, consider the following substitutions: &quot;Aristotle&quot; → &quot;The tutor of Alexander the Great&quot;; &quot;Aristotle&quot; → &quot;The author of the &#x27;Prior Analytics&#x27;&quot;; &quot;had a sister&quot; → &quot;had a sibling whose body was capable of producing egg cells&quot;; &quot;had a sister&quot; → &quot;had a parent who had a female child&quot;.

==See also==
* Description logic
* Connotation
* Extension (predicate logic)
* Extensionality
* Intensional definition
* Intensional logic
* Montague grammar
* Temperature paradox

*Sense and reference
* Set-builder notation

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Ferdinand de Saussure, &quot;Course in General Linguistics&quot;. Open Court Classics, July 1986. 
* S. E. Palmer, &quot;Vision Science: From Photons to Phenomenology&quot;, 1999. MIT Press, 

== External links ==
* Chalmers, David, &quot;On Sense and Intension&quot;.
* Rapaport, William J., &quot;Inten&quot;s&quot;ionality v. Inten&quot;t&quot;ionality&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="78" end="89" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="91" end="96" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="98" end="109" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="111" end="120" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="122" end="131" title="semiotics" label="semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q484761" start="137" end="159" title="philosophy of language" label="philosophy of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923256" start="163" end="172" title="Intension" label="intension"/>
<link wikidata="Q937228" start="180" end="188" title="Property (philosophy)" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207505" start="192" end="199" title="Quality (philosophy)" label="quality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="200" end="208" title="Connotation#Logic" label="connoted"/>
<link wikidata="Q8171" start="214" end="218" title="word" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q187931" start="220" end="226" title="phrase" label="phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q101072" start="286" end="296" title="definition" label="definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="372" end="377" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="435" end="444" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156948" start="537" end="550" title="comprehension (logic)" label="comprehension"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="771" end="792" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="907" end="914" title="Letter (alphabet)" label="letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="962" end="966" title="Sign (linguistics)" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="1014" end="1021" title="concept" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q131841" start="1025" end="1029" title="idea" label="idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41798914" start="1102" end="1107" title="Object (philosophy)" label="thing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1153" end="1165" title="Sign (semiotics)#Dyadic signs" label="Dyadic signs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1182" end="1203" title="Reference#Semantics" label="Reference (semantics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q250371" start="1320" end="1327" title="Jabberwocky" label="brillig"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="1663" end="1676" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384998" start="2035" end="2044" title="Extension (semantics)" label="extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="2173" end="2180" title="mind-body dualism" label="dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178801" start="2188" end="2194" title="monism" label="monism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185521" start="2853" end="2866" title="logical value" label="logical value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384998" start="3034" end="3043" title="extension (semantics)" label="extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="5134" end="5152" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144319" start="5658" end="5667" title="Predicate (mathematical logic)" label="predicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q387196" start="6174" end="6191" title="Description logic" label="Description logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q661062" start="6194" end="6205" title="Connotation" label="Connotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421931" start="6208" end="6235" title="Extension (predicate logic)" label="Extension (predicate logic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q965432" start="6238" end="6252" title="Extensionality" label="Extensionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q19515659" start="6255" end="6277" title="Intensional definition" label="Intensional definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044335" start="6280" end="6297" title="Intensional logic" label="Intensional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272938" start="6300" end="6316" title="Montague grammar" label="Montague grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q107919983" start="6319" end="6338" title="Temperature paradox" label="Temperature paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q330955" start="6341" end="6360" title="Sense and reference" label="Sense and reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352804" start="6363" end="6383" title="Set-builder notation" label="Set-builder notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="6416" end="6437" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13231" start="6445" end="6474" title="Course in General Linguistics" label="Course in General Linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q366123" start="6632" end="6647" title="David Chalmers" label="Chalmers, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013315" start="6687" end="6707" title="William J. Rapaport" label="Rapaport, William J."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14573" wikidata="Q34981" url="?curid=14573" title="Isaac Asimov">
<text>Isaac Asimov ( ;  – April 6, 1992) was an American writer and professor of biochemistry at Boston University. During his lifetime, Asimov was considered one of the &quot;Big Three&quot; science fiction writers, along with Robert A. Heinlein and Arthur C. Clarke. A prolific writer, he wrote or edited more than 500 books. He also wrote an estimated 90,000 letters and postcards. Best known for his hard science fiction, Asimov also wrote mysteries and fantasy, as well as popular science and other non-fiction.

Asimov&#x27;s most famous work is the &quot;Foundation&quot; series, the first three books of which won the one-time Hugo Award for &quot;Best All-Time Series&quot; in 1966. His other major series are the &quot;Galactic Empire&quot; series and the &quot;Robot&quot; series. The &quot;Galactic Empire&quot; novels are set in the much earlier history of the same fictional universe as the &quot;Foundation&quot; series. Later, with &quot;Foundation and Earth&quot; (1986), he linked this distant future to the &quot;Robot&quot; series, creating a unified &quot;future history&quot; for his works. He also wrote more than 380 short stories, including the social science fiction novelette &quot;Nightfall&quot;, which in 1964 was voted the best short science fiction story of all time by the Science Fiction Writers of America. Asimov wrote the &quot;Lucky Starr&quot; series of juvenile science-fiction novels using the pen name Paul French.

Most of his popular science books explain concepts in a historical way, going as far back as possible to a time when the science in question was at its simplest stage. Examples include &quot;Guide to Science&quot;, the three-volume &quot;Understanding Physics&quot;, and &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Chronology of Science and Discovery&quot;. He wrote on numerous other scientific and non-scientific topics, such as chemistry, astronomy, mathematics, history, biblical exegesis, and literary criticism.

He was the president of the American Humanist Association. Several entities have been named in his honor, including the asteroid (5020) Asimov, a crater on Mars, a Brooklyn elementary school, Honda&#x27;s humanoid robot ASIMO, and four literary awards.
==Surname==

Asimov&#x27;s family name derives from the first part of (), meaning &#x27;winter grain&#x27; (specifically rye) in which his great-great-great-grandfather dealt, with the Russian surname ending &quot;-ov&quot; added. Azimov is spelled in the Cyrillic alphabet. When the family arrived in the United States in 1923 and their name had to be spelled in the Latin alphabet, Asimov&#x27;s father spelled it with an S, believing this letter to be pronounced like Z (as in German), and so it became Asimov. This later inspired one of Asimov&#x27;s short stories, &quot;Spell My Name with an S&quot;.

Asimov refused early suggestions of using a more common name as a pseudonym, believing that its recognizability helped his career. After becoming famous, he often met readers who believed that &quot;Isaac Asimov&quot; was a distinctive pseudonym created by an author with a common name.

== Life ==
=== Early life ===
Asimov was born in Petrovichi, Russian SFSR, on an unknown date between October 4, 1919, and January 2, 1920, inclusive. Asimov celebrated his birthday on January 2.

Asimov&#x27;s parents were Russian Jews, Anna Rachel (née Berman) and Judah Asimov, the son of a miller. He was named Isaac after his mother&#x27;s father, Isaac Berman. Asimov wrote of his father, &quot;My father, for all his education as an Orthodox Jew, was not Orthodox in his heart&quot;, noting that &quot;he didn&#x27;t recite the myriad prayers prescribed for every action, and he never made any attempt to teach them to me.&quot;

In 1921, Asimov and 16 other children in Petrovichi developed double pneumonia. Only Asimov survived. He had two younger siblings: a sister, Marcia (born Manya; June 17, 1922 – April 2, 2011), and a brother, Stanley (July 25, 1929 – August 16, 1995), who would become vice-president of &quot;Newsday&quot;.

Asimov&#x27;s family travelled to the United States via Liverpool on the RMS &quot;Baltic&quot;, arriving on February 3, 1923 when he was three years old. His parents spoke Yiddish and English to him; he never learned Russian, his parents using it as a secret language &quot;when they wanted to discuss something privately that my big ears were not to hear&quot;. Growing up in Brooklyn, New York, Asimov taught himself to read at the age of five (and later taught his sister to read as well, enabling her to enter school in the second grade). His mother got him into first grade a year early by claiming he was born on September 7, 1919. In third grade he learned about the &quot;error&quot; and insisted on an official correction of the date to January 2. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1928 at the age of eight.

After becoming established in the U.S., his parents owned a succession of candy stores in which everyone in the family was expected to work. The candy stores sold newspapers and magazines, which Asimov credited as a major influence in his lifelong love of the written word, as it presented him as a child with an unending supply of new reading material (including pulp science fiction magazines) that he could not have otherwise afforded. Asimov began reading science fiction at age nine, at the time that the genre was becoming more science-centered. Asimov was also a frequent patron of the Brooklyn Public Library during his formative years.

=== Education and career ===
Asimov attended New York City public schools from age five, including Boys High School in Brooklyn. Graduating at 15, he attended the City College of New York for several days before accepting a scholarship at Seth Low Junior College. This was a branch of Columbia University in Downtown Brooklyn designed to absorb some of the academically qualified Jewish and Italian-American students who applied to the more prestigious Columbia College but exceeded the unwritten ethnic admission quotas which were common at the time. Originally a zoology major, Asimov switched to chemistry after his first semester because he disapproved of &quot;dissecting an alley cat&quot;. After Seth Low Junior College closed in 1936, Asimov finished his Bachelor of Science degree at Columbia&#x27;s Morningside Heights campus (later the Columbia University School of General Studies) in 1939. (In 1983, Dr. Robert Pollack (dean of Columbia College, 1982–1989) granted Asimov an honorary doctorate from Columbia College after requiring that Asimov place his foot in a bucket of water to pass the college&#x27;s swimming requirement.)

After two rounds of rejections by medical schools, Asimov applied to the graduate program in chemistry at Columbia in 1939; initially he was rejected and then only accepted on a probationary basis. He completed his Master of Arts degree in chemistry in 1941 and earned a Doctor of Philosophy degree in chemistry in 1948. During his chemistry studies, he also learned French and German.

From 1942 to 1945 during World War II, between his masters and doctoral studies, Asimov worked as a civilian chemist at the Philadelphia Navy Yard&#x27;s Naval Air Experimental Station and lived in the Walnut Hill section of West Philadelphia. In September 1945, he was conscripted into the post-war U.S. Army; if he had not had his birth date corrected while at school, he would have been officially 26 years old and ineligible. In 1946, a bureaucratic error caused his military allotment to be stopped, and he was removed from a task force days before it sailed to participate in Operation Crossroads nuclear weapons tests at Bikini Atoll. He was promoted to corporal on July 11 before receiving an honorable discharge on July 26, 1946.

After completing his doctorate and a postdoctoral year with Robert Elderfield, Asimov was offered the position of associate professor of biochemistry at the Boston University School of Medicine. This was in large part due to his years-long correspondence with William Boyd, a former associate professor of biochemistry at Boston University, who initially contacted Asimov to compliment him on his story &quot;Nightfall&quot;. Upon receiving a promotion to professor of immunochemistry, Boyd reached out to Asimov, requesting him to be his replacement. The initial offer of professorship was withdrawn and Asimov was offered the position of instructor of biochemistry instead, which he accepted. He began work in 1949 with a $5,000 salary (), maintaining this position for several years. By 1952, however, he was making more money as a writer than from the university, and he eventually stopped doing research, confining his university role to lecturing students. In 1955, he was promoted to tenured associate professor. In December 1957, Asimov was dismissed from his teaching post, with effect from June 30, 1958, due to his lack of research. After a struggle over two years, he reached an agreement with the university that he would keep his title and give the opening lecture each year for a biochemistry class. On October 18, 1979, the university honored his writing by promoting him to full professor of biochemistry. Asimov&#x27;s personal papers from 1965 onward are archived at the university&#x27;s Mugar Memorial Library, to which he donated them at the request of curator Howard Gotlieb.

In 1959, after a recommendation from Arthur Obermayer, Asimov&#x27;s friend and a scientist on the U.S. missile defense project, Asimov was approached by DARPA to join Obermayer&#x27;s team. Asimov declined on the grounds that his ability to write freely would be impaired should he receive classified information, but submitted a paper to DARPA titled &quot;On Creativity&quot; containing ideas on how government-based science projects could encourage team members to think more creatively.

=== Personal life ===
Asimov met his first wife, Gertrude Blugerman (May 16, 1917, Toronto, Canada – October 17, 1990, Boston, U.S.), on a blind date on February 14, 1942, and married her on July 26. The couple lived in an apartment in West Philadelphia while Asimov was employed at the Philadelphia Navy Yard (where two of his co-workers were L. Sprague de Camp and Robert A. Heinlein). Gertrude returned to Brooklyn while he was in the army, and they both lived there from July 1946 before moving to Stuyvesant Town, Manhattan, in July 1948. They moved to Boston in May 1949, then to nearby suburbs Somerville in July 1949, Waltham in May 1951, and, finally, West Newton in 1956. They had two children, David (born 1951) and Robyn Joan (born 1955). In 1970, they separated and Asimov moved back to New York, this time to the Upper West Side of Manhattan where he lived for the rest of his life. He began seeing Janet O. Jeppson, a psychiatrist and science-fiction writer, and married her on November 30, 1973, two weeks after his divorce from Gertrude.

Asimov was a claustrophile: he enjoyed small, enclosed spaces. In the third volume of his autobiography, he recalls a childhood desire to own a magazine stand in a New York City Subway station, within which he could enclose himself and listen to the rumble of passing trains while reading.

Asimov was afraid of flying, doing so only twice: once in the course of his work at the Naval Air Experimental Station and once returning home from Oʻahu in 1946. Consequently, he seldom traveled great distances. This phobia influenced several of his fiction works, such as the Wendell Urth mystery stories and the &quot;Robot&quot; novels featuring Elijah Baley. In his later years, Asimov found enjoyment traveling on cruise ships, beginning in 1972 when he viewed the Apollo 17 launch from a cruise ship. On several cruises, he was part of the entertainment program, giving science-themed talks aboard ships such as the &quot;Queen Elizabeth 2&quot;. He sailed to England in June 1974 on the for a trip mostly devoted to lectures in London and Birmingham, though he also found time to visit Stonehenge and Shakespeare&#x27;s birthplace.
Asimov was a teetotaler.

He was an able public speaker and was regularly invited to give talks about science in his distinct New York accent. He participated in many science fiction conventions, where he was friendly and approachable. He patiently answered tens of thousands of questions and other mail with postcards and was pleased to give autographs. He was of medium height, and stocky build. In his later years, he adopted a signature style of &quot;mutton-chop&quot; sideburns. He took to wearing bolo ties after his wife Janet objected to his clip-on bow ties. He never learned to swim or ride a bicycle, but did learn to drive a car after he moved to Boston. In his humor book &quot;Asimov Laughs Again&quot;, he describes Boston driving as &quot;anarchy on wheels&quot;.

Asimov&#x27;s wide interests included his participation in later years in organizations devoted to the comic operas of Gilbert and Sullivan. Many of his short stories mention or quote Gilbert and Sullivan. He was a prominent member of The Baker Street Irregulars, the leading Sherlock Holmes society, for whom he wrote an essay arguing that Professor Moriarty&#x27;s work &quot;The Dynamics of An Asteroid&quot; involved the willful destruction of an ancient, civilized planet. He was also a member of the male-only literary banqueting club the Trap Door Spiders, which served as the basis of his fictional group of mystery solvers, the Black Widowers. He later used his essay on Moriarty&#x27;s work as the basis for a Black Widowers story, &quot;The Ultimate Crime&quot;, which appeared in &quot;More Tales of the Black Widowers&quot;.

In 1984, the American Humanist Association (AHA) named him the Humanist of the Year. He was one of the signers of the &quot;Humanist Manifesto&quot;. From 1985 until his death in 1992, he served as honorary president of the AHA, and was succeeded by his friend and fellow writer Kurt Vonnegut. He was also a close friend of &quot;Star Trek&quot; creator Gene Roddenberry, and earned a screen credit as &quot;special science consultant&quot; on &quot;Star Trek: The Motion Picture&quot; for his advice during production.

Asimov was a founding member of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal, CSICOP (now the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry) and is listed in its Pantheon of Skeptics. In a discussion with James Randi at CSICon 2016 regarding the founding of CSICOP, Kendrick Frazier said that Asimov was &quot;a key figure in the Skeptical movement who is less well known and appreciated today, but was very much in the public eye back then.&quot; He said that Asimov&#x27;s being associated with CSICOP &quot;gave it immense status and authority&quot; in his eyes.

Asimov described Carl Sagan as one of only two people he ever met whose intellect surpassed his own. The other, he claimed, was the computer scientist and artificial intelligence expert Marvin Minsky. Asimov was an on-and-off member and honorary vice president of Mensa International, albeit reluctantly; he described some members of that organization as &quot;brain-proud and aggressive about their IQs&quot;.

After his father died in 1969, Asimov annually contributed to a Judah Asimov Scholarship Fund at Brandeis University.

In 2006, he was named by Carnegie Corporation of New York to the inaugural class of winners of the Great Immigrants Award.

=== Illness and death ===
In 1977, Asimov had a heart attack. In December 1983, he had triple bypass surgery at NYU Medical Center, during which he contracted HIV from a blood transfusion. His HIV status was kept secret out of concern that the anti-AIDS prejudice might extend to his family members.

He died in Manhattan on April 6, 1992, and was cremated. The cause of death was reported as heart and kidney failure. Ten years following Asimov&#x27;s death, Janet and Robyn Asimov agreed that the HIV story should be made public; Janet revealed it in her edition of his autobiography, &quot;It&#x27;s Been a Good Life&quot;.

== Writings ==
=== Overview ===

Asimov&#x27;s career can be divided into several periods. His early career, dominated by science fiction, began with short stories in 1939 and novels in 1950. This lasted until about 1958, all but ending after publication of &quot;The Naked Sun&quot; (1957). He began publishing nonfiction as co-author of a college-level textbook called &quot;Biochemistry and Human Metabolism&quot;. Following the brief orbit of the first human-made satellite Sputnik I by the USSR in 1957, he wrote more nonfiction, particularly popular science books, and less science fiction. Over the next quarter-century, he wrote only four science fiction novels, and 120 nonfiction books.

Starting in 1982, the second half of his science fiction career began with the publication of &quot;Foundation&#x27;s Edge&quot;. From then until his death, Asimov published several more sequels and prequels to his existing novels, tying them together in a way he had not originally anticipated, making a unified series. There are many inconsistencies in this unification, especially in his earlier stories. Doubleday and Houghton Mifflin published about 60% of his work up to 1969, Asimov stating that &quot;both represent a father image&quot;.

Asimov believed his most enduring contributions would be his &quot;Three Laws of Robotics&quot; and the &quot;Foundation&quot; series. The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; credits his science fiction for introducing into the English language the words &quot;robotics&quot;, &quot;positronic&quot; (an entirely fictional technology), and &quot;psychohistory&quot; (which is also used for a different study on historical motivations). Asimov coined the term &quot;robotics&quot; without suspecting that it might be an original word; at the time, he believed it was simply the natural analogue of words such as mechanics and hydraulics, but for robots. Unlike his word &quot;psychohistory&quot;, the word &quot;robotics&quot; continues in mainstream technical use with Asimov&#x27;s original definition. &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot; featured androids with &quot;positronic brains&quot; and the first-season episode &quot;Datalore&quot; called the positronic brain &quot;Asimov&#x27;s dream&quot;.

Asimov was so prolific and diverse in his writing that his books span all major categories of the Dewey Decimal Classification except for category 100, philosophy and psychology. However, he wrote several essays about psychology, and forewords for the books &quot;The Humanist Way&quot; (1988) and &quot;In Pursuit of Truth&quot; (1982), which were classified in the 100s category, but none of his own books were classified in that category.

According to UNESCO&#x27;s &quot;Index Translationum database&quot;, Asimov is the world&#x27;s 24th-most-translated author.

=== Science fiction ===


Asimov became a science fiction fan in 1929, when he began reading the pulp magazines sold in his family&#x27;s candy store. At first his father forbade reading pulps until Asimov persuaded him that because the science fiction magazines had &quot;Science&quot; in the title, they must be educational. At age 18 he joined the Futurians science fiction fan club, where he made friends who went on to become science fiction writers or editors.

Asimov began writing at the age of 11, imitating &quot;The Rover Boys&quot; with eight chapters of &quot;The Greenville Chums at College&quot;. His father bought him a used typewriter at age 16. His first published work was a humorous item on the birth of his brother for Boys High School&#x27;s literary journal in 1934. In May 1937 he first thought of writing professionally, and began writing his first science fiction story, &quot;Cosmic Corkscrew&quot; (now lost), that year. On May 17, 1938, puzzled by a change in the schedule of &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot;, Asimov visited its publisher Street &amp; Smith Publications. Inspired by the visit, he finished the story on June 19, 1938, and personally submitted it to &quot;Astounding&quot; editor John W. Campbell two days later. Campbell met with Asimov for more than an hour and promised to read the story himself. Two days later he received a detailed rejection letter. This was the first of what became almost weekly meetings with the editor while Asimov lived in New York, until moving to Boston in 1949; Campbell had a strong formative influence on Asimov and became a personal friend.

By the end of the month, Asimov completed a second story, &quot;Stowaway&quot;. Campbell rejected it on July 22 but—in &quot;the nicest possible letter you could imagine&quot;—encouraged him to continue writing, promising that Asimov might sell his work after another year and a dozen stories of practice. On October 21, 1938, he sold the third story he finished, &quot;Marooned Off Vesta&quot;, to &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, edited by Raymond A. Palmer, and it appeared in the March 1939 issue. Asimov was paid $64 (), or one cent a word. Two more stories appeared that year, &quot;The Weapon Too Dreadful to Use&quot; in the May &quot;Amazing&quot; and &quot;Trends&quot; in the July &quot;Astounding&quot;, the issue fans later selected as the start of the Golden Age of Science Fiction. For 1940, ISFDB catalogs seven stories in four different pulp magazines, including one in &quot;Astounding&quot;. His earnings became enough to pay for his education, but not yet enough for him to become a full-time writer.

He later said that unlike other Golden Age writers Heinlein and A. E. van Vogt—also first published in 1939, and whose talent and stardom were immediately obvious—Asimov &quot;(this is not false modesty) came up only gradually&quot;. Through July 29, 1940, Asimov wrote 22 stories in 25 months, of which 13 were published; he wrote in 1972 that from that date he never wrote a science fiction story that was not published (except for two &quot;special cases&quot;). By 1941 Asimov was famous enough that Donald Wollheim told him that he purchased &quot;The Secret Sense&quot; for a new magazine only because of his name, and the December 1940 issue of &quot;Astonishing&quot;—featuring Asimov&#x27;s name in bold—was the first magazine to base cover art on his work, but Asimov later said that neither he nor anyone else—except perhaps Campbell—considered him better than an often published &quot;third rater&quot;.

Based on a conversation with Campbell, Asimov wrote &quot;Nightfall&quot;, his 32nd story, in March and April 1941, and &quot;Astounding&quot; published it in September 1941. In 1968 the Science Fiction Writers of America voted &quot;Nightfall&quot; the best science fiction short story ever written. In &quot;Nightfall and Other Stories&quot; Asimov wrote, &quot;The writing of &#x27;Nightfall&#x27; was a watershed in my professional career ... I was suddenly taken seriously and the world of science fiction became aware that I existed. As the years passed, in fact, it became evident that I had written a &#x27;classic&#x27;.&quot; &quot;Nightfall&quot; is an archetypal example of social science fiction, a term he created to describe a new trend in the 1940s, led by authors including him and Heinlein, away from gadgets and space opera and toward speculation about the human condition.

After writing &quot;Victory Unintentional&quot; in January and February 1942, Asimov did not write another story for a year. He expected to make chemistry his career, and was paid $2,600 annually at the Philadelphia Navy Yard, enough to marry his girlfriend; he did not expect to make much more from writing than the $1,788.50 he had earned from the 28 stories he had already sold over four years. Asimov left science fiction fandom and no longer read new magazines, and might have left the writing profession had not Heinlein and de Camp been his coworkers at the Navy Yard and previously sold stories continued to appear.

In 1942, Asimov published the first of his &quot;Foundation&quot; stories—later collected in the &quot;Foundation&quot; trilogy: &quot;Foundation&quot; (1951), &quot;Foundation and Empire&quot; (1952), and &quot;Second Foundation&quot; (1953). The books describe the fall of a vast interstellar empire and the establishment of its eventual successor. They feature his fictional science of psychohistory, whose theories could predict the future course of history according to dynamical laws regarding the statistical analysis of mass human actions.

Campbell raised his rate per word, Orson Welles purchased rights to &quot;Evidence&quot;, and anthologies reprinted his stories. By the end of the war Asimov was earning as a writer an amount equal to half of his Navy Yard salary, even after a raise, but Asimov still did not believe that writing could support him, his wife, and future children.

His &quot;positronic&quot; robot stories—many of which were collected in &quot;I, Robot&quot; (1950)—were begun at about the same time. They promulgated a set of rules of ethics for robots (see Three Laws of Robotics) and intelligent machines that greatly influenced other writers and thinkers in their treatment of the subject. Asimov notes in his introduction to the short story collection &quot;The Complete Robot&quot; (1982) that he was largely inspired by the tendency of robots up to that time to fall consistently into a Frankenstein plot in which they destroyed their creators. The &quot;Robot&quot; series has led to film adaptations. With Asimov&#x27;s collaboration, in about 1977, Harlan Ellison wrote a screenplay of &quot;I, Robot&quot; that Asimov hoped would lead to &quot;the first really adult, complex, worthwhile science fiction film ever made&quot;. The screenplay has never been filmed and was eventually published in book form in 1994. The 2004 movie &quot;I, Robot&quot;, starring Will Smith, was based on an unrelated script by Jeff Vintar titled &quot;Hardwired&quot;, with Asimov&#x27;s ideas incorporated later after the rights to Asimov&#x27;s title were acquired. (The title was not original to Asimov but had previously been used for a story by Eando Binder.) Also, one of Asimov&#x27;s robot short stories, &quot;The Bicentennial Man&quot;, was expanded into a novel &quot;The Positronic Man&quot; by Asimov and Robert Silverberg, and this was adapted into the 1999 movie &quot;Bicentennial Man&quot;, starring Robin Williams.

In 1966 the &quot;Foundation&quot; trilogy won the Hugo Award for the all-time best series of science fiction and fantasy novels, and they along with the &quot;Robot&quot; series are his most famous science fiction. Besides movies, his &quot;Foundation&quot; and &quot;Robot&quot; stories have inspired other derivative works of science fiction literature, many by well-known and established authors such as Roger MacBride Allen, Greg Bear, Gregory Benford, David Brin, and Donald Kingsbury. At least some of these appear to have been done with the blessing of, or at the request of, Asimov&#x27;s widow, Janet Asimov.

In 1948, he also wrote a spoof chemistry article, &quot;The Endochronic Properties of Resublimated Thiotimoline&quot;. At the time, Asimov was preparing his own doctoral dissertation, which would include an oral examination. Fearing a prejudicial reaction from his graduate school evaluation board at Columbia University, Asimov asked his editor that it be released under a pseudonym. When it nevertheless appeared under his own name, Asimov grew concerned that his doctoral examiners might think he wasn&#x27;t taking science seriously. At the end of the examination, one evaluator turned to him, smiling, and said, &quot;What can you tell us, Mr. Asimov, about the thermodynamic properties of the compound known as thiotimoline&quot;. Laughing hysterically with relief, Asimov had to be led out of the room. After a five-minute wait, he was summoned back into the room and congratulated as &quot;Dr. Asimov&quot;.

Demand for science fiction greatly increased during the 1950s, making it possible for a genre author to write full-time. In 1949, book publisher Doubleday&#x27;s science fiction editor Walter I. Bradbury accepted Asimov&#x27;s unpublished &quot;Grow Old with Me&quot; (40,000 words), but requested that it be extended to a full novel of 70,000 words. The book appeared under the Doubleday imprint in January 1950 with the title of &quot;Pebble in the Sky&quot;. Doubleday published five more original science fiction novels by Asimov in the 1950s, along with the six juvenile Lucky Starr novels, the latter under the pseudonym &quot;Paul French&quot;. Doubleday also published collections of Asimov&#x27;s short stories, beginning with &quot;The Martian Way and Other Stories&quot; in 1955. The early 1950s also saw Gnome Press publish one collection of Asimov&#x27;s positronic robot stories as &quot;I, Robot&quot; and his &quot;Foundation&quot; stories and novelettes as the three books of the &quot;Foundation trilogy&quot;. More positronic robot stories were republished in book form as &quot;The Rest of the Robots&quot;.

Book publishers and the magazines &quot;Galaxy&quot; and &quot;Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot; ended Asimov&#x27;s dependence on &quot;Astounding&quot;. He later described the era as his &quot;&#x27;mature&#x27; period&quot;. Asimov&#x27;s &quot;The Last Question&quot; (1956), on the ability of humankind to cope with and potentially reverse the process of entropy, was his personal favorite story.

In 1972, his stand-alone novel &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot; was published to general acclaim, winning Best Novel in the Hugo, Nebula, and Locus Awards.

In December 1974, former Beatle Paul McCartney approached Asimov and asked him to write the screenplay for a science-fiction movie musical. McCartney had a vague idea for the plot and a small scrap of dialogue, about a rock band whose members discover they are being impersonated by extraterrestrials. The band and their impostors would likely be played by McCartney&#x27;s group Wings, then at the height of their career. Though not generally a fan of rock music, Asimov was intrigued by the idea and quickly produced a treatment outline of the story adhering to McCartney&#x27;s overall idea but omitting McCartney&#x27;s scrap of dialogue. McCartney rejected it, and the treatment now exists only in the Boston University archives.

Asimov said in 1969 that he had &quot;the happiest of all my associations with science fiction magazines&quot; with &quot;Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;; &quot;I have no complaints about &quot;Astounding&quot;, &quot;Galaxy&quot;, or any of the rest, heaven knows, but &quot;F&amp;SF&quot; has become something special to me&quot;. Beginning in 1977, Asimov lent his name to &quot;Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine&quot; (now &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction&quot;) and wrote an editorial for each issue. There was also a short-lived &quot;Asimov&#x27;s SF Adventure Magazine&quot; and a companion &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction Anthology&quot; reprint series, published as magazines (in the same manner as the stablemates &quot;Ellery Queen&#x27;s Mystery Magazine&quot;″s and &quot;Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s Mystery Magazine&quot;″s &quot;anthologies&quot;).

Due to pressure by fans on Asimov to write another book in his &quot;Foundation&quot; series, he did so with &quot;Foundation&#x27;s Edge&quot; (1982) and &quot;Foundation and Earth&quot; (1986), and then went back to before the original trilogy with &quot;Prelude to Foundation&quot; (1988) and &quot;Forward the Foundation&quot; (1992), his last novel.

He also helped Leonard Nimoy fleshing out the premise of the science fiction comic Primortals (1995–1997).

=== Popular science ===
Asimov and two colleagues published a textbook in 1949, with two more editions by 1969. During the late 1950s and 1960s, Asimov substantially decreased his fiction output (he published only four adult novels between 1957&#x27;s &quot;The Naked Sun&quot; and 1982&#x27;s &quot;Foundation&#x27;s Edge&quot;, two of which were mysteries). He greatly increased his nonfiction production, writing mostly on science topics; the launch of Sputnik in 1957 engendered public concern over a &quot;science gap&quot;. Asimov explained in &quot;The Rest of the Robots&quot; that he had been unable to write substantial fiction since the summer of 1958, and observers understood him as saying that his fiction career had ended, or was permanently interrupted. Asimov recalled in 1969 that &quot;the United States went into a kind of tizzy, and so did I. I was overcome by the ardent desire to write popular science for an America that might be in great danger through its neglect of science, and a number of publishers got an equally ardent desire to publish popular science for the same reason&quot;.

&quot;Fantasy and Science Fiction&quot; invited Asimov to continue his regular nonfiction column, begun in the now-folded bimonthly companion magazine &quot;Venture Science Fiction Magazine&quot;. The first of 399 monthly &quot;F&amp;SF&quot; columns appeared in November 1958 and they continued until his terminal illness. These columns, periodically collected into books by Doubleday, gave Asimov a reputation as a &quot;Great Explainer&quot; of science; he described them as his only popular science writing in which he never had to assume complete ignorance of the subjects on the part of his readers. The column was ostensibly dedicated to popular science but Asimov had complete editorial freedom, and wrote about contemporary social issues in essays such as &quot;Thinking About Thinking&quot; and &quot;Knock Plastic!&quot;. In 1975 he wrote of these essays: &quot;I get more pleasure out of them than out of any other writing assignment.&quot;

Asimov&#x27;s first wide-ranging reference work, &quot;The Intelligent Man&#x27;s Guide to Science&quot; (1960), was nominated for a National Book Award, and in 1963 he won a Hugo Award—his first—for his essays for &quot;F&amp;SF&quot;. The popularity of his science books and the income he derived from them allowed him to give up most academic responsibilities and become a full-time freelance writer. He encouraged other science fiction writers to write popular science, stating in 1967 that &quot;the knowledgeable, skillful science writer is worth his weight in contracts&quot;, with &quot;twice as much work as he can possibly handle&quot;.

The great variety of information covered in Asimov&#x27;s writings prompted Kurt Vonnegut to ask, &quot;How does it feel to know everything?&quot; Asimov replied that he only knew how it felt to have the &#x27;reputation&#x27; of omniscience: &quot;Uneasy&quot;. Floyd C. Gale said that &quot;Asimov has a rare talent. He can make your mental mouth water over dry facts&quot;, and &quot;science fiction&#x27;s loss has been science popularization&#x27;s gain&quot;. Asimov said that &quot;Of all the writing I do, fiction, non-fiction, adult, or juvenile, these &quot;F &amp; SF&quot; articles are by far the most fun&quot;. He regretted, however, that he had less time for fiction—causing dissatisfied readers to send him letters of complaint—stating in 1969 that &quot;In the last ten years, I&#x27;ve done a couple of novels, some collections, a dozen or so stories, but that&#x27;s &quot;nothing&quot;&quot;.

In his essay &quot;To Tell a Chemist&quot; (1965), Asimov proposed a simple shibboleth for distinguishing chemists from non-chemists: ask the person to read the word &quot;unionized&quot;. Chemists, he noted, will read &quot;un&quot;-&quot;ionized&quot; (electrically neutral), while non-chemists will read &quot;union-ized&quot; (belonging to a trade union).

=== Coined terms ===
Asimov coined the term &quot;robotics&quot; in his 1941 story &quot;Liar!&quot;, though he later remarked that he believed then that he was merely using an existing word, as he stated in &quot;Gold&quot; (&quot;The Robot Chronicles&quot;). While acknowledging the Oxford Dictionary reference, he incorrectly states that the word was first printed about one third of the way down the first column of page 100 in the March 1942 issue of &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; – the printing of his short story &quot;Runaround&quot;.

In the same story, Asimov also coined the term &quot;positronic&quot; (the counterpart to &quot;electronic&quot; for positrons).

Asimov coined the term &quot;psychohistory&quot; in his &quot;Foundation&quot; stories to name a fictional branch of science which combines history, sociology, and mathematical statistics to make general predictions about the future behavior of very large groups of people, such as the Galactic Empire. Asimov said later that he should have called it psychosociology. It was first introduced in the five short stories (1942–1944) which would later be collected as the 1951 fix-up novel &quot;Foundation&quot;. Somewhat later, the term &quot;psychohistory&quot; was applied by others to research of the effects of psychology on history.

=== Other writings ===
In addition to his interest in science, Asimov was interested in history. Starting in the 1960s, he wrote 14 popular history books, including &quot;The Greeks: A Great Adventure&quot; (1965), &quot;The Roman Republic&quot; (1966), &quot;The Roman Empire&quot; (1967), &quot;The Egyptians&quot; (1967) &quot;The Near East: 10,000 Years of History&quot; (1968), and &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Chronology of the World&quot; (1991).

He published &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Guide to the Bible&quot; in two volumes—covering the Old Testament in 1967 and the New Testament in 1969—and then combined them into one 1,300-page volume in 1981. Complete with maps and tables, the guide goes through the books of the Bible in order, explaining the history of each one and the political influences that affected it, as well as biographical information about the important characters. His interest in literature manifested itself in several annotations of literary works, including &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Guide to Shakespeare&quot; (1970), &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Annotated Don Juan&quot; (1972), &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Annotated Paradise Lost&quot; (1974), and &quot;The Annotated Gulliver&#x27;s Travels&quot; (1980).

Asimov was also a noted mystery author and a frequent contributor to &quot;Ellery Queen&#x27;s Mystery Magazine&quot;. He began by writing science fiction mysteries such as his Wendell Urth stories, but soon moved on to writing &quot;pure&quot; mysteries. He published two full-length mystery novels, and wrote 66 stories about the Black Widowers, a group of men who met monthly for dinner, conversation, and a puzzle. He got the idea for the Widowers from his own association in a stag group called the Trap Door Spiders, and all of the main characters (with the exception of the waiter, Henry, who he admitted resembled Wodehouse&#x27;s Jeeves) were modeled after his closest friends. A parody of the Black Widowers, &quot;An Evening with the White Divorcés,&quot; was written by author, critic, and librarian Jon L. Breen. Asimov joked, &quot;all I can do ... is to wait until I catch him in a dark alley, someday.&quot;

Toward the end of his life, Asimov published a series of collections of limericks, mostly written by himself, starting with &quot;Lecherous Limericks&quot;, which appeared in 1975. &quot;Limericks: Too Gross&quot;, whose title displays Asimov&#x27;s love of puns, contains 144 limericks by Asimov and an equal number by John Ciardi. He even created a slim volume of Sherlockian limericks. Asimov featured Yiddish humor in &quot;Azazel, The Two Centimeter Demon&quot;. The two main characters, both Jewish, talk over dinner, or lunch, or breakfast, about anecdotes of &quot;George&quot; and his friend Azazel. Asimov&#x27;s &quot;Treasury of Humor&quot; is both a working joke book and a treatise propounding his views on humor theory. According to Asimov, the most essential element of humor is an abrupt change in point of view, one that suddenly shifts focus from the important to the trivial, or from the sublime to the ridiculous.

Particularly in his later years, Asimov to some extent cultivated an image of himself as an amiable lecher. In 1971, as a response to the popularity of sexual guidebooks such as &quot;The Sensuous Woman&quot; (by &quot;J&quot;) and &quot;The Sensuous Man&quot; (by &quot;M&quot;), Asimov published &quot;The Sensuous Dirty Old Man&quot; under the byline &quot;Dr. &#x27;A (although his full name was printed on the paperback edition, first published 1972). However, by 2016, Asimov&#x27;s habit of groping women was seen as sexual harassment and came under criticism, and was cited as an early example of inappropriate behavior that can occur at science fiction conventions.

Asimov published three volumes of autobiography. &quot;In Memory Yet Green&quot; (1979) and &quot;In Joy Still Felt&quot; (1980) cover his life up to 1978. The third volume, &quot;I. Asimov: A Memoir&quot; (1994), covered his whole life (rather than following on from where the second volume left off). The epilogue was written by his widow Janet Asimov after his death. The book won a Hugo Award in 1995. Janet Asimov edited &quot;It&#x27;s Been a Good Life&quot; (2002), a condensed version of his three autobiographies. He also published three volumes of retrospectives of his writing, &quot;Opus 100&quot; (1969), &quot;Opus 200&quot; (1979), and &quot;Opus 300&quot; (1984).

In 1987, the Asimovs co-wrote &quot;How to Enjoy Writing: A Book of Aid and Comfort&quot;. In it they offer advice on how to maintain a positive attitude and stay productive when dealing with discouragement, distractions, rejection, and thick-headed editors. The book includes many quotations, essays, anecdotes, and husband-wife dialogues about the ups and downs of being an author.

Asimov and &quot;Star Trek&quot; creator Gene Roddenberry developed a unique relationship during &quot;Star Trek&quot;″s initial launch in the late 1960s. Asimov wrote a critical essay on &quot;Star Trek&quot;″s scientific accuracy for &quot;TV Guide&quot; magazine. Roddenberry retorted respectfully with a personal letter explaining the limitations of accuracy when writing a weekly series. Asimov corrected himself with a follow-up essay to &quot;TV Guide&quot; claiming that despite its inaccuracies, &quot;Star Trek&quot; was a fresh and intellectually challenging science fiction television show. The two remained friends to the point where Asimov even served as an advisor on a number of &quot;Star Trek&quot; projects.
In 1973, Asimov published a proposal for calendar reform, called the World Season Calendar. It divides the year into four seasons (named A–D) of 13 weeks (91 days) each. This allows days to be named, e.g., &quot;D-73&quot; instead of December 1 (due to December 1 being the 73rd day of the 4th quarter). An extra &#x27;year day&#x27; is added for a total of 365 days.

=== Awards and recognition ===
Asimov won more than a dozen annual awards for particular works of science fiction and a half-dozen lifetime awards.
He also received 14 honorary doctorate degrees from universities.
* 1955 – Guest of Honor at the 13th World Science Fiction Convention
* 1957 – Thomas Alva Edison Foundation Award for best science book for youth, for &quot;Building Blocks of the Universe&quot;
* 1960 – Howard W. Blakeslee Award from the American Heart Association for &quot;The Living River&quot;
* 1962 – Boston University&#x27;s Publication Merit Award
* 1963 – A special Hugo Award for &quot;adding science to science fiction,&quot; for essays published in &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction&quot;
* 1963 – Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences
* 1964 – The Science Fiction Writers of America voted &quot;Nightfall&quot; (1941) the all-time best science fiction short story
* 1965 – James T. Grady Award of the American Chemical Society (now called the James T. Grady-James H. Stack Award for Interpreting Chemistry)
* 1966 – Best All-time Novel Series Hugo Award for the &quot;Foundation&quot; trilogy
* 1967 – Edward E. Smith Memorial Award
* 1967 – AAAS-Westinghouse Science Writing Award for Magazine Writing, for essay &quot;Over the Edge of the Universe&quot; (in the March 1967 &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot;)
* 1972 – Nebula Award for Best Novel for &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot;
* 1973 – Hugo Award for Best Novel for &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot;
* 1973 – Locus Award for Best Novel for &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot;
* 1975 – Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement
* 1975 – Klumpke-Roberts Award &quot;for outstanding contributions to the public understanding and appreciation of astronomy&quot;
* 1975 – Locus Award for Best Reprint Anthology for &quot;Before the Golden Age&quot;
* 1977 – Hugo Award for Best Novelette for &quot;The Bicentennial Man&quot;
* 1977 – Nebula Award for Best Novelette for &quot;The Bicentennial Man&quot;
* 1977 – Locus Award for Best Novelette for &quot;The Bicentennial Man&quot;
* 1981 – An asteroid, 5020 Asimov, was named in his honor
* 1981 – Locus Award for Best Non-Fiction Book for &quot;In Joy Still Felt: The Autobiography of Isaac Asimov, 1954–1978&quot;
* 1983 – Hugo Award for Best Novel for &quot;Foundation&#x27;s Edge&quot;
* 1983 – Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel for &quot;Foundation&#x27;s Edge&quot;
* 1984 – Humanist of the Year
* 1986 – The Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America named him its 8th SFWA Grand Master (presented in 1987).
* 1987 – Locus Award for Best Short Story for &quot;Robot Dreams&quot;
* 1992 – Hugo Award for Best Novelette for &quot;Gold&quot;
* 1995 – Hugo Award for Best Non-Fiction Book for &quot;I. Asimov: A Memoir&quot;
* 1995 – Locus Award for Best Non-Fiction Book for &quot;I. Asimov: A Memoir&quot;
* 1996 – A 1946 Retro-Hugo for Best Novel of 1945 was given at the 1996 WorldCon for &quot;The Mule&quot;, the 7th Foundation story, published in &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot;
* 1997 – The Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted Asimov in its second class of two deceased and two living persons, along with H. G. Wells.
* 2000 – Asimov was featured on a stamp in Israel
* 2001 – The Isaac Asimov Memorial Debates at the Hayden Planetarium in New York were inaugurated
* 2009 – A crater on the planet Mars, Asimov, was named in his honor
* 2010 – In the US Congress bill about the designation of the National Robotics Week as an annual event, a tribute to Isaac Asimov is as follows:
** &quot;Whereas the second week in April each year is designated as &#x27;National Robotics Week&#x27;, recognizing the accomplishments of Isaac Asimov, who immigrated to America, taught science, wrote science books for children and adults, first used the term robotics, developed the Three Laws of Robotics, and died in April 1992: Now, therefore, be it resolved ...&quot;
* 2015 – Selected as a member of the New York State Writers Hall of Fame.
* 2016 – A 1941 Retro-Hugo for Best Short Story of 1940 was given at the 2016 WorldCon for &quot;Robbie&quot;, his first positronic robot story, published in &quot;Super Science Stories&quot;, September 1940
* 2018 – A 1943 Retro-Hugo for Best Short Story of 1942 was given at the 2018 WorldCon for &quot;Foundation&quot;, published in &quot;Astounding Science-Fiction&quot;, May 1942

== Writing style ==
Asimov was his own secretary, typist, indexer, proofreader, and literary agent. He wrote a typed first draft composed at the keyboard at 90 words per minute; he imagined an ending first, then a beginning, then &quot;let everything in-between work itself out as I come to it&quot;. (Asimov used an outline only once, later describing it as &quot;like trying to play the piano from inside a straitjacket&quot;.) After correcting a draft by hand, he retyped the document as the final copy and only made one revision with minor editor-requested changes; a word processor did not save him much time, Asimov said, because 95% of the first draft was unchanged.

After disliking making multiple revisions of &quot;Black Friar of the Flame&quot;, Asimov refused to make major, second, or non-editorial revisions (&quot;like chewing used gum&quot;), stating that &quot;too large a revision, or too many revisions, indicate that the piece of writing is a failure. In the time it would take to salvage such a failure, I could write a new piece altogether and have infinitely more fun in the process&quot;. He submitted &quot;failures&quot; to another editor.

Asimov&#x27;s fiction style is extremely unornamented. In 1980, science fiction scholar James Gunn wrote of &quot;I, Robot&quot;:

Asimov addressed such criticism in 1989 at the beginning of &quot;Nemesis&quot;:

Gunn cited examples of a more complex style, such as the climax of &quot;Liar!&quot;. Sharply drawn characters occur at key junctures of his storylines: Susan Calvin in &quot;Liar!&quot; and &quot;Evidence&quot;, Arkady Darell in &quot;Second Foundation&quot;, Elijah Baley in &quot;The Caves of Steel&quot;, and Hari Seldon in the &quot;Foundation&quot; prequels.

Other than books by Gunn and Joseph Patrouch, there is relatively little literary criticism on Asimov (particularly when compared to the sheer volume of his output). Cowart and Wymer&#x27;s &quot;Dictionary of Literary Biography&quot; (1981) gives a possible reason:

Gunn&#x27;s and Patrouch&#x27;s studies of Asimov both state that a clear, direct prose style is still a style. Gunn&#x27;s 1982 book comments in detail on each of Asimov&#x27;s novels. He does not praise all of Asimov&#x27;s fiction (nor does Patrouch), but calls some passages in &quot;The Caves of Steel&quot; &quot;reminiscent of Proust&quot;. When discussing how that novel depicts night falling over futuristic New York City, Gunn says that Asimov&#x27;s prose &quot;need not be ashamed anywhere in literary society&quot;.

Although he prided himself on his unornamented prose style (for which he credited Clifford D. Simak as an early influence), and said in 1973 that his style had not changed, Asimov also enjoyed giving his longer stories complicated narrative structures, often by arranging chapters in nonchronological ways. Some readers have been put off by this, complaining that the nonlinearity is not worth the trouble and adversely affects the clarity of the story. For example, the first third of &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot; begins with Chapter 6, then backtracks to fill in earlier material. (John Campbell advised Asimov to begin his stories as late in the plot as possible. This advice helped Asimov create &quot;Reason&quot;, one of the early &quot;Robot&quot; stories). Patrouch found that the interwoven and nested flashbacks of &quot;The Currents of Space&quot; did serious harm to that novel, to such an extent that only a &quot;dyed-in-the-kyrt Asimov fan&quot; could enjoy it. In his later novel &quot;Nemesis&quot; one group of characters lives in the &quot;present&quot; and another group starts in the &quot;past&quot;, beginning 15 years earlier and gradually moving toward the time of the first group.

=== Alien life ===
Asimov once explained that his reluctance to write about aliens came from an incident early in his career when &quot;Astounding&quot;″s editor John Campbell rejected one of his science fiction stories because the alien characters were portrayed as superior to the humans. The nature of the rejection led him to believe that Campbell may have based his bias towards humans in stories on a real-world racial bias. Unwilling to write only weak alien races, and concerned that a confrontation would jeopardize his and Campbell&#x27;s friendship, he decided he would not write about aliens at all. Nevertheless, in response to these criticisms, he wrote &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot;, which contains aliens and alien sex. The book won the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1972, and the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1973. Asimov said that of all his writings, he was most proud of the middle section of &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot;, the part that deals with those themes.

In the Hugo Award–winning novelette &quot;Gold&quot;, Asimov describes an author, based on himself, who has one of his books (&quot;The Gods Themselves&quot;) adapted into a &quot;compu-drama&quot;, essentially photo-realistic computer animation. The director criticizes the fictionalized Asimov (&quot;Gregory Laborian&quot;) for having an extremely nonvisual style, making it difficult to adapt his work, and the author explains that he relies on ideas and dialogue rather than description to get his points across.

=== Romance and women ===

In the early days of science fiction some authors and critics felt that the romantic elements were inappropriate in science fiction stories, which were supposedly to be focused on science and technology. Isaac Asimov was a supporter of this point of view, expressed in his 1938-1939 letters to &quot;Astounding&quot;, where he described such elements as &quot;mush&quot; and &quot;slop&quot;. To his dismay, these letters were met with a strong opposition.

Asimov attributed the lack of romance and sex in his fiction to the &quot;early imprinting&quot; from starting his writing career when he had never been on a date and &quot;didn&#x27;t know anything about girls&quot;. He was sometimes criticized for the general absence of sex (and of extraterrestrial life) in his science fiction. He claimed he wrote &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot; (1972) to respond to these criticisms, which often came from New Wave science fiction (and often British) writers. The second part (of three) of the novel is set on an alien world with three sexes, and the sexual behavior of these creatures is extensively depicted.

== Views ==
=== Religion ===
Asimov was an atheist, and a humanist. He did not oppose religious conviction in others, but he frequently railed against superstitious and pseudoscientific beliefs that tried to pass themselves off as genuine science. During his childhood, his parents observed the traditions of Orthodox Judaism less stringently than they had in Petrovichi; they did not force their beliefs upon young Isaac, and he grew up without strong religious influences, coming to believe that the &quot;Torah&quot; represented Hebrew mythology in the same way that the &quot;Iliad&quot; recorded Greek mythology. When he was 13, he chose not to have a bar mitzvah. As his books &quot;Treasury of Humor&quot; and &quot;Asimov Laughs Again&quot; record, Asimov was willing to tell jokes involving God, Satan, the Garden of Eden, Jerusalem, and other religious topics, expressing the viewpoint that a good joke can do more to provoke thought than hours of philosophical discussion.

For a brief while, his father worked in the local synagogue to enjoy the familiar surroundings and, as Isaac put it, &quot;shine as a learned scholar&quot; versed in the sacred writings. This scholarship was a seed for his later authorship and publication of &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Guide to the Bible&quot;, an analysis of the historic foundations for the Old and New Testaments. For many years, Asimov called himself an atheist; he considered the term somewhat inadequate, as it described what he did not believe rather than what he did. Eventually, he described himself as a &quot;humanist&quot; and considered that term more practical. Asimov continued to identify himself as a secular Jew, as stated in his introduction to Jack Dann&#x27;s anthology of Jewish science fiction, &quot;Wandering Stars&quot;: &quot;I attend no services and follow no ritual and have never undergone that curious puberty rite, the Bar Mitzvah. It doesn&#x27;t matter. I am Jewish.&quot;

When asked in an interview in 1982 if he was an atheist, Asimov replied,

Likewise, he said about religious education: &quot;I would not be satisfied to have my kids choose to be religious without trying to argue them out of it, just as I would not be satisfied to have them decide to smoke regularly or engage in any other practice I consider detrimental to mind or body.&quot;

In his last volume of autobiography, Asimov wrote,

The same memoir states his belief that Hell is &quot;the drooling dream of a sadist&quot; crudely affixed to an all-merciful God; if even human governments were willing to curtail cruel and unusual punishments, wondered Asimov, why would punishment in the afterlife not be restricted to a limited term? Asimov rejected the idea that a human belief or action could merit infinite punishment. If an afterlife existed, he claimed, the longest and most severe punishment would be reserved for those who &quot;slandered God by inventing Hell&quot;.

Asimov said about using religious motifs in his writing:

=== Politics ===
Asimov became a staunch supporter of the Democratic Party during the New Deal, and thereafter remained a political liberal. He was a vocal opponent of the Vietnam War in the 1960s and in a television interview during the early 1970s he publicly endorsed George McGovern. He was unhappy about what he considered an &quot;irrationalist&quot; viewpoint taken by many radical political activists from the late 1960s and onwards. In his second volume of autobiography, &quot;In Joy Still Felt&quot;, Asimov recalled meeting the counterculture figure Abbie Hoffman. Asimov&#x27;s impression was that the 1960s&#x27; counterculture heroes had ridden an emotional wave which, in the end, left them stranded in a &quot;no-man&#x27;s land of the spirit&quot; from which he wondered if they would ever return.

Asimov vehemently opposed Richard Nixon, considering him &quot;a crook and a liar&quot;. He closely followed Watergate, and was pleased when the president was forced to resign. Asimov was dismayed over the pardon extended to Nixon by his successor Gerald Ford: &quot;I was not impressed by the argument that it has spared the nation an ordeal. To my way of thinking, the ordeal was necessary to make certain it would never happen again.&quot;

After Asimov&#x27;s name appeared in the mid-1960s on a list of people the Communist Party USA &quot;considered amenable&quot; to its goals, the FBI investigated him. Because of his academic background, the bureau briefly considered Asimov as a possible candidate for known Soviet spy ROBPROF, but found nothing suspicious in his life or background.

Asimov appeared to hold an equivocal attitude towards Israel. In his first autobiography, he indicates his support for the safety of Israel, though insisting that he was not a Zionist. In his third autobiography, Asimov stated his opposition to the creation of a Jewish state, on the grounds that he was opposed to having nation-states in general, and supported the notion of a single humanity. Asimov especially worried about the safety of Israel given that it had been created among Muslim neighbors &quot;who will never forgive, never forget and never go away&quot;, and said that Jews had merely created for themselves another &quot;Jewish ghetto&quot;.

=== Social issues ===
Asimov believed that &quot;&quot;science&quot; fiction ... serve[s] the good of humanity&quot;. He considered himself a feminist even before women&#x27;s liberation became a widespread movement; he argued that the issue of women&#x27;s rights was closely connected to that of population control. Furthermore, he believed that homosexuality must be considered a &quot;moral right&quot; on population grounds, as must all consenting adult sexual activity that does not lead to reproduction. He issued many appeals for population control, reflecting a perspective articulated by people from Thomas Malthus through Paul R. Ehrlich.

In a 1988 interview by Bill Moyers, Asimov proposed computer-aided learning, where people would use computers to find information on subjects in which they were interested. He thought this would make learning more interesting, since people would have the freedom to choose what to learn, and would help spread knowledge around the world. Also, the one-to-one model would let students learn at their own pace. Asimov thought that people would live in space by 2019.

In 1983 Asimov wrote:
He continues on education: 

=== Sexual harassment ===
Asimov would often fondle, kiss and pinch women at conventions and elsewhere without regard for their consent. According to Alec Nevala-Lee, author of an Asimov biography and writer on the history of science fiction, he often defended himself by saying that far from showing objections, these women cooperated. In a 1971 satirical piece, &quot;The Sensuous Dirty Old Man&quot;, Asimov wrote: &quot;The question then is not whether or not a girl should be touched. The question is merely where, when, and how she should be touched.&quot;

According to Nevala-Lee, however, &quot;many of these encounters were clearly nonconsensual.&quot; He wrote that Asimov&#x27;s behaviour, as a leading science-fiction author and personality, contributed to an undesirable atmosphere for women in the male-dominated science fiction community. In support of this, he quoted some of Asimov&#x27;s contemporary fellow-authors such as Judith Merril, Harlan Ellison and Frederik Pohl, as well as editors such as Timothy Seldes. Additional specific incidents were reported by other people including Edward L. Ferman, long-time editor of &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;, who wrote &quot;...instead of shaking my date&#x27;s hand, he shook her &quot;left breast&quot;.

=== Environment and population ===
Asimov&#x27;s defense of civil applications of nuclear power, even after the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant incident, damaged his relations with some of his fellow liberals. In a letter reprinted in &quot;Yours, Isaac Asimov&quot;, he states that although he would prefer living in &quot;no danger whatsoever&quot; to living near a nuclear reactor, he would still prefer a home near a nuclear power plant to a slum on Love Canal or near &quot;a Union Carbide plant producing methyl isocyanate&quot;, the latter being a reference to the Bhopal disaster.

In the closing years of his life, Asimov blamed the deterioration of the quality of life that he perceived in New York City on the shrinking tax base caused by the middle-class flight to the suburbs, though he continued to support high taxes on the middle class to pay for social programs. His last nonfiction book, &quot;Our Angry Earth&quot; (1991, co-written with his long-time friend, science fiction author Frederik Pohl), deals with elements of the environmental crisis such as overpopulation, oil dependence, war, global warming, and the destruction of the ozone layer. In response to being presented by Bill Moyers with the question &quot;What do you see happening to the idea of dignity to human species if this population growth continues at its present rate?&quot;, Asimov responded:

=== Other authors ===
Asimov enjoyed the writings of J. R. R. Tolkien, and used &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; as a plot point in a Black Widowers story, titled &quot;Nothing like Murder&quot;. In the essay &quot;All or Nothing&quot; (for &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction,&quot; Jan 1981), Asimov said that he admired Tolkien and that he had read &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; five times. (The feelings were mutual, with Tolkien saying that he had enjoyed Asimov&#x27;s science fiction. This would make Asimov an exception to Tolkien&#x27;s earlier claim that he rarely found &quot;any modern books&quot; that were interesting to him.)

He acknowledged other writers as superior to himself in talent, saying of Harlan Ellison, &quot;He is (in my opinion) one of the best writers in the world, far more skilled at the art than I am.&quot; Asimov disapproved of the New Wave&#x27;s growing influence, stating in 1967 &quot;I want science fiction. I think science fiction isn&#x27;t really science fiction if it lacks science. And I think the better and truer the science, the better and truer the science fiction&quot;.

The feelings of friendship and respect between Asimov and Arthur C. Clarke were demonstrated by the so-called &quot;Clarke–Asimov Treaty of Park Avenue&quot;, negotiated as they shared a cab in New York. This stated that Asimov was required to insist that Clarke was the best science fiction writer in the world (reserving second-best for himself), while Clarke was required to insist that Asimov was the best science writer in the world (reserving second-best for himself). Thus, the dedication in Clarke&#x27;s book &quot;Report on Planet Three&quot; (1972) reads: &quot;In accordance with the terms of the Clarke–Asimov treaty, the second-best science writer dedicates this book to the second-best science-fiction writer.&quot;

In 1980, Asimov wrote a highly critical review of George Orwell&#x27;s &quot;1984&quot;. Though dismissive of his attacks, James Machell has stated that they &quot;are easier to understand when you consider that Asimov viewed 1984 as dangerous literature. He opines that if communism were to spread across the globe, it would come in a completely different form to the one in 1984, and by looking to Orwell as an authority on totalitarianism, &#x27;we will be defending ourselves against assaults from the wrong direction and we will lose&#x27;.&quot;

Asimov became a fan of mystery stories at the same time as science fiction. He preferred to read the former because &quot;I read every [science fiction] story keenly aware that it might be worse than mine, in which case I had no patience with it, or that it might be better, in which case I felt miserable&quot;. Asimov wrote &quot;I make no secret of the fact that in my mysteries I use Agatha Christie as my model. In my opinion, her mysteries are the best ever written, far better than the Sherlock Holmes stories, and Hercule Poirot is the best detective fiction has seen. Why should I not use as my model what I consider the best?&quot; He enjoyed Sherlock Holmes, but considered Arthur Conan Doyle to be &quot;a slapdash and sloppy writer.&quot;

Asimov also enjoyed humorous stories, particularly those of P. G. Wodehouse.

In non-fiction writing, Asimov particularly admired the writing style of Martin Gardner, and tried to emulate it in his own science books. On meeting Gardner for the first time in 1965, Asimov told him this, to which Gardner answered that he had based his own style on Asimov&#x27;s.

== Influence ==
Paul Krugman, holder of a Nobel Prize in Economics, stated Asimov&#x27;s concept of psychohistory inspired him to become an economist.

John Jenkins, who has reviewed the vast majority of Asimov&#x27;s written output, once observed, &quot;It has been pointed out that most science fiction writers since the 1950s have been affected by Asimov, either modeling their style on his or deliberately avoiding anything like his style.&quot; Along with such figures as Bertrand Russell and Karl Popper, Asimov left his mark as one of the most distinguished interdisciplinarians of the 20th century. &quot;Few individuals&quot;, writes , &quot;understood better than Isaac Asimov what synoptic thinking is all about. His almost 500 books—which he wrote as a specialist, a knowledgeable authority, or just an excited layman—range over almost all conceivable subjects: the sciences, history, literature, religion, and of course, science fiction.&quot;

== Bibliography ==
Depending on the counting convention used, and including all titles, charts, and edited collections, there may be currently over 500 books in Asimov&#x27;s bibliography—as well as his individual short stories, individual essays, and criticism. For his 100th, 200th, and 300th books (based on his personal count), Asimov published &quot;Opus 100&quot; (1969), &quot;Opus 200&quot; (1979), and &quot;Opus 300&quot; (1984), celebrating his writing. An extensive bibliography of Isaac Asimov&#x27;s works has been compiled by Ed Seiler. His book writing rate was analysed, showing that he wrote faster as he wrote more.

An online exhibit in West Virginia University Libraries&#x27; virtually complete Asimov Collection displays features, visuals, and descriptions of some of his more than 600 books, games, audio recordings, videos, and wall charts. Many first, rare, and autographed editions are in the Libraries&#x27; Rare Book Room. Book jackets and autographs are presented online along with descriptions and images of children&#x27;s books, science fiction art, multimedia, and other materials in the collection.

=== Science fiction ===
==== &quot;Greater Foundation&quot; series ====

The &quot;Robot&quot; series was originally separate from the &quot;Foundation&quot; series. The Galactic Empire novels were published as independent stories, set earlier in the same future as &quot;Foundation&quot;. Later in life, Asimov synthesized the &quot;Robot&quot; series into a single coherent &quot;history&quot; that appeared in the extension of the &quot;Foundation&quot; series.

All of these books were published by Doubleday &amp; Co, except the original Foundation trilogy which was originally published by Gnome Books before being bought and republished by Doubleday.
* The Robot series:
** (first Elijah Baley SF-crime novel)
** (second Elijah Baley SF-crime novel)
** (third Elijah Baley SF-crime novel)
** (sequel to the Elijah Baley trilogy)
* Galactic Empire novels:
** (early Galactic Empire)
** (long before the Empire)
** (Republic of Trantor still expanding)
* Foundation prequels:
** 
* Original &quot;Foundation&quot; trilogy:
** (also published with the title &#x27;The Man Who Upset the Universe&#x27; as a 35¢ Ace paperback, D-125, in about 1952)
* Extended Foundation series:
** 

==== Lucky Starr series (as Paul French) ====

All published by Doubleday &amp; Co
* &quot;David Starr, Space Ranger&quot; (1952)
* &quot;Lucky Starr and the Pirates of the Asteroids&quot; (1953)
* &quot;Lucky Starr and the Oceans of Venus&quot; (1954)
* &quot;Lucky Starr and the Big Sun of Mercury&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Lucky Starr and the Moons of Jupiter&quot; (1957)
* &quot;Lucky Starr and the Rings of Saturn&quot; (1958)

==== Norby Chronicles (with Janet Asimov) ====

All published by Walker &amp; Company
* &quot;Norby, the Mixed-Up Robot&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Norby&#x27;s Other Secret&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Norby and the Lost Princess&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Norby and the Invaders&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Norby and the Queen&#x27;s Necklace&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Norby Finds a Villain&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Norby Down to Earth&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Norby and Yobo&#x27;s Great Adventure&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Norby and the Oldest Dragon&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Norby and the Court Jester&quot; (1991)

==== Novels not part of a series ====
Novels marked with an asterisk (*) have minor connections to &quot;Foundation&quot; universe.
* &quot;The End of Eternity&quot; (1955), Doubleday (*)
* &quot;Fantastic Voyage&quot; (1966), Bantam Books (paperback) and Houghton Mifflin (hardback) (a novelization of the movie)
* &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot; (1972), Doubleday
* &quot;Fantastic Voyage II: Destination Brain&quot; (1987), Doubleday (not a sequel to &quot;Fantastic Voyage,&quot; but a similar, independent story)
* &quot;Nemesis&quot; (1989), Bantam Doubleday Dell (*)
* &quot;Nightfall&quot; (1990), Doubleday, with Robert Silverberg (based on &quot;Nightfall&quot;, a 1941 short story written by Asimov)
* &quot;Child of Time&quot; (1992), Bantam Doubleday Dell, with Robert Silverberg (based on &quot;The Ugly Little Boy&quot;, a 1958 short story written by Asimov)
* &quot;The Positronic Man&quot; (1992), Bantam Doubleday Dell, with Robert Silverberg (*) (based on &quot;The Bicentennial Man&quot;, a 1976 novella written by Asimov)

==== Short-story collections ====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Mysteries ===
==== Novels ====
* &quot;The Death Dealers&quot; (1958), Avon Books, republished as &quot;A Whiff of Death&quot; by Walker &amp; Company
* &quot;Murder at the ABA&quot; (1976), Doubleday, also published as &quot;Authorized Murder&quot;

==== Short-story collections ====
===== Black Widowers series =====

* &quot;Tales of the Black Widowers&quot; (1974), Doubleday
* &quot;More Tales of the Black Widowers&quot; (1976), Doubleday
* &quot;Casebook of the Black Widowers&quot; (1980), Doubleday
* &quot;Banquets of the Black Widowers&quot; (1984), Doubleday
* &quot;Puzzles of the Black Widowers&quot; (1990), Doubleday
* &quot;The Return of the Black Widowers&quot; (2003), Carroll &amp; Graf

===== Other mysteries =====
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Mysteries&quot; (1968), Doubleday
* &quot;The Key Word and Other Mysteries&quot; (1977), Walker
* &quot;The Union Club Mysteries&quot; (1983), Doubleday
* &quot;The Disappearing Man and Other Mysteries&quot; (1985), Walker
* &quot;The Best Mysteries of Isaac Asimov&quot; (1986), Doubleday

=== Nonfiction ===
==== Popular science ====
=====Collections of Asimov&#x27;s essays for &quot;F&amp;SF&quot;=====
The following books collected essays which were originally published as monthly columns in &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction&quot; and collected by Doubleday &amp; Co
# &quot;Fact and Fancy&quot; (1962)
# &quot;View from a Height&quot; (1963)
# &quot;Adding a Dimension&quot; (1964)
# &quot;Of Time and Space and Other Things&quot; (1965)
# &quot;From Earth to Heaven&quot; (1966)
# &quot;Science, Numbers, and I&quot; (1968)
# &quot;The Solar System and Back&quot; (1970)
# &quot;The Stars in Their Courses&quot; (1971)
# &quot;The Left Hand of the Electron&quot; (1972)
# &quot;The Tragedy of the Moon&quot; (1973)
# &quot;Asimov On Astronomy&quot; (updated version of essays in previous collections) (1974) 
# &quot;Asimov On Chemistry&quot; (updated version of essays in previous collections) (1974)
# &quot;Of Matters Great and Small&quot; (1975)
# &quot;Asimov On Physics&quot; (updated version of essays in previous collections) (1976) 
# &quot;The Planet That Wasn&#x27;t&quot; (1976)
# &quot;Asimov On Numbers&quot; (updated version of essays in previous collections) (1976)
# &quot;Quasar, Quasar, Burning Bright&quot; (1977)
# &quot;The Road to Infinity&quot; (1979)
# &quot;The Sun Shines Bright&quot; (1981)
# &quot;Counting the Eons&quot; (1983)
# &quot;X Stands for Unknown&quot; (1984)
# &quot;The Subatomic Monster&quot; (1985)
# &quot;Far as Human Eye Could See&quot; (1987)
# &quot;The Relativity of Wrong&quot; (1988)
# &quot;Asimov on Science: A 30 Year Retrospective 1959–1989&quot; (1989) (features the first essay in the introduction)
# &quot;Out of the Everywhere&quot; (1990)
# &quot;The Secret of the Universe&quot; (1991)

=====Other general science essay collections=====
* &quot;Only a Trillion&quot; (1957), Abelard-Schuman, ; (1976) revised and updated ed.
* &quot;Is Anyone There?&quot; (1967), Doubleday, (which includes the article in which he coined the term &quot;spome&quot;)
* &quot;Today and Tomorrow and—&quot; (1973), Doubleday
* &quot;Science Past, Science Future&quot; (1975), Doubleday, 
* &quot;Please Explain&quot; (1975), Houghton Mifflin, 
* &quot;Life and Time&quot; (1978), Doubleday
* &quot;The Roving Mind&quot; (1983), Prometheus Books, new edition 1997, 
* &quot;The Dangers of Intelligence&quot; (1986), Houghton Mifflin
* &quot;Past, Present and Future&quot; (1987), Prometheus Books, 
* &quot;The Tyrannosaurus Prescription&quot; (1989), Prometheus Books
* &quot;Frontiers&quot; (1990), Dutton
* &quot;Frontiers II&quot; (1993), Dutton

=====Other science books by Asimov=====
* &quot;The Chemicals of Life&quot; (1954), Abelard-Schuman 
* &quot;Inside the Atom&quot; (1956), Abelard-Schuman, 
* &quot;Building Blocks of the Universe&quot; (1957; revised 1974), Abelard-Schuman, 
* &quot;The World of Carbon&quot; (1958), Abelard-Schuman, 
* &quot;The World of Nitrogen&quot; (1958), Abelard-Schuman, 
* &quot;Words of Science and the History Behind Them&quot; (1959), Houghton Mifflin 
* &quot;The Clock We Live On&quot; (1959), Abelard-Schuman, 
* &quot;Breakthroughs in Science&quot; (1959), Houghton Mifflin, 
* &quot;Realm of Numbers&quot; (1959), Houghton Mifflin, 
* &quot;Realm of Measure&quot; (1960), Houghton Mifflin
* &quot;The Wellsprings of Life&quot; (1960), Abelard-Schuman, 
* &quot;Life and Energy&quot; (1962), Doubleday, 
* &quot;The Genetic Code&quot; (1962), The Orion Press
* &quot;The Human Body: Its Structure and Operation&quot; (1963), Houghton Mifflin, , (revised)
* &quot;The Human Brain: Its Capacities and Functions&quot; (1963), Houghton Mifflin, 
* &quot;Planets for Man&quot; (with Stephen H. Dole) (1964), Random House, reprinted by RAND in 2007 
* &quot;An Easy Introduction to the Slide Rule&quot; (1965), Houghton Mifflin, 
* &quot;The Intelligent Man&#x27;s Guide to Science&quot; (1965), Basic Books
** The title varied with each of the four editions, the last being &quot;Asimov&#x27;s New Guide to Science&quot; (1984) 
* &quot;The Universe: From Flat Earth to Quasar&quot; (1966), Walker, 
* &quot;The Neutrino&quot; (1966), Doubleday, ASIN B002JK525W
* &quot;Understanding Physics Vol. I, Motion, Sound, and Heat&quot; (1966), Walker, 
* &quot;Understanding Physics Vol. II, Light, Magnetism, and Electricity&quot; (1966), Walker, 
* &quot;Understanding Physics Vol. III, The Electron, Proton, and Neutron&quot; (1966), Walker, 
* &quot;Photosynthesis&quot; (1969), Basic Books, 
* &quot;Our World in Space&quot; (1974), New York Graphic, 
* &quot;Eyes on the Universe: A History of the Telescope&quot; (1976), Andre Deutsch Limited, 
* &quot;The Collapsing Universe&quot; (1977), Walker, 
* &quot;Extraterrestrial Civilizations&quot; (1979), Crown, 
* &quot;A Choice of Catastrophes&quot; (1979), Simon &amp; Schuster, 
* &quot;Visions of the Universe&quot; with illustrations by Kazuaki Iwasaki (1981), Cosmos Store, 
* &quot;Exploring the Earth and the Cosmos&quot; (1982), Crown, 
* &quot;The Measure of the Universe&quot; (1983), Harper &amp; Row
* &quot;Think About Space: Where Have We Been and Where Are We Going?&quot; with co-author Frank White (1989), Walker
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Chronology of Science and Discovery&quot; (1989), Harper &amp; Row, second edition adds content thru 1993, 
* &quot;Beginnings: The Story of Origins&quot; (1989), Walker
* &quot;Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Guide to Earth and Space&quot; (1991), Random House, 
* &quot;&quot; (1991), Dutton, 
* &quot;Mysteries of Deep Space: Quasars, Pulsars and Black Holes&quot; (1994) 
* &quot;Earth&#x27;s Moon&quot; (1988), Gareth Stevens, revised in 2003 by Richard Hantula 
* &quot;The Sun&quot; (1988), Gareth Stevens, revised in 2003 by Richard Hantula 
* &quot;The Earth&quot; (1988), Gareth Stevens, revised in 2004 by Richard Hantula 
* &quot;Jupiter&quot; (1989), Gareth Stevens, revised in 2004 by Richard Hantula 
* &quot;Venus&quot; (1990), Gareth Stevens, revised in 2004 by Richard Hantula 

==== Literary works ====
All published by Doubleday
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Guide to Shakespeare&quot;, vols I and II (1970), 
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Annotated &quot;Don Juan&quot;&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Annotated &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Familiar Poems, Annotated&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s The Annotated &quot;Gulliver&#x27;s Travels&quot;&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Annotated &quot;Gilbert and Sullivan&quot;&quot; (1988)

==== The Bible ====
* &quot;Words from Genesis&quot; (1962), Houghton Mifflin
* &quot;Words from the Exodus&quot; (1963), Houghton Mifflin
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Guide to the Bible&quot;, vols I and II (1967 and 1969, one-volume ed. 1981), Doubleday, 
* &quot;The Story of Ruth&quot; (1972), Doubleday, 
* &quot;In the Beginning&quot; (1981), Crown

==== Autobiography ====

* &quot;In Memory Yet Green: The Autobiography of Isaac Asimov, 1920–1954&quot; (1979, Doubleday)
* &quot;In Joy Still Felt: The Autobiography of Isaac Asimov, 1954–1978&quot; (1980, Doubleday)
* &quot;I. Asimov: A Memoir&quot; (1994, Doubleday)
* &quot;It&#x27;s Been a Good Life&quot; (2002, Prometheus Books), condensation of Asimov&#x27;s three volumes of autobiography, edited by his widow, Janet Jeppson Asimov

==== History ====
All published by Houghton Mifflin except where otherwise stated
* &quot;The Kite That Won the Revolution&quot; (1963), 
* &quot;The Greeks: A Great Adventure&quot; (1965)
* &quot;The Roman Republic&quot; (1966)
* &quot;The Roman Empire&quot; (1967)
* &quot;The Egyptians&quot; (1967)
* &quot;The Near East&quot; (1968)
* &quot;The Dark Ages&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Words from History&quot; (1968)
* &quot;The Shaping of England&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Constantinople: The Forgotten Empire&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The Land of Canaan&quot; (1971)
* &quot;The Shaping of France&quot; (1972)
* &quot;The Shaping of North America: From Earliest Times to 1763&quot; (1973)
* &quot;The Birth of the United States: 1763–1816&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Our Federal Union: The United States from 1816 to 1865&quot; (1975), 
* &quot;The Golden Door: The United States from 1865 to 1918&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Chronology of the World&quot; (1991), HarperCollins, 
* &quot;The March of the Millennia&quot; (1991), with co-author Frank White, Walker &amp; Company, 

==== Humor ====
* &quot;The Sensuous Dirty Old Man&quot; (1971) (As Dr. A), Walker &amp; Company, 
* &quot;Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Treasury of Humor&quot; (1971), Houghton Mifflin, 
* &quot;Lecherous Limericks&quot; (1975), Walker, 
* &quot;More Lecherous Limericks&quot; (1976), Walker, 
* &quot;Still More Lecherous Limericks&quot; (1977), Walker, 
* &quot;Limericks, Two Gross&quot;, with John Ciardi (1978), Norton, 
* &quot;A Grossery of Limericks&quot;, with John Ciardi (1981), Norton, 
* &quot;Limericks for Children&quot; (1984), Caedmon
* &quot;Asimov Laughs Again&quot; (1992), HarperCollins

==== On writing science fiction ====
* &quot;Asimov on Science Fiction&quot; (1981), Doubleday
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Galaxy&quot; (1989), Doubleday

==== Other nonfiction ====
* &quot;Opus 100&quot; (1969), Houghton Mifflin, 
* &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Biographical Encyclopedia of Science and Technology&quot; (1964), Doubleday (revised edition 1972, )
* &quot;Opus 200&quot; (1979), Houghton Mifflin, 
* &quot;Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Book of Facts&quot; (1979), Grosset &amp; Dunlap, 
* &quot;Opus 300&quot; (1984), Houghton Mifflin, 
* &quot;Our Angry Earth: A Ticking Ecological Bomb&quot; (1991), with co-author Frederik Pohl, Tor, .

== Television, music, and film appearances ==
* &quot;I Robot&quot;, a concept album by the Alan Parsons Project that examined some of Asimov&#x27;s work
* &quot;The Last Word&quot; (1959)
* &quot;The Dick Cavett Show&quot;, four appearances 1968–71
* &quot;The Nature of Things&quot; (1969)
* ABC News coverage of Apollo 11, 1969, with Fred Pohl, interviewed by Rod Serling
* David Frost interview program, August 1969. Frost asked Asimov if he had ever tried to find God and, after some initial evasion, Asimov answered, &quot;God is much more intelligent than I am—let him try to find me.&quot;
* BBC Horizon &quot;It&#x27;s About Time&quot; (1979), show hosted by Dudley Moore
* &quot;Target ... Earth?&quot; (1980)
* &quot;The David Letterman Show&quot; (1980)
* NBC TV &quot;Speaking Freely&quot;, interviewed by Edwin Newman (1982)
* ARTS Network talk show hosted by Studs Terkel and Calvin Trillin, approximately (1982)
* &quot;Oltre New York&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Voyage to the Outer Planets and Beyond&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Gandahar&quot; (1987), a French animated science-fiction film by René Laloux. Asimov wrote the English translation for the film.
* Bill Moyers interview (1988)
* &quot;Stranieri in America&quot; (1988)

== Adaptations ==

* Several of his stories (&quot;The Dead Past&quot;, &quot;Sucker Bait&quot;, &quot;Satisfaction Guaranteed&quot;, &quot;Reason&quot;, &quot;Liar!&quot;, and &quot;The Naked Sun&quot;) were adapted as television plays for the first three series of the science-fiction (later horror) anthology series &quot;Out of the Unknown&quot; between 1965 and 1969. Only &quot;The Dead Past&quot; and &quot;Sucker Bait&quot; are known to still exist entirely as 16mm telerecordings. Tele-snaps, brief audio recordings and video clips exist for &quot;Satisfaction Guaranteed&quot; and &quot;The Prophet&quot; (adapted from &quot;Reason&quot;), while only production stills, brief audio recordings and video clips exist for &quot;Liar!&quot;. Production stills and an almost complete audio recording exist for &quot;The Naked Sun&quot;.
* &quot;El robot embustero&quot; (1966), short film directed by Antonio Lara de Gavilán, based on short story &quot;Liar!&quot;
* &quot;A halhatatlanság halála&quot; (1977), TV movie directed by András Rajnai, based on novel &quot;The End of Eternity&quot;
* &quot;The Ugly Little Boy&quot; (1977), short film directed by Barry Morse and Donald W. Thompson, based on novelette &quot;The Ugly Little Boy&quot;
* &quot;The End of Eternity&quot; (1987), film directed by Andrei Yermash, based on novel &quot;The End of Eternity&quot;
* &quot;Nightfall&quot; (1988), film directed by Paul Mayersberg, based on novelette &quot;Nightfall&quot;
* &quot;Robots&quot; (1988), film directed by Doug Smith and Kim Takal, based on the &quot;Robot&quot; series
* &quot;Robot City&quot; (1995), an adventure game released for Windows and Mac OS, based on the book series of the same name that consists of science fiction novels written by multiple authors, inspired by the &quot;Robot&quot; series.
* &quot;Bicentennial Man&quot; (1999), film directed by Chris Columbus, based on novelette &quot;The Bicentennial Man&quot; and on novel &quot;The Positronic Man&quot;
* &quot;Nightfall&quot; (2000), film directed by Gwyneth Gibby, based on novelette &quot;Nightfall&quot;
* &quot;I, Robot&quot; (2004), film directed by Alex Proyas, with very tenuous connections with the short stories of the &quot;Robot&quot; series
* &quot;Eagle Eye&quot; (2008), film directed by D. J. Caruso, loosely based on short story &quot;All the Troubles of the World&quot;
* &quot;Formula of Death&quot; (2012), TV movie directed by Behdad Avand Amini, based on novel &quot;The Death Dealers&quot;
* &quot;Spell My Name with an S&quot; (2014), short film directed by Samuel Ali, based on short story &quot;Spell My Name with an S&quot;
* &quot;Foundation&quot; (2021), series created by David S. Goyer and Josh Friedman, based on the &quot;Foundation&quot; series

== References ==
=== Explanatory footnotes ===
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited sources ===

* Asimov, Isaac. &quot;Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Treasury of Humor&quot; (1971), Boston: Houghton Mifflin, .
: &quot;In Memory Yet Green&quot; (1979), New York: Avon, .
: &quot;In Joy Still Felt&quot; (1980), New York: Avon .
: &quot;I. Asimov: A Memoir&quot; (1994), (hc), (pb).
: &quot;Yours, Isaac Asimov&quot; (1996), edited by Stanley Asimov. New York: Doubleday .
: &quot;It&#x27;s Been a Good Life&quot; (2002), edited by Janet Asimov. .
* Goldman, Stephen H., &quot;Isaac Asimov&quot;, in &quot;Dictionary of Literary Biography,&quot; Vol. 8, Cowart and Wymer eds. (Gale Research, 1981), pp. 15–29.
* Gunn, James. &quot;On Variations on a Robot&quot;, &quot;IASFM&quot;, July 1980, pp. 56–81.
: &quot;Isaac Asimov: The Foundations of Science Fiction&quot; (1982). .
: &quot;The Science of Science-Fiction Writing&quot; (2000). .
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* Asimov Online, a vast repository of information about Asimov, maintained by Asimov enthusiast Edward Seiler
* 
* 
* 
* Jenkins&#x27; Spoiler-Laden Guide to Isaac Asimov, reviews of all of Asimov&#x27;s books</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="0" end="12" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="75" end="87" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="91" end="108" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="186" end="201" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="222" end="240" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="245" end="261" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q192425" start="368" end="376" title="postcard" label="postcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q725757" start="398" end="418" title="hard science fiction" label="hard science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585139" start="438" end="447" title="mystery fiction" label="mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="452" end="459" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q995600" start="472" end="487" title="popular science" label="popular science"/>
<link wikidata="Q213051" start="498" end="509" title="non-fiction" label="non-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="556" end="566" title="Foundation (book series)" label="Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="629" end="639" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q368390" start="723" end="738" title="Galactic Empire series" label="Galactic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q913482" start="766" end="771" title="Robot series" label="Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050014" start="948" end="968" title="Foundation and Earth" label="Foundation and Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490686" start="1071" end="1085" title="future history" label="future history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075980" start="1121" end="1148" title="Isaac Asimov short stories bibliography" label="more than 380 short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q944250" start="1164" end="1186" title="social science fiction" label="social science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138091" start="1203" end="1212" title="Nightfall (Asimov novelette and novel)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="1300" end="1334" title="Science Fiction Writers of America" label="Science Fiction Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q898113" start="1359" end="1370" title="Lucky Starr series" label="Lucky Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233720" start="1387" end="1395" title="Young adult fiction" label="juvenile"/>
<link wikidata="Q943878" start="1643" end="1659" title="The Intelligent Man&amp;#x27;s Guide to Science" label="Guide to Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883795" start="1690" end="1711" title="Understanding Physics" label="Understanding Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="1859" end="1868" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="1870" end="1879" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1881" end="1892" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="1894" end="1901" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="1912" end="1920" title="exegesis" label="exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="1926" end="1944" title="literary criticism" label="literary criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q465035" start="1975" end="2004" title="American Humanist Association" label="American Humanist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="2067" end="2075" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458116" start="2076" end="2089" title="5020 Asimov" label="(5020) Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866656" start="2093" end="2099" title="Asimov crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="2103" end="2107" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="2111" end="2119" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="2139" end="2144" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q297769" start="2167" end="2172" title="ASIMO" label="ASIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075907" start="2178" end="2198" title="Isaac Asimov Awards" label="four literary awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365323" start="2288" end="2300" title="winter cereals" label="winter grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="2321" end="2324" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="2456" end="2473" title="Cyrillic alphabet" label="Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="2568" end="2582" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647714" start="2776" end="2799" title="Spell My Name with an S" label="Spell My Name with an S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010621" start="3145" end="3155" title="Petrovichi" label="Petrovichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="3157" end="3169" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="3320" end="3332" title="History of the Jews in Russia" label="Russian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="3536" end="3548" title="Orthodox Jew" label="Orthodox Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777205" start="3631" end="3673" title="Prayer in Judaism" label="myriad prayers prescribed for every action"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128409" start="3795" end="3811" title="double pneumonia" label="double pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104177309" start="3941" end="3948" title="Stanley Asimov" label="Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140593" start="4025" end="4032" title="Newsday" label="Newsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q805686" start="4114" end="4136" title="RMS Baltic (1903)" label="RMS &amp;quot;Baltic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="4214" end="4221" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="4259" end="4266" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="4419" end="4427" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4429" end="4437" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4570" end="4582" title="educational stage#United States" label="second grade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4609" end="4620" title="educational stage#United States" label="first grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="4811" end="4822" title="Naturalization" label="naturalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574069" start="4940" end="4951" title="candy store" label="candy store"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399338" start="5235" end="5259" title="science fiction magazine" label="science fiction magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198796" start="5459" end="5482" title="Brooklyn Public Library" label="Brooklyn Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952707" start="5611" end="5627" title="Boys and Girls High School" label="Boys High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="5631" end="5639" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="5675" end="5699" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149901" start="5751" end="5774" title="Seth Low Junior College" label="Seth Low Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="5797" end="5816" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900913" start="5820" end="5837" title="Downtown Brooklyn" label="Downtown Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="5903" end="5919" title="Italian-American" label="Italian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569677" start="5965" end="5981" title="Columbia College, Columbia University" label="Columbia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q304974" start="6016" end="6032" title="numerus clausus" label="admission quotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="6077" end="6084" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="6111" end="6120" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="6275" end="6294" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149901" start="6359" end="6404" title="Columbia University School of General Studies" label="Columbia University School of General Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="6871" end="6885" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="6927" end="6947" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7068" end="7080" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548690" start="7167" end="7189" title="Philadelphia Navy Yard" label="Philadelphia Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565585" start="7245" end="7256" title="Walnut Hill, Philadelphia" label="Walnut Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q767950" start="7268" end="7285" title="West Philadelphia" label="West Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="7343" end="7352" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="7625" end="7645" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q152225" start="7671" end="7683" title="Bikini Atoll" label="Bikini Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q17378201" start="7704" end="7712" title="corporal" label="corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q843610" start="7744" end="7763" title="honorable discharge" label="honorable discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125292" start="7820" end="7832" title="Postdoctoral researcher" label="postdoctoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344009" start="7843" end="7860" title="Robert Elderfield" label="Robert Elderfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344260" start="7897" end="7916" title="associate professor" label="associate professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="7920" end="7932" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119659" start="7940" end="7976" title="Boston University School of Medicine" label="Boston University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006262" start="8043" end="8055" title="William C. Boyd" label="William Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138091" start="8192" end="8201" title="Nightfall (Asimov novelette and novel)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466273" start="8252" end="8267" title="immunochemistry" label="immunochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154390" start="8774" end="8780" title="tenure" label="tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932084" start="9291" end="9313" title="Mugar Memorial Library" label="Mugar Memorial Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q15784132" start="9420" end="9436" title="Arthur Obermayer" label="Arthur Obermayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156255" start="9482" end="9502" title="U.S. missile defense" label="U.S. missile defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="9537" end="9542" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="9674" end="9696" title="classified information" label="classified information"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="9959" end="9966" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="9995" end="10001" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q884125" start="10015" end="10025" title="blind date" label="blind date"/>
<link wikidata="Q767950" start="10112" end="10129" title="West Philadelphia" label="West Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q316313" start="10220" end="10238" title="L. Sprague de Camp" label="L. Sprague de Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="10243" end="10261" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588578" start="10378" end="10393" title="Stuyvesant Town" label="Stuyvesant Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="10395" end="10404" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="10434" end="10440" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49199" start="10477" end="10487" title="Somerville, Massachusetts" label="Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q49190" start="10502" end="10509" title="Waltham, Massachusetts" label="Waltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986069" start="10537" end="10548" title="West Newton, Massachusetts" label="West Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q429687" start="10703" end="10718" title="Upper West Side" label="Upper West Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q517435" start="10789" end="10805" title="Janet Asimov" label="Janet O. Jeppson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10945" end="10958" title="Claustrophilia" label="claustrophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="11096" end="11116" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127417" start="11234" end="11250" title="fear of flying" label="afraid of flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="11371" end="11376" title="Oahu" label="Oʻahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q387878" start="11501" end="11513" title="Wendell Urth" label="Wendell Urth"/>
<link wikidata="Q988862" start="11573" end="11585" title="Elijah Baley" label="Elijah Baley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="11643" end="11654" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="11694" end="11703" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985043" start="11718" end="11729" title="SS Statendam (1956)" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244204" start="11852" end="11869" title="Queen Elizabeth 2" label="Queen Elizabeth 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="12017" end="12027" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="12076" end="12086" title="teetotalism" label="teetotaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588197" start="12189" end="12204" title="New York accent" label="New York accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958056" start="12230" end="12256" title="science fiction convention" label="science fiction convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q890356" start="12537" end="12546" title="sideburns" label="sideburns"/>
<link wikidata="Q785480" start="12567" end="12575" title="bolo tie" label="bolo tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220650" start="12948" end="12959" title="comic opera" label="comic opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="12964" end="12984" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47183632" start="13080" end="13107" title="The Baker Street Irregulars" label="The Baker Street Irregulars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="13121" end="13136" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283878" start="13390" end="13407" title="Trap Door Spiders" label="Trap Door Spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q798399" start="13482" end="13496" title="Black Widowers" label="Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16800876" start="13593" end="13611" title="The Ultimate Crime" label="The Ultimate Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932353" start="13643" end="13675" title="More Tales of the Black Widowers" label="More Tales of the Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q465035" start="13697" end="13726" title="American Humanist Association" label="American Humanist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128145" start="13802" end="13832" title="Humanist Manifesto II" label="&amp;quot;Humanist Manifesto&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="13963" end="13976" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="14014" end="14023" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q191716" start="14038" end="14054" title="Gene Roddenberry" label="Gene Roddenberry"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14134" end="14163" title="Star Trek: The Motion Picture" label="Star Trek: The Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115728" start="14329" end="14360" title="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry" label="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="14426" end="14437" title="James Randi" label="James Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404258" start="14441" end="14452" title="CSICon" label="CSICon 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q13478952" start="14487" end="14503" title="Kendrick Frazier" label="Kendrick Frazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q929771" start="14551" end="14569" title="Skeptical movement" label="Skeptical movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="14805" end="14815" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="14920" end="14938" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="14943" end="14966" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q204815" start="14974" end="14987" title="Marvin Minsky" label="Marvin Minsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q184194" start="15052" end="15071" title="Mensa International" label="Mensa International"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="15297" end="15316" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660410" start="15344" end="15376" title="Carnegie Corporation of New York" label="Carnegie Corporation of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359767" start="15418" end="15440" title="Great Immigrants Award" label="Great Immigrants Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="15491" end="15503" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q186020" start="15530" end="15551" title="Coronary artery bypass surgery" label="triple bypass surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="15602" end="15605" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="15613" end="15630" title="blood transfusion" label="blood transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282077" start="15687" end="15706" title="Discrimination against people with HIV/AIDS" label="anti-AIDS prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="15846" end="15860" title="Renal failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089950" start="16036" end="16062" title="It&amp;#x27;s Been a Good Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s Been a Good Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q469862" start="16335" end="16348" title="The Naked Sun" label="The Naked Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="16549" end="16558" title="Sputnik I" label="Sputnik I"/>
<link wikidata="Q995600" start="16619" end="16634" title="popular science" label="popular science"/>
<link wikidata="Q932592" start="16869" end="16891" title="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Edge" label="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="17177" end="17186" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="17191" end="17207" title="Houghton Mifflin" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758" start="17383" end="17405" title="Three Laws of Robotics" label="Three Laws of Robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="17420" end="17449" title="Foundation Series" label="&amp;quot;Foundation&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="17461" end="17486" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="17579" end="17587" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488408" start="17601" end="17611" title="positronic brain" label="positronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="17664" end="17677" title="psychohistory (fictional)" label="psychohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q764526" start="17710" end="17725" title="Psychohistory" label="different study"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="17929" end="17938" title="mechanics" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="17943" end="17953" title="hydraulics" label="hydraulics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="17963" end="17968" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18128" end="18158" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181787" start="18174" end="18182" title="android (robot)" label="androids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488408" start="18194" end="18210" title="positronic brain" label="positronic brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435716" start="18253" end="18261" title="Datalore" label="Datalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q48460" start="18428" end="18456" title="Dewey Decimal Classification" label="Dewey Decimal Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="18482" end="18492" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="18497" end="18507" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="18786" end="18792" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="18996" end="19009" title="pulp magazine" label="pulp magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399338" start="19136" end="19160" title="science fiction magazine" label="science fiction magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q848452" start="19250" end="19259" title="Futurians" label="Futurians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085171" start="19260" end="19284" title="science fiction fandom" label="science fiction fan club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371689" start="19422" end="19436" title="The Rover Boys" label="The Rover Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="19910" end="19936" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500230" start="19973" end="20004" title="Street &amp;amp; Smith Publications" label="Street &amp;amp; Smith Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q435056" start="20130" end="20146" title="John W. Campbell" label="John W. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721040" start="20590" end="20598" title="The Callistan Menace" label="Stowaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873373" start="20896" end="20914" title="Marooned Off Vesta" label="Marooned Off Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="20931" end="20946" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025311" start="20964" end="20981" title="Raymond A. Palmer" label="Raymond A. Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773994" start="21111" end="21141" title="The Weapon Too Dreadful to Use" label="The Weapon Too Dreadful to Use"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838296" start="21189" end="21195" title="Trends (short story)" label="Trends"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420210" start="21288" end="21317" title="Golden Age of Science Fiction" label="Golden Age of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629164" start="21329" end="21334" title="ISFDB" label="ISFDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q315059" start="21608" end="21622" title="A. E. van Vogt" label="A. E. van Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q908589" start="22048" end="22063" title="Donald Wollheim" label="Donald Wollheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763085" start="22097" end="22113" title="The Secret Sense" label="The Secret Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q624903" start="22288" end="22297" title="cover art" label="cover art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138091" start="22519" end="22528" title="Nightfall (Asimov short story)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="22648" end="22682" title="Science Fiction Writers of America" label="Science Fiction Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007191" start="22771" end="22798" title="Nightfall and Other Stories" label="Nightfall and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q944250" start="23147" end="23169" title="social science fiction" label="social science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q339084" start="23280" end="23286" title="gadget" label="gadget"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="23292" end="23303" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124515" start="23337" end="23352" title="human condition" label="human condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q555208" start="23375" end="23396" title="Victory Unintentional" label="Victory Unintentional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="24077" end="24107" title="Foundation Trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Foundation&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q753894" start="24115" end="24125" title="Foundation (Isaac Asimov novel)" label="Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q839800" start="24146" end="24167" title="Foundation and Empire" label="Foundation and Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q853927" start="24192" end="24209" title="Second Foundation" label="Second Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="24262" end="24281" title="Galactic Empire (Asimov)" label="interstellar empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="24369" end="24382" title="Psychohistory (fictional)" label="psychohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="24564" end="24576" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q778683" start="24603" end="24611" title="Evidence (short story)" label="Evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q913482" start="24881" end="24917" title="Robot series" label="&amp;quot;positronic&amp;quot; robot stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q393018" start="24956" end="24964" title="I, Robot" label="I, Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="25048" end="25054" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758" start="25071" end="25093" title="Three Laws of Robotics" label="Three Laws of Robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q923895" start="25275" end="25293" title="The Complete Robot" label="The Complete Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="25406" end="25418" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="25571" end="25585" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="25711" end="25731" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction film"/>
<link wikidata="Q200572" start="25858" end="25866" title="I, Robot (film)" label="I, Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="25883" end="25893" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175211" start="25931" end="25942" title="Jeff Vintar" label="Jeff Vintar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801041" start="26143" end="26150" title="I, Robot (short story)" label="a story"/>
<link wikidata="Q638055" start="26154" end="26166" title="Eando Binder" label="Eando Binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q468132" start="26223" end="26243" title="The Bicentennial Man" label="The Bicentennial Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297144" start="26283" end="26301" title="The Positronic Man" label="The Positronic Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q314553" start="26322" end="26339" title="Robert Silverberg" label="Robert Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170250" start="26388" end="26404" title="Bicentennial Man (film)" label="Bicentennial Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="26421" end="26435" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="26489" end="26499" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q913482" start="26592" end="26616" title="Robot series" label="&amp;quot;Robot&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346691" start="26846" end="26866" title="Roger MacBride Allen" label="Roger MacBride Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q317491" start="26868" end="26877" title="Greg Bear" label="Greg Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q358312" start="26879" end="26894" title="Gregory Benford" label="Gregory Benford"/>
<link wikidata="Q315069" start="26896" end="26906" title="David Brin" label="David Brin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036044" start="26912" end="26928" title="Donald Kingsbury" label="Donald Kingsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q517435" start="27043" end="27055" title="Janet Asimov" label="Janet Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q42757690" start="27083" end="27106" title="False document" label="spoof chemistry article"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245959" start="27114" end="27169" title="Thiotimoline" label="The Endochronic Properties of Resublimated Thiotimoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="27228" end="27240" title="dissertation" label="dissertation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="27359" end="27378" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="28120" end="28129" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q382862" start="28412" end="28429" title="Pebble in the Sky" label="Pebble in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q898113" start="28551" end="28569" title="Lucky Starr series" label="Lucky Starr novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616068" start="28717" end="28750" title="The Martian Way and Other Stories" label="The Martian Way and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574338" start="28791" end="28802" title="Gnome Press" label="Gnome Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q393018" start="28877" end="28885" title="I, Robot" label="I, Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="28906" end="28916" title="The Foundation Series" label="Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252893" start="29073" end="29095" title="The Rest of the Robots" label="The Rest of the Robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="29144" end="29150" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="29167" end="29196" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q979311" start="29354" end="29371" title="The Last Question" label="The Last Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="29466" end="29473" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q389750" start="29546" end="29565" title="The Gods Themselves" label="The Gods Themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q255032" start="29632" end="29636" title="Hugo Award for Best Novel" label="Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="29638" end="29644" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q595998" start="29650" end="29655" title="Locus Award for Best Novel" label="Locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="29690" end="29696" title="The Beatles" label="Beatle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="29697" end="29711" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q622988" start="30045" end="30050" title="Wings (band)" label="Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="30849" end="30878" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806997" start="30960" end="30995" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s SF Adventure Magazine" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s SF Adventure Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051459" start="31154" end="31190" title="Ellery Queen&amp;#x27;s Mystery Magazine" label="Ellery Queen&amp;#x27;s Mystery Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835184" start="31209" end="31249" title="Alfred Hitchcock&amp;#x27;s Mystery Magazine" label="Alfred Hitchcock&amp;#x27;s Mystery Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q932592" start="31400" end="31422" title="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Edge" label="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050014" start="31446" end="31466" title="Foundation and Earth" label="Foundation and Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q783533" start="31542" end="31563" title="Prelude to Foundation" label="Prelude to Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q938629" start="31587" end="31609" title="Forward the Foundation" label="Forward the Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16345" start="31656" end="31669" title="Leonard Nimoy" label="Leonard Nimoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243636" start="31724" end="31734" title="Primortals" label="Primortals"/>
<link wikidata="Q469862" start="32007" end="32020" title="The Naked Sun" label="The Naked Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q932592" start="32049" end="32071" title="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Edge" label="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q333352" start="32232" end="32277" title="Sputnik crisis" label="public concern over a &amp;quot;science gap&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920416" start="33019" end="33051" title="Venture Science Fiction Magazine" label="Venture Science Fiction Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q943878" start="33871" end="33914" title="The Intelligent Man&amp;#x27;s Guide to Science" label="The Intelligent Man&amp;#x27;s Guide to Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="33949" end="33968" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="33991" end="34001" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q215279" start="34202" end="34218" title="freelance writer" label="freelance writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="34540" end="34553" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="34727" end="34740" title="Floyd C. Gale" label="Floyd C. Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q840625" start="35454" end="35464" title="shibboleth" label="shibboleth"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="35618" end="35625" title="Ionization" label="ionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="35691" end="35696" title="Trade union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="35789" end="35797" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q928354" start="35828" end="35833" title="Liar! (short story)" label="Liar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936542" start="35953" end="35957" title="Gold (Asimov book)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="36201" end="36227" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074155" start="36274" end="36283" title="Runaround (story)" label="Runaround"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="36409" end="36417" title="positron" label="positron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="36451" end="36464" title="psychohistory (fictional)" label="psychohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="36478" end="36500" title="Foundation (book series)" label="&amp;quot;Foundation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="36562" end="36569" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="36571" end="36580" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q745328" start="36586" end="36609" title="mathematical statistics" label="mathematical statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="36708" end="36723" title="Galactic Empire (Asimov)" label="Galactic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456296" start="36895" end="36901" title="fix-up" label="fix-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q753894" start="36914" end="36924" title="Foundation (Isaac Asimov novel)" label="Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q764526" start="36963" end="36976" title="psychohistory" label="psychohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806995" start="37452" end="37489" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Chronology of the World" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Chronology of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348329" start="37524" end="37556" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Bible" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="37591" end="37604" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="37621" end="37634" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806996" start="38042" end="38076" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to Shakespeare" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q798399" start="38597" end="38611" title="Black Widowers" label="Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q204698" start="39262" end="39271" title="limerick (poetry)" label="limericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511577" start="39320" end="39339" title="Lecherous Limericks" label="Lecherous Limericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="39448" end="39451" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q947519" start="39510" end="39521" title="John Ciardi" label="John Ciardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="39556" end="39567" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlockian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="39595" end="39602" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402714" start="39618" end="39650" title="Azazel (Asimov)" label="Azazel, The Two Centimeter Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075902" start="39819" end="39836" title="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Treasury of Humor" label="Treasury of Humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12166565" start="39911" end="39923" title="Theory of humor" label="humor theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763306" start="40310" end="40328" title="The Sensuous Woman" label="The Sensuous Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763305" start="40364" end="40380" title="The Sensuous Man" label="The Sensuous Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q751722" start="40650" end="40667" title="sexual harassment" label="sexual harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086887" start="40819" end="40849" title="Autobiographies of Isaac Asimov" label="three volumes of autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q517435" start="41143" end="41155" title="Janet Asimov" label="Janet Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="41188" end="41198" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089950" start="41234" end="41260" title="It&amp;#x27;s Been a Good Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s Been a Good Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099099" start="41397" end="41405" title="Opus 100" label="Opus 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013085" start="41426" end="41434" title="Opus 200" label="Opus 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q96397617" start="41459" end="41467" title="Opus 300" label="Opus 300"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="41885" end="41894" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q191716" start="41909" end="41925" title="Gene Roddenberry" label="Gene Roddenberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="42110" end="42118" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q336059" start="42438" end="42464" title="science fiction on television" label="science fiction television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329260" start="42636" end="42651" title="calendar reform" label="calendar reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="43132" end="43150" title="honorary doctorate" label="honorary doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q617378" start="43214" end="43246" title="Worldcon" label="World Science Fiction Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="43256" end="43274" title="Thomas Alva Edison" label="Thomas Alva Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715879" start="43382" end="43401" title="Howard W. Blakeslee" label="Howard W. Blakeslee"/>
<link wikidata="Q464880" start="43417" end="43443" title="American Heart Association" label="American Heart Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="43486" end="43503" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="43554" end="43564" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="43646" end="43689" title="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="43719" end="43756" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="43770" end="43804" title="Science Fiction Writers of America" label="Science Fiction Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="43923" end="43948" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143927" start="43965" end="44027" title="James T. Grady-James H. Stack Award for Interpreting Chemistry" label="James T. Grady-James H. Stack Award for Interpreting Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="44090" end="44100" title="Foundation (book series)" label="Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q987744" start="44124" end="44154" title="Edward E. Smith Memorial Award" label="Edward E. Smith Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="44164" end="44168" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="AAAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="44169" end="44181" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44182" end="44224" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science#Awards and fellowships" label="Science Writing Award for Magazine Writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="44303" end="44325" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="44342" end="44369" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Nebula Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q389750" start="44380" end="44399" title="The Gods Themselves" label="The Gods Themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q255032" start="44415" end="44440" title="Hugo Award for Best Novel" label="Hugo Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q595998" start="44486" end="44512" title="Locus Award for Best Novel" label="Locus Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="44593" end="44615" title="Academy of Achievement" label="Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174253" start="44625" end="44646" title="Klumpke-Roberts Award" label="Klumpke-Roberts Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="44756" end="44767" title="Locus Award" label="Locus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880358" start="44805" end="44826" title="Before the Golden Age" label="Before the Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056265" start="44842" end="44871" title="Hugo Award for Best Novelette" label="Hugo Award for Best Novelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q468132" start="44882" end="44902" title="The Bicentennial Man" label="The Bicentennial Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q936683" start="44918" end="44949" title="Nebula Award for Best Novelette" label="Nebula Award for Best Novelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008964" start="44996" end="45026" title="Locus Award for Best Novelette" label="Locus Award for Best Novelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458116" start="45086" end="45097" title="5020 Asimov" label="5020 Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="45131" end="45142" title="Locus Award" label="Locus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086887" start="45179" end="45242" title="Autobiographies of Isaac Asimov" label="In Joy Still Felt: The Autobiography of Isaac Asimov, 1954–1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q255032" start="45258" end="45283" title="Hugo Award for Best Novel" label="Hugo Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q932592" start="45294" end="45316" title="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Edge" label="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q465035" start="45423" end="45443" title="Lifetime Achievement Award in Cultural Humanism" label="Humanist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="45457" end="45503" title="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q901462" start="45522" end="45539" title="SFWA Grand Master" label="SFWA Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="45570" end="45581" title="Locus Award" label="Locus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q583366" start="45613" end="45625" title="Robot Dreams (short story)" label="Robot Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056265" start="45641" end="45670" title="Hugo Award for Best Novelette" label="Hugo Award for Best Novelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578532" start="45681" end="45685" title="Gold (short story)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056237" start="45701" end="45737" title="Hugo Award for Best Non-Fiction Book" label="Hugo Award for Best Non-Fiction Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086887" start="45748" end="45767" title="Autobiographies of Isaac Asimov" label="I. Asimov: A Memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="45783" end="45794" title="Locus Award" label="Locus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086887" start="45831" end="45850" title="Autobiographies of Isaac Asimov" label="I. Asimov: A Memoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45948" end="45956" title="Foundation and Empire#The Mule" label="The Mule"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46055" end="46095" title="EMP Museum#Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="46183" end="46194" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397171" start="46296" end="46314" title="Hayden Planetarium" label="Hayden Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866656" start="46382" end="46388" title="Asimov (crater)" label="Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203236" start="46971" end="47006" title="New York State Writers Hall of Fame" label="New York State Writers Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="47024" end="47034" title="Hugo Award" label="Retro-Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q372968" start="47105" end="47111" title="Robbie (short story)" label="Robbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642742" start="47172" end="47193" title="Super Science Stories" label="Super Science Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="47232" end="47242" title="Hugo Award" label="Retro-Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47313" end="47323" title="Foundation (Asimov novel)#&amp;quot;The Encyclopedists&amp;quot;" label="Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="47350" end="47376" title="Astounding Science-Fiction" label="Astounding Science-Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q873506" start="47452" end="47457" title="index (publishing)" label="index"/>
<link wikidata="Q834191" start="47461" end="47472" title="proofreader" label="proofreader"/>
<link wikidata="Q278919" start="47478" end="47492" title="literary agent" label="literary agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531349" start="47711" end="47718" title="outline (list)" label="outline"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="47966" end="47980" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920795" start="48120" end="48144" title="Black Friar of the Flame" label="Black Friar of the Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q715505" start="48650" end="48660" title="James Gunn (author)" label="James Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071504" start="48759" end="48766" title="Nemesis (Isaac Asimov novel)" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073739" start="48928" end="48940" title="Susan Calvin" label="Susan Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="48988" end="49001" title="Arkady Darell" label="Arkady Darell"/>
<link wikidata="Q482085" start="49058" end="49076" title="The Caves of Steel" label="The Caves of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q289355" start="49088" end="49099" title="Hari Seldon" label="Hari Seldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210318" start="49337" end="49369" title="Dictionary of Literary Biography" label="Dictionary of Literary Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="49743" end="49749" title="Marcel Proust" label="Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q294625" start="50021" end="50038" title="Clifford D. Simak" label="Clifford D. Simak"/>
<link wikidata="Q847829" start="50170" end="50189" title="narrative structure" label="narrative structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q130788" start="50226" end="50239" title="Chronology" label="chronological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894685" start="50307" end="50319" title="Nonlinear (arts)" label="nonlinearity"/>
<link wikidata="Q737630" start="50648" end="50654" title="Reason (Asimov)" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q786615" start="50773" end="50794" title="The Currents of Space" label="The Currents of Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q435056" start="51312" end="51325" title="John W. Campbell" label="John Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q389750" start="51824" end="51843" title="The Gods Themselves" label="The Gods Themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="51905" end="51932" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Nebula Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q255032" start="51950" end="51975" title="Hugo Award for Best Novel" label="Hugo Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="52146" end="52156" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578532" start="52181" end="52185" title="Gold (short story)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q939559" start="52350" end="52365" title="photo-realistic" label="photo-realistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="52366" end="52384" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="52985" end="52995" title="Astounding" label="Astounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="53428" end="53449" title="extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q389750" start="53501" end="53520" title="The Gods Themselves" label="The Gods Themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296283" start="53588" end="53612" title="New Wave science fiction" label="New Wave science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="53837" end="53844" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="53852" end="53860" title="Humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133182" start="53945" end="53958" title="superstition" label="superstitious"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="53963" end="53979" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="54103" end="54119" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="54302" end="54307" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716022" start="54326" end="54342" title="Jewish mythology" label="Hebrew mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="54374" end="54379" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="54395" end="54410" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q75673" start="54451" end="54462" title="bar mitzvah" label="bar mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075902" start="54483" end="54500" title="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Treasury of Humor" label="Treasury of Humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="54599" end="54604" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="54610" end="54624" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="54626" end="54635" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="54829" end="54838" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348329" start="55044" end="55076" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Bible" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722384" start="55457" end="55468" title="List of Jewish atheists and agnostics" label="secular Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112002" start="55503" end="55512" title="Jack Dann" label="Jack Dann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967217" start="55563" end="55578" title="Wandering Stars (anthology)" label="Wandering Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="56218" end="56222" title="Hell" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285927" start="56256" end="56262" title="sadistic personality disorder" label="sadist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="56840" end="56856" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="56868" end="56876" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="56914" end="56921" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="56954" end="56965" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="57053" end="57068" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q306514" start="57344" end="57357" title="Abbie Hoffman" label="Abbie Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="57397" end="57423" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="1960s&amp;#x27; counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="57625" end="57638" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="57708" end="57717" title="Watergate" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="57847" end="57858" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="58118" end="58137" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="58188" end="58191" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="58448" end="58454" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="58570" end="58577" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915311" start="58657" end="58669" title="Jewish state" label="Jewish state"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="58716" end="58729" title="nation-states" label="nation-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031205" start="59216" end="59239" title="women&amp;#x27;s liberation" label="women&amp;#x27;s liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="59298" end="59317" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="59401" end="59414" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764961" start="59591" end="59609" title="population control" label="population control"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526" start="59663" end="59677" title="Thomas Malthus" label="Thomas Malthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q377983" start="59686" end="59701" title="Paul R. Ehrlich" label="Paul R. Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q605370" start="59727" end="59738" title="Bill Moyers" label="Bill Moyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068473" start="59756" end="59779" title="computer-aided learning" label="computer-aided learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093606" start="60052" end="60062" title="One to one computing" label="one-to-one"/>
<link wikidata="Q28606872" start="60371" end="60386" title="Alec Nevala-Lee" label="Alec Nevala-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q276304" start="61164" end="61177" title="Judith Merril" label="Judith Merril"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="61179" end="61193" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q312641" start="61198" end="61211" title="Frederik Pohl" label="Frederik Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350792" start="61326" end="61342" title="Edward L. Ferman" label="Edward L. Ferman"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="61370" end="61415" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="61603" end="61616" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q840847" start="61633" end="61650" title="Three Mile Island accident" label="Three Mile Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872409" start="61981" end="61991" title="Love Canal" label="Love Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q908553" start="62008" end="62021" title="Union Carbide" label="Union Carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q410431" start="62038" end="62055" title="methyl isocyanate" label="methyl isocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q129029" start="62099" end="62114" title="Bhopal disaster" label="Bhopal disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="62281" end="62300" title="white flight" label="middle-class flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110556" start="62439" end="62454" title="Our Angry Earth" label="Our Angry Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q312641" start="62529" end="62542" title="Frederik Pohl" label="Frederik Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q331439" start="62601" end="62615" title="human overpopulation" label="overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377164" start="62617" end="62631" title="oil dependence" label="oil dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="62633" end="62636" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="62638" end="62652" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="62681" end="62692" title="ozone layer" label="ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q605370" start="62728" end="62739" title="Bill Moyers" label="Bill Moyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="62966" end="62982" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="62999" end="63020" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q798399" start="63048" end="63062" title="Black Widowers" label="Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="63648" end="63662" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296283" start="63801" end="63809" title="New Wave science fiction" label="New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="64114" end="64130" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q109711" start="64196" end="64207" title="Park Avenue" label="Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="64838" end="64851" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="64865" end="64869" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="65729" end="65744" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="65863" end="65877" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Hercule Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="66026" end="66044" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207515" start="66154" end="66169" title="P. G. Wodehouse" label="P. G. Wodehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q677706" start="66245" end="66259" title="Martin Gardner" label="Martin Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="66473" end="66485" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="66499" end="66523" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Prize in Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="66557" end="66570" title="Psychohistory (fictional)" label="psychohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="66934" end="66950" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="66955" end="66966" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="67022" end="67042" title="Interdisciplinarity" label="interdisciplinarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662607" start="67149" end="67157" title="Synoptic philosophy" label="synoptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099099" start="67770" end="67778" title="Opus 100" label="Opus 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013085" start="67799" end="67807" title="Opus 200" label="Opus 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q96397617" start="67832" end="67840" title="Opus 300" label="Opus 300"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986926" start="68072" end="68106" title="West Virginia University Libraries" label="West Virginia University Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="69053" end="69071" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q988862" start="69238" end="69250" title="Elijah Baley" label="Elijah Baley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="69800" end="69818" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q728140" start="69827" end="69852" title="David Starr, Space Ranger" label="David Starr, Space Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q785014" start="69874" end="69918" title="Lucky Starr and the Pirates of the Asteroids" label="Lucky Starr and the Pirates of the Asteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q666538" start="69940" end="69975" title="Lucky Starr and the Oceans of Venus" label="Lucky Starr and the Oceans of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839004" start="69997" end="70035" title="Lucky Starr and the Big Sun of Mercury" label="Lucky Starr and the Big Sun of Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839002" start="70057" end="70093" title="Lucky Starr and the Moons of Jupiter" label="Lucky Starr and the Moons of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839001" start="70115" end="70150" title="Lucky Starr and the Rings of Saturn" label="Lucky Starr and the Rings of Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050465" start="70259" end="70284" title="Norby, the Mixed-Up Robot" label="Norby, the Mixed-Up Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="70835" end="70866" title="Foundation universe" label="&amp;quot;Foundation&amp;quot; universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q466196" start="70876" end="70895" title="The End of Eternity" label="The End of Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="70910" end="70919" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219171" start="70932" end="70948" title="Fantastic Voyage" label="Fantastic Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609948" start="70963" end="70975" title="Bantam Books" label="Bantam Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="70992" end="71008" title="Houghton Mifflin" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q389750" start="71058" end="71077" title="The Gods Themselves" label="The Gods Themselves"/>
<link wikidata="" start="71110" end="71148" title="Fantastic Voyage II: Destination Brain" label="Fantastic Voyage II: Destination Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071504" start="71262" end="71269" title="Nemesis (Asimov)" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138091" start="71318" end="71327" title="Nightfall (Asimov novelette and novel)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q314553" start="71358" end="71375" title="Robert Silverberg" label="Robert Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q21190269" start="71545" end="71564" title="The Ugly Little Boy" label="The Ugly Little Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297144" start="71618" end="71636" title="The Positronic Man" label="The Positronic Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q468132" start="71717" end="71737" title="The Bicentennial Man" label="The Bicentennial Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q864042" start="71891" end="71908" title="The Death Dealers" label="The Death Dealers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874472" start="71923" end="71933" title="Avon Books" label="Avon Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q568642" start="71982" end="72002" title="Walker &amp;amp; Company" label="Walker &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937708" start="72011" end="72028" title="Murder at the ABA" label="Murder at the ABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712561" start="72180" end="72207" title="Tales of the Black Widowers" label="Tales of the Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932353" start="72240" end="72272" title="More Tales of the Black Widowers" label="More Tales of the Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793479" start="72305" end="72335" title="Casebook of the Black Widowers" label="Casebook of the Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q772495" start="72368" end="72398" title="Banquets of the Black Widowers" label="Banquets of the Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772086" start="72431" end="72460" title="Puzzles of the Black Widowers" label="Puzzles of the Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795573" start="72493" end="72525" title="The Return of the Black Widowers" label="The Return of the Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046504" start="72540" end="72558" title="Carroll &amp;amp; Graf" label="Carroll &amp;amp; Graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q387878" start="72596" end="72619" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Mysteries" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744171" start="72652" end="72684" title="The Key Word and Other Mysteries" label="The Key Word and Other Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771551" start="72714" end="72738" title="The Union Club Mysteries" label="The Union Club Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991816" start="72771" end="72811" title="The Disappearing Man and Other Mysteries" label="The Disappearing Man and Other Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716746" start="72841" end="72875" title="The Best Mysteries of Isaac Asimov" label="The Best Mysteries of Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="73114" end="73157" title="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="73181" end="73199" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428677" start="73208" end="73222" title="Fact and Fancy" label="Fact and Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928763" start="73244" end="73262" title="View from a Height" label="View from a Height"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681163" start="73284" end="73302" title="Adding a Dimension" label="Adding a Dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q4328833" start="73324" end="73358" title="Of Time and Space and Other Things" label="Of Time and Space and Other Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385758" start="73380" end="73400" title="From Earth to Heaven" label="From Earth to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933553" start="73422" end="73445" title="Science, Numbers, and I" label="Science, Numbers, and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765145" start="73467" end="73492" title="The Solar System and Back" label="The Solar System and Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932955" start="73514" end="73540" title="The Stars in Their Courses" label="The Stars in Their Courses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746627" start="73562" end="73591" title="The Left Hand of the Electron" label="The Left Hand of the Electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263364" start="73613" end="73636" title="The Tragedy of the Moon" label="The Tragedy of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934361" start="73845" end="73871" title="Of Matters Great and Small" label="Of Matters Great and Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932941" start="73985" end="74012" title="The Planet That Wasn&amp;#x27;t" label="The Planet That Wasn&amp;#x27;t"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269416" start="74125" end="74155" title="Quasar, Quasar, Burning Bright" label="Quasar, Quasar, Burning Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932174" start="74177" end="74197" title="The Road to Infinity" label="The Road to Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767357" start="74219" end="74240" title="The Sun Shines Bright (book)" label="The Sun Shines Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177161" start="74262" end="74279" title="Counting the Eons" label="Counting the Eons"/>
<link wikidata="Q260711" start="74301" end="74321" title="X Stands for Unknown" label="X Stands for Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767139" start="74343" end="74364" title="The Subatomic Monster" label="The Subatomic Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263034" start="74386" end="74412" title="Far as Human Eye Could See" label="Far as Human Eye Could See"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760107" start="74434" end="74457" title="The Relativity of Wrong" label="The Relativity of Wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111753" start="74600" end="74621" title="Out of the Everywhere" label="Out of the Everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763173" start="74643" end="74669" title="The Secret of the Universe" label="The Secret of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094305" start="74742" end="74757" title="Only a Trillion" label="Only a Trillion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74830" end="74846" title="Is Anyone There?" label="Is Anyone There?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578933" start="74934" end="74939" title="spome" label="spome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74955" end="74978" title="Today and Tomorrow and—" label="Today and Tomorrow and—"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75074" end="75088" title="Please Explain" label="Please Explain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871370" start="75206" end="75222" title="Prometheus Books" label="Prometheus Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75576" end="75597" title="The Chemicals of Life (book)" label="The Chemicals of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795366" start="75612" end="75627" title="Abelard-Schuman" label="Abelard-Schuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893361" start="75637" end="75652" title="Inside the Atom" label="Inside the Atom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75693" end="75724" title="Building Blocks of the Universe" label="Building Blocks of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75779" end="75798" title="The World of Carbon (book)" label="The World of Carbon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75839" end="75860" title="The World of Nitrogen (book)" label="The World of Nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75901" end="75945" title="Words of Science and the History Behind Them" label="Words of Science and the History Behind Them"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="75960" end="75976" title="Houghton Mifflin" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75986" end="76006" title="The Clock We Live On (book)" label="The Clock We Live On"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76047" end="76071" title="Breakthroughs in Science" label="Breakthroughs in Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76113" end="76129" title="Realm of Numbers" label="Realm of Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76171" end="76187" title="Realm of Measure" label="Realm of Measure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76227" end="76250" title="The Wellsprings of Life" label="The Wellsprings of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545043" start="76291" end="76306" title="Life and Energy" label="Life and Energy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76341" end="76357" title="The Genetic Code" label="The Genetic Code"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76396" end="76439" title="The Human Body: Its Structure and Operation" label="The Human Body: Its Structure and Operation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76492" end="76537" title="The Human Brain: Its Capacities and Functions (book)" label="The Human Brain: Its Capacities and Functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="76607" end="76622" title="Stephen H. Dole" label="Stephen H. Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="76632" end="76644" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="76659" end="76663" title="RAND" label="RAND"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76681" end="76719" title="An Easy Introduction to the Slide Rule" label="An Easy Introduction to the Slide Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q943878" start="76761" end="76804" title="The Intelligent Man&amp;#x27;s Guide to Science" label="The Intelligent Man&amp;#x27;s Guide to Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034881" start="76819" end="76830" title="Basic Books" label="Basic Books"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76961" end="77000" title="The Universe: From Flat Earth to Quasar (book)" label="The Universe: From Flat Earth to Quasar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77032" end="77044" title="The Neutrino (book)" label="The Neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753278" start="77070" end="77074" title="ASIN" label="ASIN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77094" end="77147" title="Understanding Physics Vol. I, Motion, Sound, and Heat" label="Understanding Physics Vol. I, Motion, Sound, and Heat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77179" end="77243" title="Understanding Physics Vol. II, Light, Magnetism, and Electricity" label="Understanding Physics Vol. II, Light, Magnetism, and Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77275" end="77340" title="Understanding Physics Vol. III, The Electron, Proton, and Neutron" label="Understanding Physics Vol. III, The Electron, Proton, and Neutron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77372" end="77386" title="Photosynthesis (book)" label="Photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77423" end="77441" title="Our World in Space (book)" label="Our World in Space"/>
<link wikidata="" start="77483" end="77531" title="Eyes on the Universe: A History of the Telescope" label="Eyes on the Universe: A History of the Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77578" end="77601" title="The Collapsing Universe (book)" label="The Collapsing Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678790" start="77633" end="77663" title="Extraterrestrial Civilizations" label="Extraterrestrial Civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936267" start="77764" end="77787" title="Visions of the Universe" label="Visions of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77816" end="77831" title="Kazuaki Iwasaki" label="Kazuaki Iwasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421414" start="77863" end="77897" title="Exploring the Earth and the Cosmos" label="Exploring the Earth and the Cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77928" end="77955" title="The Measure of the Universe" label="The Measure of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="77995" end="78056" title="Think About Space: Where Have We Been and Where Are We Going?" label="Think About Space: Where Have We Been and Where Are We Going?"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78113" end="78162" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Chronology of Science and Discovery" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Chronology of Science and Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075879" start="78305" end="78349" title="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to Earth and Space" label="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to Earth and Space"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78419" end="78476" title="Mysteries of Deep Space: Quasars, Pulsars and Black Holes" label="Mysteries of Deep Space: Quasars, Pulsars and Black Holes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78499" end="78516" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s Moon (Asimov)" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522979" start="78531" end="78545" title="Gareth Stevens" label="Gareth Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78566" end="78581" title="Richard Hantula" label="Richard Hantula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78591" end="78598" title="The Sun (Asimov)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78648" end="78663" title="Richard Hantula" label="Richard Hantula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78673" end="78682" title="The Earth (Asimov)" label="The Earth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78757" end="78764" title="Jupiter (Asimov)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78839" end="78844" title="Venus (Asimov)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806996" start="78972" end="79006" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to Shakespeare" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245187" start="79075" end="79083" title="Don Juan (Byron)" label="Don Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754" start="79141" end="79154" title="Paradise Lost" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q181488" start="79263" end="79286" title="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels" label="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="79344" end="79364" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="79446" end="79462" title="Houghton Mifflin" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348329" start="79532" end="79564" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Bible" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="79846" end="79855" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089950" start="80013" end="80039" title="It&amp;#x27;s Been a Good Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s Been a Good Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871370" start="80053" end="80069" title="Prometheus Books" label="Prometheus Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q517435" start="80155" end="80175" title="Janet Asimov" label="Janet Jeppson Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="80212" end="80228" title="Houghton Mifflin" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806995" start="81076" end="81113" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Chronology of the World" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Chronology of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="81128" end="81141" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806995" start="81152" end="81178" title="The March of the Millennia" label="The March of the Millennia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075902" start="81352" end="81389" title="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Treasury of Humor" label="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Treasury of Humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="81404" end="81420" title="Houghton Mifflin" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511577" start="81431" end="81450" title="Lecherous Limericks" label="Lecherous Limericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q947519" start="81706" end="81717" title="John Ciardi" label="John Ciardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="81830" end="81843" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099099" start="82029" end="82037" title="Opus 100" label="Opus 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385073" start="82079" end="82144" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Biographical Encyclopedia of Science and Technology" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Biographical Encyclopedia of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013085" start="82202" end="82210" title="Opus 200" label="Opus 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q96397617" start="82331" end="82339" title="Opus 300" label="Opus 300"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110556" start="82381" end="82396" title="Our Angry Earth" label="Our Angry Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q312641" start="82453" end="82466" title="Frederik Pohl" label="Frederik Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470689" start="82530" end="82537" title="I Robot (album)" label="I Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q533478" start="82564" end="82588" title="the Alan Parsons Project" label="the Alan Parsons Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730121" start="82673" end="82693" title="The Dick Cavett Show" label="The Dick Cavett Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521987" start="82734" end="82754" title="The Nature of Things" label="The Nature of Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="82770" end="82778" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="82791" end="82800" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q312641" start="82813" end="82822" title="Fred Pohl" label="Fred Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q435920" start="82839" end="82850" title="Rod Serling" label="Rod Serling"/>
<link wikidata="Q380865" start="82853" end="82864" title="David Frost" label="David Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112475" start="83076" end="83087" title="BBC Horizon" label="BBC Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q310343" start="83144" end="83156" title="Dudley Moore" label="Dudley Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="83244" end="83247" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346696" start="83295" end="83307" title="Edwin Newman" label="Edwin Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q529276" start="83350" end="83362" title="Studs Terkel" label="Studs Terkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q950762" start="83367" end="83381" title="Calvin Trillin" label="Calvin Trillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q944102" start="83508" end="83516" title="Gandahar (film)" label="Gandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q958483" start="83573" end="83584" title="René Laloux" label="René Laloux"/>
<link wikidata="Q605370" start="83639" end="83650" title="Bill Moyers" label="Bill Moyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793685" start="83762" end="83775" title="The Dead Past" label="The Dead Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202549" start="83789" end="83800" title="Sucker Bait" label="Sucker Bait"/>
<link wikidata="Q716005" start="83814" end="83837" title="Satisfaction Guaranteed (short story)" label="Satisfaction Guaranteed"/>
<link wikidata="Q737630" start="83851" end="83857" title="Reason (short story)" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q928354" start="83871" end="83876" title="Liar! (short story)" label="Liar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q469862" start="83894" end="83907" title="The Naked Sun" label="The Naked Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111800" start="84036" end="84054" title="Out of the Unknown" label="Out of the Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630352" start="84185" end="84199" title="telerecordings" label="telerecordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695708" start="84201" end="84211" title="Tele-snaps" label="Tele-snaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620383" start="84617" end="84640" title="Antonio Lara de Gavilán" label="Antonio Lara de Gavilán"/>
<link wikidata="Q928354" start="84669" end="84674" title="Liar! (short story)" label="Liar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139882" start="84748" end="84761" title="András Rajnai" label="András Rajnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q466196" start="84784" end="84803" title="The End of Eternity" label="The End of Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q809082" start="84875" end="84886" title="Barry Morse" label="Barry Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q21190269" start="84936" end="84955" title="The Ugly Little Boy" label="The Ugly Little Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4230743" start="84970" end="84989" title="The End of Eternity (film)" label="The End of Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210856" start="85092" end="85101" title="Nightfall (1988 film)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371817" start="85133" end="85148" title="Paul Mayersberg" label="Paul Mayersberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353465" start="85199" end="85205" title="Robots (1988 film)" label="Robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q913482" start="85276" end="85300" title="Robot series" label="&amp;quot;Robot&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267181" start="85309" end="85319" title="Robot City (video game)" label="Robot City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="85337" end="85351" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="85365" end="85372" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q43627" start="85377" end="85383" title="Mac OS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170250" start="85546" end="85562" title="Bicentennial Man (film)" label="Bicentennial Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079" start="85594" end="85608" title="Chris Columbus (filmmaker)" label="Chris Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q468132" start="85635" end="85655" title="The Bicentennial Man" label="The Bicentennial Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297144" start="85681" end="85699" title="The Positronic Man" label="The Positronic Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073378" start="85714" end="85723" title="Nightfall (2000 film)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85755" end="85768" title="Gwyneth Gibby" label="Gwyneth Gibby"/>
<link wikidata="Q200572" start="85819" end="85827" title="I, Robot (film)" label="I, Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q259687" start="85859" end="85870" title="Alex Proyas" label="Alex Proyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q158474" start="85965" end="85974" title="Eagle Eye" label="Eagle Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000825" start="86055" end="86084" title="All the Troubles of the World" label="All the Troubles of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q864042" start="86192" end="86209" title="The Death Dealers" label="The Death Dealers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647714" start="86324" end="86347" title="Spell My Name with an S" label="Spell My Name with an S"/>
<link wikidata="Q56281007" start="86362" end="86372" title="Foundation (TV series)" label="Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q352010" start="86405" end="86419" title="David S. Goyer" label="David S. Goyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288874" start="86424" end="86437" title="Josh Friedman" label="Josh Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="86458" end="86468" title="Foundation (book series)" label="Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="86666" end="86682" title="Houghton Mifflin" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086887" start="86694" end="86713" title="In Memory Yet Green" label="In Memory Yet Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="87243" end="87248" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction" label="IASFM"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14575" wikidata="Q230055" url="?curid=14575" title="Izabella Scorupco">
<text>Izabella Scorupco (born Izabela Dorota Skorupko; 4 June 1970) is a Polish-Swedish actress, singer and model. She is best known for having played a Bond girl, Natalya Simonova, in the 1995 James Bond film &quot;GoldenEye&quot;. She is also known for her cover of the Shirley &amp; Company song &quot;Shame, Shame, Shame&quot; which was released in 1992 and became a European hit.

==Life==
Scorupco was born to Lech, a musician, and Magdalena Skorupko, a doctor, in Białystok, Poland, in 1970. When she was one year old, her parents separated, and she remained with her mother. In 1978, they moved to Bredäng in Stockholm, Sweden, where Scorupco learned to speak Swedish, English and French.

On 25 December 1996, Scorupco married Polish ice hockey player Mariusz Czerkawski. They had one daughter together, Julia (born 16 September 1997). They divorced in 1998.

On 30 January 2003, Scorupco married an American, Jeffrey Raymond; they have a son, Jakob (born 24 July 2003). They divorced in 2015. She now lives in Los Angeles and New York City. Since 2017, Scorupco has been in a relationship with Karl Rosengren. They married on 6 October 2019. In 2014, Scorupco became an American citizen.

==Career==
In the late 1980s, Scorupco travelled throughout Europe working as a model, and appeared on the cover of &quot;Vogue&quot;. In 1987, she was discovered by director Staffan Hildebrand and starred in the film &quot;Ingen kan älska som vi&quot; (&quot;Nobody can love like us&quot;). In the early 1990s, she had a brief but successful career as a pop singer, releasing the album &quot;IZA&quot;, which was certified gold in Sweden in 1991. Her 1992 cover version of &quot;Shame, Shame, Shame&quot; was a hit in several European countries.

In 2011, Scorupco reprised her singing career, duetting with Swedish musician Peter Jöback in his single &quot;Jag Har Dig Nu&quot; and featuring in the song&#x27;s music video. She also starred in Jöback&#x27;s short extension film &quot;La vie, L&#x27;amour, La mort&quot;. Scorupco went on to host the spring 2012 series of &quot;Sweden&#x27;s Next Top Model&quot; but did not continue it for a second series.

Scorupco moved into comedy in July 2013 when she was named to a lead role in a Swedish romantic comedy film, &quot;Micke &amp; Veronica&quot;, alongside David Hellenius. It premiered on 25 December 2014.

==Filmography==
==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Singles===
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q230055" start="0" end="17" title="Izabella Scorupco" label="Izabella Scorupco"/>
<link wikidata="Q230055" start="24" end="47" title="Izabella Scorupco" label="Izabela Dorota Skorupko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649366" start="147" end="156" title="Bond girl" label="Bond girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q951379" start="158" end="174" title="Natalya Simonova" label="Natalya Simonova"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="188" end="198" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q19089" start="210" end="219" title="GoldenEye" label="GoldenEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q603044" start="266" end="287" title="Shirley &amp;amp; Company" label="Shirley &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="299" end="318" title="Shame, Shame, Shame (Shirley &amp;amp; Company song)#Izabella Scorupco version" label="Shame, Shame, Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="465" end="474" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316371" start="600" end="607" title="Bredäng" label="Bredäng"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="737" end="747" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607588" start="755" end="773" title="Mariusz Czerkawski" label="Mariusz Czerkawski"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="1315" end="1320" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979678" start="1586" end="1589" title="IZA (album)" label="IZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="1607" end="1621" title="gold album" label="certified gold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1673" end="1692" title="Shame, Shame, Shame (Shirley &amp;amp; Company song)#Izabella Scorupco version" label="Shame, Shame, Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q767041" start="1819" end="1831" title="Peter Jöback" label="Peter Jöback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818684" start="2074" end="2102" title="Sweden&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model" label="Sweden&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234881" start="2308" end="2323" title="David Hellenius" label="David Hellenius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14579" wikidata="Q252" url="?curid=14579" title="Indonesia">
<text>Indonesia, officially the Republic of Indonesia, is a country in Southeast Asia and Oceania, between the Indian and Pacific oceans. Comprising over 17,000 islands, including Sumatra, Java, Sulawesi, and parts of Borneo and New Guinea, Indonesia is the world&#x27;s largest archipelagic state and the 14th-largest country by area, at . With over 280 million people, Indonesia is the world&#x27;s fourth-most-populous country and the most populous Muslim-majority country. Java, the world&#x27;s most populous island, is home to more than half of the country&#x27;s population.

Indonesia operates as a presidential republic with an elected legislature and consists of 38 provinces, nine of which have special autonomous status. Jakarta, the largest city, is the world&#x27;s second-most-populous urban area. Indonesia shares with Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste, and the eastern part of Malaysia, as well as maritime borders with Singapore, Peninsular Malaysia, Vietnam, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, Palau, and India. Despite its large population and densely populated regions, Indonesia has vast areas of wilderness that support one of the world&#x27;s highest levels of biodiversity.

The Indonesian archipelago has been a valuable region for trade since at least the seventh century, when Sumatra&#x27;s Srivijaya and later Java&#x27;s Majapahit kingdoms engaged in commerce with entities from mainland China and the Indian subcontinent. Over the centuries, local rulers assimilated foreign influences, leading to the flourishing of Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms. Sunni traders and Sufi scholars later brought Islam, and European powers fought one another to monopolise trade in the Spice Islands of Maluku during the Age of Discovery. Following three and a half centuries of Dutch colonialism, Indonesia secured its independence after World War II and has since faced challenges such as separatism, corruption, and natural disasters, alongside democratisation and rapid economic growth.

Indonesian society comprises hundreds of ethnic and linguistic groups, with Javanese being the largest. The nation&#x27;s identity is unified under the motto &quot;Bhinneka Tunggal Ika&quot;, defined by a national language, cultural and religious pluralism, a history of colonialism and rebellion against it. A newly industrialised country, Indonesia&#x27;s economy ranks as the world&#x27;s 16th-largest by nominal GDP and the 8th-largest by PPP. As the world&#x27;s third-largest democracy and a middle power in global affairs, the country is a member of several multilateral organisations, including the United Nations, World Trade Organization, G20, BRICS and a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement, Association of Southeast Asian Nations, East Asia Summit, APEC and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.

== Etymology ==
The name &quot;Indonesia&quot; derives from the Greek words () and (), meaning &quot;Indian islands&quot;. The name dates back to the 19th century, far predating the formation of independent Indonesia. In 1850, George Windsor Earl, an English ethnologist, proposed the terms &quot;Indunesians&quot;—and, his preference, &quot;Malayunesians&quot;—for the inhabitants of the &quot;Indian Archipelago or Malay Archipelago&quot;. In the same publication, one of his students, James Richardson Logan, used &quot;Indonesia&quot; as a synonym for &quot;Indian Archipelago&quot;. Dutch academics writing in East Indies publications were reluctant to use &quot;Indonesia&quot;. They preferred &quot;Malay Archipelago&quot; (); the &quot;Netherlands East Indies&quot; (), popularly ; &quot;the East&quot; (); and .

After 1900, &quot;Indonesia&quot; became more common in academic circles outside the Netherlands, and native nationalist groups adopted it for political expression. Adolf Bastian of the University of Berlin popularised the name through his book . The first native scholar to use the name was Ki Hajar Dewantara when in 1913, he established a press bureau in the Netherlands, .

== History ==
=== Early history ===
The Indonesian archipelago has been inhabited since the time of &quot;homo erectus&quot; or &quot;Java Man,&quot; with fossils dating back 2 million to 500,000 BCE. Fossils of &quot;homo floresiensis&quot;, found on Flores, date around 700,000 to 60,000 BCE, while &quot;homo sapiens&quot; arrived around 43,000 BCE. Sulawesi and Borneo are home to the world&#x27;s oldest known cave paintings, dating back 40,000 to 60,000 years, and megalithic sites such as western Java&#x27;s &quot;Gunung Padang&quot;, Sulawesi&#x27;s &quot;Lore Lindu&quot; as well as Sumatra&#x27;s Nias and Sumba reflect early human settlements and ceremonial practices.

Around 2,000 BCE, Austronesian peoples began arriving in Southeast Asia from the island now known as Taiwan, gradually displacing native Melanesians to the far eastern part of the archipelago as they spread east, and would eventually form the majority of Indonesia&#x27;s modern population. Favorable agricultural conditions and advancements like wet-field rice cultivation by the 8th century BCE enabled the growth of villages and kingdoms by the first century CE. The archipelago&#x27;s strategic location fostered inter-island and international exchange with civilisations from the Indian subcontinent and mainland China, profoundly influencing Indonesian history and culture through trade.

By the 7th century CE, the Srivijaya naval kingdom thrived on trade, adopting Hindu and Buddhist influences. The 8th to 10th centuries saw the rise and decline of the Buddhist Sailendra and Hindu Mataram dynasties, leaving monumental legacies like the Borobudur and Prambanan temples. Majapahit, a Hindu kingdom established in the late 13th century in eastern Java, dominated much of the archipelago under the leadership of Gajah Mada in a period often referred to as the &quot;Golden Age&quot; in Indonesian history. Islam arrived in the 13th century in northern Sumatra, and following gradual adoption in other islands, it became the dominant religion in Java and Sumatra by the 16th century, blending with pre-existing traditions to form a distinct Islamic culture, particularly in Java.

=== Colonial era ===
In 1512, Europeans began arriving in the archipelago led by Portuguese traders under Francisco Serrão to seek monopoly of the lucrative spice trade in the Maluku Islands. Dutch and British traders soon followed, with the former establishing the Dutch East India Company (&quot;Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie&quot;, VOC) in 1602 that eventually became the dominant European power for almost two centuries. After the VOC&#x27;s dissolution in 1799 due to bankruptcy, the Dutch East Indies was established as a nationalised colony, marking the beginning of formal colonial rule by the Netherlands. Over the next century and a half, Dutch control over the archipelago was tenuous, as they faced continuous rebellions from local leaders like Prince Diponegoro in central Java, Imam Bonjol in central Sumatra, Pattimura in Maluku, and fighters in Aceh. Dutch dominance only extended to Indonesia&#x27;s modern boundaries in the early 20th century, with the establishment of Dutch posts in New Guinea.

The Japanese invasion and occupation of the Indies during World War II ended Dutch rule and encouraged Indonesia&#x27;s independence movement. Only two days after Japan&#x27;s surrender in August 1945, Sukarno and Mohammad Hatta issued the Proclamation of Indonesian Independence, and they became the country&#x27;s first president and vice-president along with Sutan Sjahrir as Prime Minister. The Netherlands attempted to re-establish their rule, prompting the start of Indonesia&#x27;s war of independence against the Dutch. The conflict lasted until 1949 when the Dutch recognised Indonesian independence in the Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference following international pressure. Despite political, social, and sectarian divisions, Indonesians found unity in their fight for independence.

=== Post-World War II ===
Sukarno shifted Indonesia from democracy to authoritarianism and maintained power by balancing the opposing forces of political Islam, the military, and the Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI). Tensions between the latter two culminated in an attempted coup in 1965, leading to a violent anti-communist purge led by the army&#x27;s Major General Suharto that killed at least 500,000 people and imprisoned around a million more. The PKI was blamed for the coup and destroyed, weakening Sukarno&#x27;s power. Suharto capitalised on this, becoming president in 1968 and establishing a US-backed &quot;New Order&quot; administration, which fostered foreign direct investment and drove three decades of substantial economic growth.

Indonesia was the worst affected country by the 1997 Asian financial crisis, bringing out widespread discontent with the New Order&#x27;s corruption and political suppression and ultimately ended Suharto&#x27;s presidency. In 1999, East Timor seceded after a controversial 25-year occupation following Indonesia&#x27;s 1975 invasion. Since 1998, Indonesia has strengthened democracy by granting regional autonomy and holding the first direct presidential election in 2004.

Political, economic and social instability, and terrorism were persistent in the 2000s. The economy has performed strongly since 2007, although corruption continues to be a chronic issue. Relations among the diverse population are mostly harmonious but sectarian discontent and violence remain problematic in some areas. A political settlement to an armed insurgency in Aceh was achieved in 2005.

== Geography ==
The southernmost country in Asia, Indonesia lies between latitudes 11°S and 6°N and longitudes 95°E and 141°E. It is also a transcontinental country, spanning Southeast Asia and Oceania and is the world&#x27;s largest archipelagic state, stretching from east to west and from north to south. The exact number Indonesia&#x27;s islands varies according to different sources, usually ranging from 13,000 to 17,000, and with around 922 permanently inhabited. Its five largest islands are Sumatra, Java, Borneo (shared with Brunei and Malaysia), Sulawesi, and New Guinea (shared with Papua New Guinea).

The country features diverse topography, including towering mountains, vast lakes, and extensive river systems. Puncak Jaya, at , is Indonesia&#x27;s highest peak, while Lake Toba in Sumatra, covering , is the largest lake. The country&#x27;s major rivers, primarily in Kalimantan and New Guinea, include the Kapuas, Barito, Mamberamo, Sepik and Mahakam, serving as vital transportation and communication routes for remote riverine communities.

=== Climate ===
Indonesia&#x27;s equatorial position ensures a relatively stable climate year-round, characterised by two main seasons: dry season from May to October and wet season from November to April, with no extremes of summer and winter. The climate is predominantly tropical rainforest, with cooler climates in mountainous areas over above sea level. The oceanic climate (Köppen &quot;Cfb&quot;) prevails in highland areas adjacent to rainforest climates, with uniform precipitation year-round. In highland areas near the tropical monsoon and tropical savanna climates, the subtropical highland climate (Köppen &quot;Cwb&quot;) is more pronounced during dry season. There is a variation in rainfall patterns, with regions like western Sumatra, Java, and the interiors of Kalimantan and Papua receiving more precipitation, while areas closer to Australia, such as Nusa Tenggara, are drier. The warm waters covering 81% of Indonesia&#x27;s area keep land temperatures stable, with high humidity (70-90%) and moderate, predictable winds influenced by monsoon cycles. Major weather hazards include strong currents in straits, such as the Lombok and Sape Straits, rather than typhoons or storms.
Several studies consider Indonesia to be at severe risk from the projected effects of climate change, including a temperature rise of by 2050 due to unreduced emissions. This warming could intensify droughts, disrupt rainfall patterns critical to agriculture, and increase occurrences of food shortages, diseases, and wildfires. Rising sea levels would also threaten the country&#x27;s densely populated coastal regions, and impoverished communities are expected to be disproportionately affected by climate change.

=== Geology ===
Indonesia&#x27;s geology is shaped by its position on the Pacific Ring of Fire, where the Indo-Australian and Pacific plates subduct beneath the Eurasian plate where they melt at about deep. This tectonic activity makes the region highly unstable with volcanoes and earthquakes. A chain of volcanoes stretches from Sumatra through Java, Bali and the Lesser Sunda Islands, and the Banda Islands of Maluku to northeastern Sulawesi. Of the 400 volcanoes, around 130 are active. While volcanic ash has made agriculture unpredictable in some areas, it has also created fertile soils that have historically sustained the high population densities of Java and Bali. Between 1972 and 1991, Java experienced a total of 29 volcanic eruptions.

The archipelago has witnessed several powerful volcanic eruptions with global repercussions. A massive supervolcano erupted with a maximum volcanic explosivity index (VEI) of 8 at present-day Lake Toba around 74,000 BCE, causing a global volcanic winter, a cooling of the climate and possibly influencing human evolution. The eruption of Mount Tambora in 1815, the most recently confirmed VEI-7 eruption, made much of the Northern Hemisphere without summer in 1816, caused 92,000 deaths and produced vast volcanic ash that blanketed nearby areas. The eruption of Mount Krakatoa in 1883, a VEI-6 eruption, produced the loudest sound in recorded history and caused 36,000 deaths due to the eruption itself and tsunamis, with additional effects around the world years after the event. Recent catastrophic disasters due to seismic activity include the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and the 2006 Yogyakarta earthquake.

=== Biodiversity ===

Recognised by Conservation International as one of 17 megadiverse countries, Indonesia hosts one of the world&#x27;s highest levels of biodiversity due to its tropical climate, large size, and archipelagic geography. The country&#x27;s flora and fauna include a mix of Asian and Australasian species. The Sunda Shelf islands (Sumatra, Java, and Borneo) have a wealth of Asian fauna as they were once linked to mainland Asia, while Sulawesi, Lesser Sunda Islands, Maluku and Papua evolved unique ecosystems due to their separation from the continental landmasses. Papua, once part of the Australian landmass, is home to over 600 bird species closely related to Australia. Indonesia is second only to Australia in total endemic species, with 6% of its 1,531 species of bird and 39% of its 515 species of mammal being endemic.

The country also boasts of coastline, featuring diverse sea and coastal ecosystems, such as dunes and mangroves, as well as coral reefs in the Coral Triangle that harbour the highest diversity of coral reef fish globally, with more than 1,650 species in eastern Indonesia. The Wallace Line, described by English naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace, marks the biogeographical divide between Asian and Australasian species, with the region between the Wallace and Weber Lines (called Wallacea) hosting unique biodiversity as described in Wallace&#x27;s 1869 book, &quot;The Malay Archipelago&quot;. Indonesia&#x27;s extensive forests, comprising 83% of Southeast Asia&#x27;s old-growth forest, are deemed crucial for the region&#x27;s ecological balance and carbon storage.

Indonesia faces severe environmental challenges due to extensive deforestation, peatland destruction, and over-exploitation of resources, driven by industries such as logging, plantations and agriculture since the 1970s, and in most recent years, palm oil. Forest cover declined from 87% in 1950 to 48% in 2022, highlighting the country as a leading forest-based emitter of greenhouse gases. These issues are often given a lower priority due to high poverty levels and weak, under-resourced governance. They also threaten indigenous and endemic species, with the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) listing many as critically endangered, such as the Bali myna, Sumatran orangutan, and Javan rhinoceros. Environmental degradation has prompted some academics to label these activities as ecocide.

=== Conservation ===
As of 2023, Indonesia has designated 21.3% of its land as protected areas and aims to align its strategy with the 2022 Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework. Additionally, 411 marine reserves account for 9% of the country&#x27;s maritime area, with a target to increase this to 30% by 2045. However, a recent study highlights that the current efforts are off track and existing marine reserves are poorly managed. Approximately 390 marine areas are managed by government bodies, communities, and other sectors, with potential for classification as other effective area-based conservation measures (OECMs), though there is no national mechanism for reporting them.

Indonesia&#x27;s conservation framework includes 55 national parks, covering around 9% of the country&#x27;s surface area. Among these, nine are predominantly marine parks, with six recognised as World Heritage Sites, seven as part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves and five wetlands of international importance under the 1971 Ramsar Convention. Notably, Indonesia has over 100 marine protected areas spanning 15.7 million hectares as of 2012 managed by the Ministry of Forestry and local governments. Previous targets included reaching 20 million hectares by 2020 under former President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono&#x27;s 2009 initiative and 10% of territorial waters, or 31 million hectares.

== Government and politics ==

Indonesia is a republic with a presidential system. Following the fall of the New Order in 1998, sweeping constitutional reforms has restructured the executive, legislative, and judicial branches while maintaining its unitary state framework despite the push to decentralise powers to regional entities. The President serves as head of state, head of government, and commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces (&quot;Tentara Nasional Indonesia&quot;, TNI) and overseeing domestic and foreign policies. Presidents may serve up to two consecutive five-year terms.

The People&#x27;s Consultative Assembly (&quot;Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat&quot;, MPR) is Indonesia&#x27;s highest representative body, responsible for amending the constitution, inaugurating or impeaching the president, and formalising state policies. It consists of two houses, the People&#x27;s Representative Council (&quot;Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat&quot;, DPR), which has 575 members and handles legislation and executive oversight, and the Regional Representative Council (&quot;Dewan Perwakilan Daerah&quot;, DPD) with 136 members, which focuses on regional matters. Since 1998, reforms have significantly enhanced the DPR&#x27;s governance role, while the DPD represents Indonesia&#x27;s diverse regional interests.

Indonesia&#x27;s judiciary includes several key institutions. The Supreme Court (&quot;Mahkamah Agung&quot;) is the highest judicial authority, handling final appeals and case reviews. The Constitutional Court (&quot;Mahkamah Konstitusi&quot;) addresses constitutional and political matters, while the Religious Court (&quot;Pengadilan Agama&quot;) oversees Islamic personal law cases. Additionally, the Judicial Commission (&quot;Komisi Yudisial&quot;) monitors judicial performance.

=== Parties and elections ===


Indonesia has had a multi-party system since 1999 where no political party has won a majority of seats in the legislative elections. Political parties are broadly categorised into two groups, secular and nationalist parties such as the Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P), the Party of the Functional Groups (&quot;Golkar&quot;), and the Great Indonesia Movement Party (&quot;Gerinda&quot;), and Islamic parties such as the National Awakening Party (PKB) and Prosperous Justice Party (PKS). Indonesia&#x27;s political spectrum is characterised by preference for pragmatism over ideological adherence to fit the prevailing political climate, as well as by what is called cartel parties, with extensive power-sharing among parties and limited accountability to voters. Pre-election alliances are also the norm, which is unlike in many democracies where the reverse case are common.

In 1955, the first general election was held to elect members of the DPR and the Constitutional Assembly (&quot;Konstituante&quot;). The most recent elections in 2024 brought eight political parties to the DPR, with a parliamentary threshold of 4% of the national vote. At the national level, Indonesians did not elect a president until 2004. Since then, the president is elected for a five-year term, as are the party-aligned members of the DPR and the non-partisan DPD. Beginning with the 2015 local elections, elections for governors and mayors have occurred on the same date. In 2013, the Constitutional Court ruled that legislative and presidential elections would be held simultaneously, starting in 2019.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Indonesia is divided into several administrative levels. At the first level are the provinces, each with a legislature (&quot;Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Daerah&quot;, DPRD) and an elected governor. The number of provinces has grown from 8 in 1945 to 38 today, with the most recent one, Southwest Papua, established in 2022. The second level includes regencies (&quot;kabupaten&quot;) and cities (&quot;kota&quot;), led by regents (&quot;bupati&quot;) and mayors (&quot;walikota&quot;), respectively, both supported by legislatures (&quot;DPRD Kabupaten/Kota&quot;). Below this are districts (&quot;kecamatan&quot;, called &quot;distrik&quot; in Papua), and the fourth level comprises villages, known by various names like &quot;desa&quot;, &quot;kelurahan&quot;, &quot;kampung&quot;, &quot;nagari&quot; (in West Sumatra), or &quot;gampong&quot; (in Aceh). Villages are subdivided into community groups (&quot;rukun warga&quot;, RW) and neighbourhood groups (&quot;rukun tetangga&quot;, RT), with further subdivisions like hamlets (&quot;dusun&quot; or &quot;dukuh&quot;) in Java.

The village level is the lowest administrative unit but holds significant influence over daily life. Village governments are led by elected heads (&quot;lurah&quot; or &quot;kepala desa&quot;) and handle local matters. Since the implementation of regional autonomy in 2001, regencies and cities have become key administrative units, responsible for most government services. Nine provinces—Aceh, Jakarta, Yogyakarta, Papua, Central Papua, Highland Papua, South Papua, Southwest Papua, and West Papua—are granted a special autonomous status (&quot;otonomi khusus&quot;) from the central government. A conservative Islamic territory, Aceh has the right to apply aspects of sharia law. Yogyakarta uniquely retains its pre-colonial monarchy, with its Sultan and Duke serving as governor and vice governor and the Papuan provinces are the only ones where indigenous people hold privileges in local governance.


=== Foreign relations ===

Indonesia follows an &quot;independent and active&quot; (&quot;bebas aktif&quot;) foreign policy, a term coined by founding father Mohammad Hatta in 1948 by which the country aims to navigate great power politics, maintain autonomy and avoid alignment with major powers. The President holds the ultimate authority in determining foreign policy directions while the Foreign Affairs Ministry is responsible for formulating and implementing foreign policy. Meanwhile, the Parliament (DPR) provides oversight and ratifies international treaties. Indonesia is considered to be a middle power internationally.

As the largest country in Southeast Asia and a founding member of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Indonesia puts ASEAN as the cornerstone of its foreign policy. Indonesia has actively supported Palestine while refraining from formal diplomatic relations with Israel, though the two countries maintain discreet ties. In the past decade and a half, Indonesia has built deep relations with China, primarily relating to substantial investments in infrastructure and trade, while at the same time maintaining a strategic partnership with the United States, focusing on economic cooperation, security, and counterterrorism efforts.

Indonesia has been a member of the United Nations since 1950 and is a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the East Asia Summit. Indonesia is also a signatory to the ASEAN Free Trade Area agreement, the Cairns Group, and the World Trade Organization (WTO). Indonesia has been a humanitarian and development aid recipient since 1967 but it has established an overseas aid programme of its own in 2019. The country also plays a role in maintaining international peace and security, deploying thousands of military and police personnel to multiple United Nations peacekeeping missions since 1957, including in Lebanon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Mali.

=== Military ===


The Indonesian National Armed Forces (TNI) consist of the Army (TNI-AD), Navy (TNI-AL) (including the Marine Corps), and Air Force (TNI-AU), with the Army comprising around 400,000 active personnel. Established during the Indonesian National Revolution, the TNI initially engaged in guerrilla warfare alongside informal militias. Its territorial structure focuses on maintaining domestic stability and deterring foreign threats. Though political reforms in 1998 removed TNI&#x27;s formal legislative role, it continues to wield political influence, albeit reduced from its peak during the New Order. Defence spending in 2022 was 0.7% of GDP, with controversies surrounding military-owned commercial ventures.

Since independence, Indonesia has struggled to maintain unity against separatist movements and insurgencies, notably in Aceh and Papua. While the former ended peacefully in 2005, the latter has continued amid an implementation of regional autonomy and well-documented human rights abuses by the TNI, including extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances and restrictions on freedom of expression, as reported by Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, and the UNHRC. Indonesia&#x27;s historical military engagements include conflicts with the Netherlands over Dutch New Guinea, opposition to the British-backed creation of Malaysia (&quot;Konfrontasi&quot;), the anti-communist mass killings, and the invasion of East Timor, which was Indonesia&#x27;s largest military operation.

=== Law enforcement and human rights ===
Law enforcement in Indonesia is primarily handled by the Indonesian National Police (POLRI), supported by other agencies under the president, ministries, or state-owned companies. These agencies perform specific policing duties and are supervised and trained by the POLRI, which serves as the country&#x27;s national civilian police force responsible for maintaining law and order.

Indonesia has a documented history of racial discrimination and conflicts, particularly against Chinese Indonesians and Papuans, which has at times escalated into violence, notably the anti-Chinese riots in 1998 and the ongoing Papua conflict since 1962. Other minorities such as the LGBTQ also face challenges, where a rapid surge of anti-LGBTQ rhetoric has been observed since the mid-2010s after a relative obscurity on the topic in the decades prior. Discrimination against religious minorities is also common.

Issues regarding free speech and the right to assembly are prevalent despite constitutional protections. Laws such as the Electronic Information and Transactions (&quot;Informasi dan Transaksi Elektronik&quot;, ITE) Law are often used to criminalise dissent, with critics and activists facing charges for expressing opinions online. Peaceful protests, particularly those addressing sensitive issues such as indigenous rights in Papua or environmental concerns, are frequently met with a heavy-handed response from law enforcement. The government on occasions imposes restrictions on assembly permits, particularly for those critical of authorities or advocating rights.

== Economy ==


Indonesia operates a mixed economy where both the private sector and the government play significant roles. As the only G20 member state in Southeast Asia, it has the region&#x27;s largest economy and is classified as a newly industrialised country. In 2024, its nominal GDP was , ranking 16th globally, while its GDP at purchasing power parity (PPP) was , ranking 8th. Per capita GDP in PPP is , while nominal per capita GDP is . Based on 2022 data, services dominate the economy in terms employment (48.8%), followed by agriculture (29.2%) and industry (21.8%), while in terms of share of GDP, both services and industry dominate (roughly 41% each), with agriculture coming second (12.4%).

The economic structure has shifted significantly over time, transitioning from agriculture in the 1950s and 1960s to gradual industrialisation and urbanisation from the late 1960s to the 1980s. Falling oil prices in the 1980s prompted diversification into manufactured exports, resulting in substantial economic growth (the GDP rose at an average rate of 7.1%) and poverty reduction from 60% to 15%. However, the economy took a severe hit during the Asian economic crisis in the late 1990s, when the GDP fell by 13%, inflation reached 78% and GDP grew by only 0.8% in 1999. The economy began recovering in the early 2000s, with growth rates between 4% and 6% from 2004 to 2024 along with prudent banking regulations, better monetary and fiscal policies and flexible exchange rates. These factors, coupled with strong domestic consumption, helped Indonesia weather the 2008 financial crisis. Although the COVID-19 pandemic in the early 2020s caused a recession, the economy rebounded within a year.

Indonesia boasts abundant natural resources, including nickel, coal, and petroleum, which dominate its export portfolio. It imports refined and crude petroleum, and vehicle parts, with major trade partners including China, the United States, Japan, Singapore, India, Malaysia, South Korea, and Thailand. Owing to plentiful rainfall, sunshine and fertile soil, Indonesia is a major agricultural country, ranking among the leading producers of palm oil, rubber, coffee, tea, cassava, rice, wheat, coconut oil, and tobacco. Despite these resources and decades of development, disparities in wealth, employment and economic opportunities persist between densely populated and economically advantaged regions in the western islands like Java and Sumatra, and sparsely populated, underdeveloped areas in the east like Maluku and Papua.

=== Tourism ===
Tourism plays a significant role in Indonesia&#x27;s economy, contributing to GDP and drawing 11.6 million international visitors in 2023. Australia, Singapore, Malaysia, China and India are the top five sources of visitors to Indonesia.

The tourism industry thrives on Indonesia&#x27;s natural and cultural wealth. The country boasts a well-preserved natural ecosystem, with rainforests covering 57% of its land area (225 million acres). Popular natural destinations include the rainforests of Sumatra and Kalimantan, particularly the Orangutan wildlife reserves. Indonesia also has one of the world&#x27;s longest coastlines, stretching . Cultural tourism features prominently, with attractions like the ancient Borobudur and Prambanan temples, the Toraja highlands, and the traditional festivities of Bali.

Indonesia is home to ten UNESCO World Heritage Sites, including Komodo National Park and the Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta. Additionally, 18 other sites are on the tentative list, such as Bunaken National Park and the Raja Ampat Islands. Historical tourism is also a major draw, with attractions like the colonial heritage of the Dutch East Indies in Jakarta and Semarang, as well as the royal palaces of Pagaruyung and Ubud.

=== Science and technology ===
Government spending on research and development is relatively low at 0.28% of GDP in 2020. Despite being ranked 54th among 133 countries on the 2024 Global Innovation Index, the country performs above expectations for its upper middle-income status. Historical innovations include &quot;terasering&quot;, the terracing techniques for rice cultivation, and the &quot;pinisi&quot; boats of the Bugis and Makassar people. In the 1980s, Tjokorda Raka Sukawati developed the Sosrobahu road construction technique that is now used internationally. Indonesia also produces passenger trains and freight wagons through its state-owned Indonesian Railway Industry (&quot;Industri Kereta Api&quot;, INKA), which exports trains abroad.

Indonesia has a history of manufacturing military and commuter aircraft and is the only country in Southeast Asia to do so. Its state-owned aerospace company, Indonesian Aerospace (&quot;PT. Dirgantara Indonesia&quot;, PTDI), has supplied components to Boeing and Airbus and co-developed the CN-235 with Spain&#x27;s CASA. Former President B. J. Habibie, who was an aerospace engineer before getting into politics, played a key role in advancing the country&#x27;s aerospace research. Recently, Indonesia has been collaborating with South Korea on the 4.5-generation fighter jet KAI KF-21 Boramae.

Indonesia&#x27;s space program, managed by the National Institute of Aeronautics and Space (&quot;Lembaga Penerbangan dan Antariksa Nasional&quot;, LAPAN), launched its first satellite in 1976 (Palapa) with assistance from the United States, making Indonesia the first developing country with a satellite system. As of 2024, Indonesia has launched 19 satellites for communication and other purposes. Recently, the government licensed Starlink to provide internet connectivity to rural and underserved regions.

== Infrastructure ==
=== Transport ===

Indonesia&#x27;s transport system reflects its archipelagic geography and population distribution heavily concentrated on Java. In 2022, the predominant road network spanned , which includes Transjakarta that operates the world&#x27;s longest bus rapid transit system. Common urban transport includes rickshaws like &quot;bajaj&quot; and &quot;becak&quot; and shared taxis such as &quot;angkot&quot; and minibuses.
Railways are primarily located in Java and parts of Sumatra and Sulawesi, serving freight and passenger transport, including commuter and inter-city rail services like those in the Greater Jakarta and Yogyakarta. In the late 2010s, rapid transit systems were introduced in Jakarta and Palembang, with more planned for other cities. Indonesia, in collaboration with China, inaugurated its first high-speed rail called &quot;Whoosh&quot; in 2023 that connects Jakarta and Bandung. It was the first such system in Southeast Asia and the Southern Hemisphere.

Air and sea transport also play significant roles. Soekarno–Hatta International Airport, Indonesia&#x27;s largest, served 49 million passengers in 2023, followed by Ngurah Rai and Juanda International Airports. Garuda Indonesia, the national flag carrier since 1949, is one of the world&#x27;s leading airlines and a member of the global airline alliance SkyTeam. The Port of Tanjung Priok, the country&#x27;s busiest and most advanced, handles over half of Indonesia&#x27;s trans-shipment cargo traffic.

=== Energy ===
Indonesia is a major energy producer and consumer, producing and consuming worth of energy in 2023. The country&#x27;s total installed power generation capacity in 2022 is approximately 83.8 gigawatts (GW), primarily from coal (61%). Other significant sources include natural gas, oil, and renewables such as geothermal, hydropower, and solar. The state-owned State Electricity Company (&quot;Perusahaan Listrik Negara&quot;, PLN) holds a monopoly on electric power distribution in the country.

Indonesia&#x27;s energy mix is still dominated by non-renewable sources, with coal being the majority, followed by natural gas and oil. Renewables, including geothermal (5%), hydropower (7%), and solar (1%), make up a smaller but growing share. The potential for renewable energy is immense, particularly in geothermal, where the country ranks as one of the world&#x27;s largest producers. The country is the world&#x27;s largest producer and exporter of thermal coal and a significant exporter of liquefied natural gas (LNG).

The government plans to transition towards greener energy sources and achieve net-zero carbon emissions by 2060. In the latest energy plan in early 2025, the government aims for a 71-gigawatt expansion in power capacity by 2034, with a focus on renewables. However, the country has insufficient infrastructure for renewable energy, faces difficulties in providing electricity access to remote areas, and continues to rely heavily on coal.

== Demographics ==

The 2020 census recorded Indonesia&#x27;s population as 270.2 million, the fourth largest in the world, with a moderately high population growth rate of 1.25%. Java is the world&#x27;s most populous island, where 56% of the country&#x27;s population lives. The population density is , ranking 88th in the world, although Java has a population density of . In 1961, the first post-colonial census recorded a total of 97 million people. It is expected to grow to around 295 million by 2030 and 321 million by 2050. The country currently has a relatively young population, with a median age of 31.5 years (2024 estimate).

The spread of the population is uneven throughout the archipelago, with a varying habitats and levels of development, ranging from the megacity of Jakarta to uncontacted tribes in Papua. As of 2022, about 58% of the population lives in urban areas. Jakarta is the country&#x27;s primate city and the second-most populous urban area globally, with over 34 million residents. About 8 million Indonesians live overseas; most settled in Malaysia, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia.
===Ethnic groups and languages===

Indonesia is home to around 600 distinct native ethnic groups, predominantly descended from Austronesian peoples speaking Proto-Austronesian languages, likely from modern-day Taiwan. The Melanesians, who inhabit eastern Indonesia, represent another significant ethnic grouping. The Javanese, making up 40% of the population, are the largest ethnic group and the politically dominant one, primarily residing in central and eastern Java, with sizeable numbers in other provinces. Other major groups include the Sundanese, Malay, Batak, Madurese, Betawi, Minangkabau, and Bugis. A sense of Indonesian nationhood exists alongside strong regional identities.

The official language, Indonesian, is a variant of Malay based on its prestige dialect, which became the archipelago&#x27;s &quot;lingua franca&quot; over the course of centuries. It was first promoted by nationalists in the 1920s and gained official status in 1945, following independence, under the name &quot;Bahasa Indonesia&quot;, and has since been widely adopted due to its use in education, media, business, and governance. While nearly all Indonesians speak &quot;Bahasa&quot;, most also speak one of over 700 local languages, often as their first language. These are predominantly from the Austronesian family, with over 270 Papuan languages in eastern Indonesia. Javanese is the most widely spoken local language, and it holds co-official status in Yogyakarta.

The Dutch and other European-descended populations like the Indos, though significant during colonial times, always represented a small fraction of the population, numbering only around 200,000 in 1930. The Dutch language never gained substantial traction due to the Dutch colonial focus on commerce rather than cultural integration. Dutch fluency exists today in small numbers among some older generations and legal professionals, as specific legal codes remain available only in that language.

=== Religion ===
Indonesia officially recognises six religions: Islam, Protestantism, Roman Catholicism, Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism—while also acknowledging indigenous religions for administrative purposes and religious freedom in the constitution. As of 2023, 87.1% of the population (244 million Indonesians), are Muslims, making Indonesia the world&#x27;s most populous Muslim-majority country, with Sunnis constituting 99% of the Muslim population. Christians, comprising 10% of the population, form majorities in several eastern provinces, while Hindus and Buddhists are primarily Balinese and Chinese Indonesians, respectively.
Before the arrival of major world religions, Indonesia&#x27;s natives practised animism and dynamism, worshiping ancestral spirits and believing in the supernatural (&quot;hyang&quot;) inhabiting natural elements, such as large trees, mountains and forests. Such beliefs are common to the Austronesian peoples. These indigenous traditions, such as Sundanese Sunda Wiwitan, Javanese Kejawèn and Dayak&#x27;s Kaharingan, have profoundly influenced modern religious practices, resulting in a less orthodox and syncretic form of faith like Javanese abangan, Balinese Hinduism and Dayak Christianity.
Hinduism reached the archipelago in the 1st century CE, followed by Buddhism in the 6th century. Both religions shaped Indonesia&#x27;s religious history through influential empires like Majapahit, Srivijaya, and Sailendra, leaving a lasting cultural impact that remains today despite both no longer being the majority. Islam arrived as early as the 8th century through Sunni and Sufi traders from the Indian subcontinent and southern Arabian peninsula, mixing with local cultural and religious traditions to form a distinct Islamic culture (&quot;santri&quot;). By the 16th century, Islam had become the dominant religion on Java and Sumatra, resulting from the combination of trade, &quot;dawah&quot; such as by the Wali Sanga and Chinese explorer Zheng He, and military campaigns by several sultanates.
Catholicism and Protestantism were later introduced through missionary efforts during European colonisation, such as by Jesuit Francis Xavier, though the spread of the former faced challenges under the policies of VOC and the Dutch colonial era. The latter&#x27;s primary branches include Calvinism and Lutheranism, though a multitude of other denominations exist in the country. A small Jewish presence has existed in the archipelago, primarily descendants of Dutch and Iraqi Jews, though their numbers have dwindled since independence in 1945. Only a few Jews remain today, mostly in major cities like Jakarta, Manado and Surabaya. One of the remaining synagogues, Sha&#x27;ar Hashamayim, is located in Tondano, North Sulawesi, which is around 31 km from Manado.
Interfaith relations in Indonesia are significantly shaped by political leadership and civil society, guided by the first principle of Pancasila, which emphasises belief in a supreme deity and religious tolerance. While the principle promotes harmony, religious intolerance continues to be a recurring issue. Religion is central to the lives of the overwhelming majority of Indonesians, which reflects its integral role in the country&#x27;s society, culture and identity.

=== Education ===
Indonesia has one of the largest education systems in the world, with over 50 million students, 4 million teachers, and more than 250,000 schools spanning the archipelago. Overseen by the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, the Ministry of Higher Education, Science, and Technology and the Ministry of Religious Affairs for Islamic schools, the system follows a 6-3-3-4 structure: six years of elementary school, three years each of junior and senior secondary school, and four years of tertiary education. While literacy rates are high (96%), it is lower in rural and remote areas. Enrolment rates vary across educational levels, with near-universal enrolment in primary education (97.9%), but drop to 81.7% and 64.2% in lower and upper secondary education and to around 42.6% for tertiary education.

Government spending on education accounts for approximately 3.6% of GDP in 2022. In the same year, there are 4,481 higher education institutions in the country, including universities, Islamic institutions and open universities. University of Indonesia, Gadjah Mada University, and the Bandung Institute of Technology are the top three universities in the country, all of which rank within the world&#x27;s top 300 universities.

Issues regarding quality and equity are persistent, in particular urban-rural disparities, inadequate school infrastructure, and a lack of qualified teachers. The system also lags behind in international benchmarks, such as the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) where Indonesian students consistently rank near the bottom in reading, mathematics, and science. The higher education sector has been struggling with underfunding, low quality, limited research output and a mismatch between graduates&#x27; skills and labour market needs.

=== Healthcare ===
Indonesia has made significant progress in developing its healthcare system since 1945. Initially, healthcare services were limited, with a shortage of doctors, hospitals, and infrastructure. In the late 1960s, the government began establishing community health centres (&quot;puskesmas&quot;) to provide basic services in rural areas. With the help from the World Health Organization in the 1970s and 1980s, Indonesia implemented an immunisation program to combat diseases like polio and measles. The system experienced a major transformation in 2014 with the launch of &quot;Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional&quot; (JKN), a universal health care managed by the Social Security Agency on Health (&quot;BPJS Kesehatan&quot;). It is one of the world&#x27;s largest single-payer systems, covering over 83% of the population (225.9 million) in 2021.

Government spending on healthcare accounts for 3.71% of GDP in 2021. Primary healthcare is delivered through &quot;puskesmas&quot;, hospitals, and private clinics. While the healthcare system lags behind those in ASEAN neighbours like Malaysia and Singapore, significant public health outcomes have been achieved, such as life expectancy increase (from 54.9 years in 1973 to 71.1 years in 2023), child mortality decline (from 15.5 deaths per 100 live births in 1972 to 2.1 deaths in 2022), polio eradication in 2014, and decreasing cases of malaria.

Some chronic health issues persist, including child stunting that affects 21.6% of children under five according to a 2022 data. Low air quality, particularly in major cities, contributes to respiratory illnesses, while maternal and child health indicators remain areas of concern, with a maternal mortality rate the third highest in the region. Additionally, Indonesia has one of the highest smoking rates globally (34.8% of adults), contributing to a high prevalence of non-communicable diseases like cardiovascular issues and lung cancer.

== Culture ==
The cultural history of Indonesia spans over two thousand years, influenced by the Indian subcontinent, China, the Middle East, Europe, Melanesian, and Austronesian peoples. These influences have shaped the country&#x27;s multicultural, multilingual, and multi-ethnic identity, distinct from its indigenous roots. Indonesia holds 16 items recognised by UNESCO as Intangible Cultural Heritage, including wayang puppet theatre, batik, angklung, the saman dance, and pencak silat. Recent joint nominations added pantun, kebaya, and kolintang to the list.

=== Art and architecture ===


Indonesian arts encompasses traditional and contemporary forms shaped by influences from India, the Arab world, China, and Europe, driven by cultural exchange and trade. Bali&#x27;s artistic traditions, such as classical Kamasan and Wayang-style painting, are renowned, originating from visual narratives depicted on candi bas-reliefs from eastern Java. Traditional architecture reflects ethnic diversity, with iconic and traditional houses (&quot;rumah adat&quot;) like Toraja&#x27;s &quot;Tongkonan&quot;, Minangkabau&#x27;s &quot;Rumah Gadang&quot;, Java&#x27;s &quot;Pendopo&quot;, and Dayak longhouses each showcasing unique customs and histories. Other traditional crafts, including carpentry and masonry, showcase intricate decorations and techniques passed down through generations.

Discoveries of megalithic sculptures led to the flourishing of tribal art among the Nias, Batak, Asmat, Dayak, and Toraja communities, who utilised wood and stone as primary sculpting materials. From the 8th to 15th centuries, the Javanese civilisation excelled in sophisticated stone sculpting and architecture, heavily influenced by the Hindu-Buddhist Dharmic culture. This period produced monumental works like the Borobudur and Prambanan temples, which today remain celebrated as masterpieces of Indonesia&#x27;s sophisticated artistic and architectural heritage.

=== Music, dance and clothing ===

Indonesia&#x27;s musical heritage predates historical records, with indigenous tribes using chants and traditional instruments like the angklung, gamelan, and sasando in rituals. Influences from other cultures have enriched Indonesian music, such as the gambus and qasida from the Middle East, keroncong from Portugal, and dangdut (one of the country&#x27;s most popular music genres), which incorporates Hindi, Malay, and Middle Eastern elements. Today, Indonesian music enjoys regional popularity in Malaysia, Singapore, and Brunei due to cultural similarities and language intelligibility.
With over 3,000 traditional dances, Indonesian dance forms have its origins in rituals and religious worship, such as a dance of witch doctors and Hudoq, as well as periods of Hindu-Buddhist and Islamic influence. While modern and urban dances shaped by Western, Japanese, and South Korean cultures are growing in popularity, traditional dances like those of Java, Bali, and Dayak remain a living tradition.

Indonesia&#x27;s rich cultural history is also reflected in its diverse clothing styles, with national costumes like batik and kebaya being widely recognised, which have its roots in Javanese, Sundanese and Balinese cultures. Traditional attire varies by region and by each province, such as the Batak ulos, Malay and Minangkabau songket, and Sasak ikat, and is commonly worn for ceremonies, weddings, and formal events.

=== Theatre and cinema ===


Traditional Indonesian theatre, such as wayang shadow puppetry often depicts Hindu epics like the Ramayana and Mahabharata. Other forms of dramas, such as &quot;Ludruk&quot;, &quot;Ketoprak&quot;, &quot;Sandiwara&quot;, &quot;Lenong&quot; and Balinese dance dramas often incorporate humour, music, and audience interaction. Unique traditions like the Minangkabau &quot;Randai&quot; combine music, dance, and martial arts (&quot;silat&quot;), telling semi-historical legends during traditional ceremonies and festivals. Modern theatre, exemplified by &quot;Teater Koma&quot;, addresses social and political themes through satire.
The first film produced in the archipelago was &quot;Loetoeng Kasaroeng&quot; (1926), a silent film by Dutch director L. Heuveldorp, and the film industry expanded post-independence with Usmar Ismail&#x27;s pioneering work in the 1950s. During the latter part of Sukarno era in the 1960s, films were used to promote nationalism and anti-Western sentiment, while Suharto&#x27;s New Order imposed censorship to maintain social order. Film productions peaked in the 1980s with notable titles such as &quot;Pengabdi Setan&quot; (1980), &quot;Tjoet Nja&#x27; Dhien&quot; (1988) and &quot;Warkop&quot; comedy films, but the industry declined in the next decade.

In the post-Suharto era, the industry saw a resurgence, and independent filmmakers tackled previously censored themes like race, religion and love, producing notable films such as &quot;Petualangan Sherina&quot; (2000) and &quot;Ada Apa dengan Cinta?&quot; (2002) and &quot;Laskar Pelangi&quot; (2008). The 2022 film &quot;KKN di Desa Penari&quot; set box office records, becoming the most-watched Indonesian film with 9.2 million tickets sold. The Indonesian Film Festival (&quot;Festival Film Indonesia&quot;), awarding the Citra Award, has celebrated cinematic achievements since 1955.

=== Mass media and literature ===

Media freedom in Indonesia significantly improved after the fall of Suharto&#x27;s rule, during which media was tightly controlled by the Ministry of Information. The television landscape shifted from a monopoly by public broadcaster TVRI (1962–1989) to a competitive market with national and provincial networks. By the 21st century, television signals have reached every village, offering up to 11 channels. Private radio stations provide news, while foreign broadcasters offer diverse programming. Print publications also expanded significantly after 1998. Indonesia&#x27;s internet development began in the early 1990s, with the first commercial Internet service provider, PT. Indo Internet, starting operations in 1994. By 2018, the country had 171 million internet users, primarily aged 15 to 19, who accessed the internet mostly through mobile phones rather than computers. Internet penetration continues to grow annually.
Indonesian literature has roots in Sanskrit inscriptions from the 5th century and a strong oral tradition, while early modern literature originates in Sumatran tradition. Traditional forms such as &quot;syair&quot;, &quot;pantun&quot;, &quot;hikayat&quot;, and &quot;babad&quot; dominate early prose and poetry, with notable works such as &quot;Syair Abdul Muluk&quot;, &quot;Hikayat Hang Tuah&quot;, &quot;Sulalatus Salatin&quot;, and &quot;Babad Tanah Jawi&quot;. The establishment of &quot;Balai Pustaka&quot; in 1917 marked a push to develop indigenous literature, leading to a literary Golden Age in the 1950s and 1960s. Influenced by the dynamics of the country&#x27;s political and social landscape, modern literature includes works from notable figures like Chairil Anwar, Pramoedya Ananta Toer, and Ayu Utami.

== Cuisine ==
Indonesian cuisine has many regional cuisines, often based upon indigenous culture and foreign influences such as Chinese, African, European, Middle Eastern, and Indian precedents. Rice is the leading staple food and is served with side dishes of meat and vegetables. Spices (notably chili), coconut milk, fish, and chicken are fundamental ingredients.

Some popular dishes such as &quot;nasi goreng&quot;, &quot;gado-gado&quot;, &quot;mie ayam&quot;, &quot;bakso&quot;, &quot;sate&quot;, and &quot;soto&quot; are ubiquitous and considered national dishes. The Ministry of Tourism, however, chose &quot;tumpeng&quot; as the official national dish in 2014, describing it as binding the diversity of various culinary traditions. Other popular dishes include &quot;rendang&quot;, one of the many Minangkabau cuisines along with &quot;dendeng&quot; and &quot;gulai&quot;. Another fermented food is &quot;oncom&quot;, similar in some ways to &quot;tempeh&quot; but uses a variety of bases (not only soy), created by different fungi, and is prevalent in West Java.
== Sports ==

Badminton and football are the most popular sports in Indonesia. Indonesia is among the few countries that have won the Thomas and Uber Cup, the world team championship of men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s badminton. Along with weightlifting, it is the sport that contributes the most to Indonesia&#x27;s Olympic medal tally. Liga 1 is the country&#x27;s premier football club league. On the international stage, Indonesia was the first Asian team to participate in the FIFA World Cup in 1938 as the Dutch East Indies. On a regional level, Indonesia won a bronze medal at the 1958 Asian Games as well as three gold medals at the 1987, 1991, and 2023 Southeast Asian Games (SEA Games). Indonesia&#x27;s first appearance at the AFC Asian Cup was in 1996.

Other popular sports include boxing and basketball, which were part of the first National Games (&quot;Pekan Olahraga Nasional&quot;, PON) in 1948. &quot;Sepak takraw&quot; and &quot;karapan sapi&quot; (bull racing) in Madura are some examples of Indonesia&#x27;s traditional sports. In areas with a history of tribal warfare, mock fighting contests are held, such as &quot;caci&quot; in Flores and &quot;pasola&quot; in Sumba. &quot;Pencak silat&quot; is an Indonesian martial art that, in 2018, became one of the sporting events in the Asian Games, with Indonesia appearing as one of the leading competitors. In Southeast Asia, Indonesia topped the SEA Games medal table ten times since 1977, most recently in 2011.

== See also ==

* List of Indonesia-related topics
* Index of Indonesia-related articles
* Outline of Indonesia

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Winters, Jeffrey A. &quot;Oligarchy and democracy in Indonesia.&quot; in &quot;Beyond Oligarchy&quot; (Cornell UP, 2014) pp. 11–34. online 


== External links ==

* Indonesia. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Indonesia from BBC News
* Key Development Forecasts for Indonesia from International Futures

Government
* Minister of The State Secretary 
* Statistics Indonesia
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members 

General information
* Indonesia &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Indonesia &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;
* 
* Official site of Indonesian Tourism</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="0" end="9" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="26" end="47" title="Indonesia" label="Republic of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="65" end="79" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="84" end="91" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="105" end="111" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="116" end="123" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142361" start="148" end="162" title="List of islands of Indonesia" label="17,000 islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="174" end="181" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="183" end="187" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="189" end="197" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="212" end="218" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="223" end="233" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107770" start="273" end="291" title="archipelagic state" label="archipelagic state"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="300" end="328" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="14th-largest country by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="395" end="423" title="List of countries and dependencies by population" label="fourth-most-populous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q42590" start="446" end="469" title="Islam by country" label="Muslim-majority country"/>
<link wikidata="Q911018" start="494" end="514" title="List of islands by population" label="most populous island"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="601" end="622" title="Presidential system" label="presidential republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q818711" start="639" end="650" title="People&amp;#x27;s Consultative Assembly" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098" start="667" end="679" title="Provinces of Indonesia" label="38 provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="700" end="725" title="Autonomous administrative division" label="special autonomous status"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="727" end="734" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496553" start="774" end="805" title="List of largest cities" label="second-most-populous urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="829" end="845" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="847" end="858" title="Timor-Leste" label="Timor-Leste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901211" start="868" end="892" title="East Malaysia" label="eastern part of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="905" end="920" title="maritime border" label="maritime border"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="927" end="936" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="938" end="957" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Peninsular Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="959" end="966" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="968" end="976" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="982" end="993" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="995" end="1004" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="1006" end="1011" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1017" end="1022" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="1147" end="1190" title="Megadiverse countries" label="world&amp;#x27;s highest levels of biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q49332" start="1197" end="1219" title="Nusantara (term)" label="Indonesian archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="1251" end="1256" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="1313" end="1322" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="1345" end="1354" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="1375" end="1383" title="commerce" label="commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="1403" end="1417" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="1426" end="1445" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578725" start="1542" end="1547" title="Hinduism in Indonesia" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514699" start="1552" end="1560" title="Buddhism in Indonesia" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="1571" end="1576" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="1589" end="1593" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q141770" start="1617" end="1622" title="Islam in Indonesia" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="1707" end="1713" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="1725" end="1741" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1783" end="1800" title="Dutch East Indies#History" label="Dutch colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661772" start="1820" end="1836" title="Proclamation of Indonesian Independence" label="its independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1843" end="1855" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q491776" start="1952" end="1967" title="Post-Suharto era in Indonesia" label="democratisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83828" start="2037" end="2043" title="Ethnic groups in Indonesia" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584565" start="2048" end="2058" title="Languages of Indonesia" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49209" start="2072" end="2080" title="Javanese people" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q145327" start="2160" end="2180" title="Bhinneka Tunggal Ika" label="Bhinneka Tunggal Ika"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="2201" end="2218" title="Indonesian language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="2267" end="2278" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="2307" end="2335" title="newly industrialised country" label="newly industrialised country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610285" start="2354" end="2361" title="economy of Indonesia" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="2388" end="2415" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="16th-largest by nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="2424" end="2442" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="8th-largest by PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322988" start="2494" end="2506" title="middle power" label="middle power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2603" end="2617" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2619" end="2643" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="2645" end="2648" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q243630" start="2650" end="2655" title="BRICS" label="BRICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="2685" end="2705" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="2707" end="2745" title="ASEAN" label="Association of Southeast Asian Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="2747" end="2763" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="2765" end="2769" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="APEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="2778" end="2813" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2880" end="2885" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546435" start="3043" end="3062" title="George Windsor Earl" label="George Windsor Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="3075" end="3086" title="ethnology" label="ethnologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="3233" end="3250" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383023" start="3304" end="3326" title="James Richardson Logan" label="James Richardson Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="3560" end="3583" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Netherlands East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q58793" start="3803" end="3816" title="Adolf Bastian" label="Adolf Bastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815982" start="3930" end="3948" title="Ki Hajar Dewantara" label="Ki Hajar Dewantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="4122" end="4134" title="homo erectus" label="homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186266" start="4234" end="4251" title="homo floresiensis" label="homo floresiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="4323" end="4335" title="homo sapiens" label="homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="4431" end="4444" title="cave painting" label="cave painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120910" start="4538" end="4551" title="Gunung Padang" label="Gunung Padang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517521" start="4581" end="4591" title="Lore Lindu National Park" label="Lore Lindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="4716" end="4736" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="4799" end="4805" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762752" start="4835" end="4846" title="Melanesians" label="Melanesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q842623" start="5045" end="5071" title="Paddy field" label="wet-field rice cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="5420" end="5429" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148477" start="5569" end="5578" title="Sailendra" label="Sailendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q402580" start="5589" end="5596" title="Mataram Kingdom" label="Mataram"/>
<link wikidata="Q42798" start="5645" end="5654" title="Borobudur" label="Borobudur"/>
<link wikidata="Q47721" start="5659" end="5668" title="Prambanan" label="Prambanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="5678" end="5687" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49329" start="5817" end="5827" title="Gajah Mada" label="Gajah Mada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580263" start="5917" end="5924" title="Spread of Islam in Indonesia" label="arrived"/>
<link wikidata="Q554452" start="6291" end="6307" title="Francisco Serrão" label="Francisco Serrão"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044695" start="6308" end="6324" title="Portuguese Empire in the Indonesian Archipelago" label="to seek monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778604" start="6342" end="6353" title="spice trade" label="spice trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="6361" end="6375" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="6451" end="6475" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="6677" end="6694" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="6790" end="6801" title="Batavian Republic" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28899" start="6952" end="6962" title="Diponegoro" label="Diponegoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q145877" start="6980" end="6991" title="Imam Bonjol" label="Imam Bonjol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784089" start="7012" end="7021" title="Pattimura" label="Pattimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q277450" start="7037" end="7053" title="Aceh War" label="fighters in Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="7191" end="7201" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q698226" start="7208" end="7225" title="Dutch East Indies campaign" label="Japanese invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q702310" start="7230" end="7254" title="Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies" label="occupation of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7262" end="7274" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="7367" end="7389" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japan&amp;#x27;s surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="7406" end="7413" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q29050" start="7418" end="7432" title="Mohammad Hatta" label="Mohammad Hatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661772" start="7444" end="7483" title="Proclamation of Indonesian Independence" label="Proclamation of Indonesian Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470857" start="7566" end="7579" title="Sutan Sjahrir" label="Sutan Sjahrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332160" start="7676" end="7730" title="Indonesian National Revolution" label="Indonesia&amp;#x27;s war of independence against the Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q519255" start="7820" end="7859" title="Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference" label="Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043529" start="8061" end="8070" title="Liberal democracy period in Indonesia" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512885" start="8074" end="8090" title="Guided Democracy in Indonesia" label="authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q855515" start="8165" end="8177" title="Indonesian National Armed Forces" label="the military"/>
<link wikidata="Q157744" start="8187" end="8215" title="Communist Party of Indonesia" label="Communist Party of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643006" start="8269" end="8286" title="30 September Movement" label="an attempted coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q799299" start="8309" end="8337" title="Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66" label="violent anti-communist purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44819" start="8375" end="8382" title="Suharto" label="Suharto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887665" start="8544" end="8563" title="Transition to the New Order" label="capitalised on this"/>
<link wikidata="Q497163" start="8621" end="8642" title="New Order (Indonesia)" label="&amp;quot;New Order&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="8674" end="8699" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="8805" end="8832" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="1997 Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8847" end="8868" title="May 1998 riots of Indonesia#Background" label="widespread discontent"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136238" start="9016" end="9048" title="East Timor genocide" label="controversial 25-year occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583734" start="9059" end="9089" title="Indonesian invasion of East Timor" label="Indonesia&amp;#x27;s 1975 invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q491776" start="9091" end="9101" title="Post-Suharto era in Indonesia" label="Since 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034445" start="9186" end="9228" title="2004 Indonesian presidential election" label="first direct presidential election in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029626" start="9279" end="9288" title="Terrorism in Indonesia" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173076" start="9375" end="9385" title="Corruption in Indonesia" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670013" start="9587" end="9605" title="insurgency in Aceh" label="insurgency in Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390395" start="9712" end="9716" title="11th parallel south" label="11°S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186300" start="9721" end="9724" title="6th parallel north" label="6°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663207" start="9740" end="9744" title="95th meridian east" label="95°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704622" start="9749" end="9754" title="141st meridian east" label="141°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q113237304" start="9769" end="9793" title="List of transcontinental countries" label="transcontinental country"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107770" start="9863" end="9881" title="archipelagic state" label="archipelagic state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="10129" end="10136" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="10138" end="10142" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="10144" end="10150" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="10186" end="10194" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="10200" end="10210" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045888" start="10356" end="10367" title="Puncak Jaya" label="Puncak Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q183360" start="10414" end="10423" title="Lake Toba" label="Lake Toba"/>
<link wikidata="Q841359" start="10553" end="10559" title="Kapuas River" label="Kapuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q979518" start="10561" end="10567" title="Barito River" label="Barito"/>
<link wikidata="Q726986" start="10569" end="10578" title="Mamberamo River" label="Mamberamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q848308" start="10580" end="10585" title="Sepik River" label="Sepik"/>
<link wikidata="Q328396" start="10590" end="10597" title="Mahakam River" label="Mahakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="10826" end="10836" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="10861" end="10871" title="wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="10964" end="10983" title="Tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="11220" end="11228" title="Tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="11229" end="11236" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="11241" end="11265" title="tropical savanna climate" label="tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q745025" start="11832" end="11838" title="Lombok Strait" label="Lombok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523067" start="11843" end="11854" title="Sape Strait" label="Sape Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q60760913" start="11954" end="11989" title="Climate change in Indonesia" label="projected effects of climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="12218" end="12235" title="Sea level rise" label="Rising sea levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783" start="12488" end="12500" title="Ring of Fire" label="Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="12512" end="12527" title="Indo-Australian plate" label="Indo-Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="12532" end="12545" title="Pacific plate" label="Pacific plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="12567" end="12581" title="Eurasian plate" label="Eurasian plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="12737" end="12744" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="12753" end="12757" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="12759" end="12763" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803" start="12772" end="12792" title="Lesser Sunda Islands" label="Lesser Sunda Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q739411" start="12802" end="12815" title="Banda Islands" label="Banda Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="12819" end="12825" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="12842" end="12850" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="12903" end="12915" title="volcanic ash" label="volcanic ash"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13251" end="13279" title="Youngest Toba eruption#Toba catastrophe theory" label="massive supervolcano erupted"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="13295" end="13321" title="volcanic explosivity index" label="volcanic explosivity index"/>
<link wikidata="Q183360" start="13348" end="13357" title="Lake Toba" label="Lake Toba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162172" start="13394" end="13409" title="volcanic winter" label="volcanic winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591483" start="13482" end="13515" title="1815 eruption of Mount Tambora" label="eruption of Mount Tambora in 1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q209625" start="13598" end="13620" title="Year Without a Summer" label="without summer in 1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094772" start="13707" end="13741" title="1883 eruption of Krakatoa" label="eruption of Mount Krakatoa in 1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="14004" end="14032" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q867691" start="14041" end="14067" title="2006 Yogyakarta earthquake" label="2006 Yogyakarta earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127365" start="14106" end="14132" title="Conservation International" label="Conservation International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="14146" end="14167" title="megadiverse countries" label="megadiverse countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077944" start="14371" end="14383" title="Australasian realm" label="Australasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18842" start="14397" end="14408" title="Sunda Shelf" label="Sunda Shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="14810" end="14817" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784223" start="15060" end="15074" title="Coral Triangle" label="Coral Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784207" start="15113" end="15128" title="coral reef fish" label="coral reef fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q210746" start="15194" end="15206" title="Wallace Line" label="Wallace Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q160627" start="15240" end="15261" title="Alfred Russel Wallace" label="Alfred Russel Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q63149" start="15376" end="15386" title="Weber Line" label="Weber Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991326" start="15396" end="15404" title="Wallacea" label="Wallacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q940414" start="15482" end="15503" title="The Malay Archipelago" label="The Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381292" start="15710" end="15734" title="Environmental issues in Indonesia" label="environmental challenges"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="16250" end="16296" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q756868" start="16355" end="16364" title="Bali myna" label="Bali myna"/>
<link wikidata="Q543424" start="16366" end="16384" title="Sumatran orangutan" label="Sumatran orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170311" start="16390" end="16406" title="Javan rhinoceros" label="Javan rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251271" start="16580" end="16595" title="Protected areas of Indonesia" label="protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q115780453" start="16641" end="16687" title="Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework" label="Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q115978993" start="17079" end="17127" title="other effective area-based conservation measures" label="other effective area-based conservation measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="17392" end="17412" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q163248" start="17435" end="17470" title="World Network of Biosphere Reserves" label="World Network of Biosphere Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="17532" end="17549" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q57405" start="17793" end="17817" title="Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono" label="Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432165" start="17994" end="18023" title="Fall of Suharto" label="fall of the New Order in 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q108570445" start="18034" end="18056" title="Amendments to the Constitution of Indonesia" label="constitutional reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="18146" end="18159" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755916" start="18236" end="18245" title="President of Indonesia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="18256" end="18269" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="18271" end="18289" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q855515" start="18321" end="18333" title="Indonesian National Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q818711" start="18491" end="18526" title="People&amp;#x27;s Consultative Assembly" label="People&amp;#x27;s Consultative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670027" start="18774" end="18810" title="People&amp;#x27;s Representative Council" label="People&amp;#x27;s Representative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118693" start="18934" end="18965" title="Regional Representative Council" label="Regional Representative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200557" start="19279" end="19292" title="Supreme Court of Indonesia" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000949" start="19402" end="19422" title="Constitutional Court of Indonesia" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409251" start="19617" end="19636" title="Judicial Commission of Indonesia" label="Judicial Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354078" start="19841" end="19862" title="Elections in Indonesia" label="legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186306" start="19967" end="20006" title="Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle" label="Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536552" start="20020" end="20050" title="Party of the Functional Groups" label="Party of the Functional Groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261459" start="20081" end="20111" title="Great Indonesia Movement Party" label="Great Indonesia Movement Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257317" start="20167" end="20191" title="National Awakening Party" label="National Awakening Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511101" start="20202" end="20226" title="Prosperous Justice Party" label="Prosperous Justice Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734552" start="20413" end="20427" title="Cartel party theory" label="cartel parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164276" start="20705" end="20728" title="Constitutional Assembly of Indonesia" label="Constitutional Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q104666706" start="20761" end="20790" title="2024 Indonesian general election" label="most recent elections in 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q217032" start="20842" end="20865" title="Electoral threshold" label="parliamentary threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q12504402" start="21115" end="21135" title="2015 Indonesian local elections" label="2015 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q57445374" start="21330" end="21334" title="2019 Indonesian general election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098" start="21455" end="21464" title="Provinces of Indonesia" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q20425953" start="21556" end="21564" title="List of current governors in Indonesia" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191695" start="21718" end="21727" title="Regency (Indonesia)" label="regencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700011" start="21949" end="21958" title="Districts of Indonesia" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225692" start="22052" end="22060" title="Villages of Indonesia" label="villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095" start="22866" end="22871" title="Papua (province)" label="Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q12486766" start="22873" end="22886" title="Central Papua" label="Central Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q112810104" start="22888" end="22902" title="Highland Papua" label="Highland Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q61439296" start="22904" end="22915" title="South Papua" label="South Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q115253263" start="22917" end="22932" title="Southwest Papua" label="Southwest Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096" start="22938" end="22948" title="West Papua (province)" label="West Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="22963" end="22988" title="Autonomous administrative division" label="special autonomous status"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="23062" end="23079" title="Islamism" label="Islamic territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q103948645" start="23164" end="23185" title="List of Indonesian monarchies" label="pre-colonial monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114397" start="23196" end="23202" title="Yogyakarta Sultanate" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177663" start="23207" end="23211" title="Pakualaman" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q29050" start="23514" end="23528" title="Mohammad Hatta" label="Mohammad Hatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490747" start="23748" end="23772" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Indonesia)" label="Foreign Affairs Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322988" start="23957" end="23969" title="middle power" label="middle power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="24094" end="24099" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026319" start="24179" end="24207" title="Indonesia–Palestine relations" label="actively supported Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026304" start="24237" end="24269" title="Indonesia–Israel relations" label="diplomatic relations with Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100222" start="24376" end="24396" title="China–Indonesia relations" label="relations with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026384" start="24520" end="24554" title="Indonesia–United States relations" label="partnership with the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025919" start="24650" end="24680" title="Indonesia and the United Nations" label="a member of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="24724" end="24744" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="24756" end="24791" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="24806" end="24822" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q297472" start="24861" end="24882" title="ASEAN Free Trade Area" label="ASEAN Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025959" start="24898" end="24910" title="Cairns Group" label="Cairns Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="24920" end="24944" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="25302" end="25309" title="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501987" start="25315" end="25347" title="MONUSCO" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525579" start="25353" end="25357" title="United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q855515" start="25383" end="25415" title="Indonesian National Armed Forces" label="Indonesian National Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862927" start="25437" end="25441" title="Indonesian Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704661" start="25452" end="25456" title="Indonesian Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669350" start="25481" end="25493" title="Indonesian Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332160" start="25601" end="25631" title="Indonesian National Revolution" label="Indonesian National Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268458" start="25948" end="25977" title="Dwifungsi" label="its peak during the New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670013" start="26209" end="26213" title="Insurgency in Aceh" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893456" start="26218" end="26223" title="Papuan conflict" label="Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058688" start="26618" end="26648" title="West New Guinea dispute" label="conflicts with the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q941881" start="26654" end="26670" title="Dutch New Guinea" label="Dutch New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361929" start="26733" end="26744" title="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation" label="Konfrontasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583734" start="26795" end="26817" title="Indonesian invasion of East Timor" label="invasion of East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103954" start="26973" end="26999" title="Indonesian National Police" label="Indonesian National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q44596" start="27387" end="27414" title="Discrimination against Chinese Indonesians" label="against Chinese Indonesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749287" start="27484" end="27510" title="May 1998 riots of Indonesia" label="anti-Chinese riots in 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893456" start="27527" end="27541" title="Papua conflict" label="Papua conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774220" start="27634" end="27653" title="anti-LGBTQ rhetoric" label="anti-LGBTQ rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626309" start="27722" end="27731" title="LGBTQ rights in Indonesia" label="the topic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="28523" end="28536" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="28622" end="28625" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="28722" end="28750" title="newly industrialised country" label="newly industrialised country"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="28783" end="28804" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="ranking 16th globally"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="28859" end="28870" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="ranking 8th"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="28913" end="28927" title="gross domestic product" label="per capita GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q19645964" start="29222" end="29253" title="Economic history of Indonesia" label="shifted significantly over time"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="29645" end="29684" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="Asian economic crisis in the late 1990s"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="30063" end="30084" title="2008 financial crisis" label="2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="30099" end="30116" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047695" start="30569" end="30595" title="Agriculture in Indonesia" label="major agricultural country"/>
<link wikidata="Q42798" start="31756" end="31765" title="Borobudur" label="Borobudur"/>
<link wikidata="Q47721" start="31770" end="31779" title="Prambanan" label="Prambanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q290201" start="31793" end="31799" title="Toraja" label="Toraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="31846" end="31850" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q260149" start="31874" end="31905" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Indonesia" label="ten UNESCO World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520" start="31917" end="31937" title="Komodo National Park" label="Komodo National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568" start="31946" end="31977" title="Yogyakarta" label="Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517532" start="32043" end="32064" title="Bunaken National Park" label="Bunaken National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088317" start="32073" end="32091" title="Raja Ampat Islands" label="Raja Ampat Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q51910893" start="32206" end="32213" title="Kota Tua Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808215" start="32218" end="32226" title="Dutch architecture in Semarang" label="Semarang"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999873" start="32243" end="32256" title="List of palaces in Indonesia" label="royal palaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q12486845" start="32260" end="32270" title="Pagaruyung Palace" label="Pagaruyung"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646466" start="32275" end="32279" title="Ubud Palace" label="Ubud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="32462" end="32485" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q838625" start="32600" end="32610" title="Terrace (agriculture)" label="terasering"/>
<link wikidata="Q538882" start="32679" end="32685" title="pinisi" label="pinisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002570" start="32705" end="32710" title="Bugis" label="Bugis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886290" start="32715" end="32730" title="Makassar people" label="Makassar people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810633" start="32746" end="32768" title="Tjokorda Raka Sukawati" label="Tjokorda Raka Sukawati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563921" start="32783" end="32792" title="Sosrobahu" label="Sosrobahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121061" start="32939" end="32966" title="Industri Kereta Api" label="Indonesian Railway Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49252" start="33197" end="33217" title="Indonesian Aerospace" label="Indonesian Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="33291" end="33297" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="33302" end="33308" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498" start="33330" end="33336" title="CASA/IPTN CN-235" label="CN-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128353" start="33355" end="33359" title="CASA (aircraft manufacturer)" label="CASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q76156" start="33378" end="33391" title="B. J. Habibie" label="B. J. Habibie"/>
<link wikidata="Q495218" start="33617" end="33634" title="KAI KF-21 Boramae" label="KAI KF-21 Boramae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797789" start="33684" end="33727" title="National Institute of Aeronautics and Space" label="National Institute of Aeronautics and Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000754" start="33831" end="33837" title="Palapa" label="Palapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867977" start="34071" end="34079" title="Starlink" label="Starlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671143" start="34379" end="34391" title="Transjakarta" label="Transjakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q182634" start="34489" end="34497" title="rickshaw" label="rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926929" start="34780" end="34799" title="KRL Commuterline" label="the Greater Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q105424963" start="34804" end="34814" title="KAI Commuter Yogyakarta Line" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="34888" end="34897" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999865" start="34997" end="35012" title="High-speed rail in Indonesia" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q10389" start="35073" end="35080" title="Bandung" label="Bandung"/>
<link wikidata="Q749497" start="35210" end="35246" title="Soekarno–Hatta International Airport" label="Soekarno–Hatta International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q935262" start="35274" end="35310" title="List of busiest airports by passenger traffic" label="served 49 million passengers in 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061846" start="35324" end="35334" title="Ngurah Rai International Airport" label="Ngurah Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431631" start="35339" end="35367" title="Juanda International Airport" label="Juanda International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q512468" start="35370" end="35386" title="Garuda Indonesia" label="Garuda Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212282" start="35514" end="35521" title="SkyTeam" label="SkyTeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231165" start="35527" end="35548" title="Port of Tanjung Priok" label="Port of Tanjung Priok"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377106" start="35695" end="35729" title="Energy in Indonesia" label="major energy producer and consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="35805" end="35831" title="Electricity generation" label="installed power generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201636" start="36040" end="36065" title="Perusahaan Listrik Negara" label="State Electricity Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q60766119" start="37168" end="37179" title="2020 Indonesian census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185994" start="37189" end="37216" title="Demographics of Indonesia" label="Indonesia&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="37239" end="37266" title="List of countries and dependencies by population" label="fourth largest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="37324" end="37328" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574237" start="37889" end="37900" title="List of Indonesian provinces by Human Development Index" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q174844" start="37919" end="37927" title="megacity" label="megacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q672979" start="37942" end="37960" title="Uncontacted peoples" label="uncontacted tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422929" start="38063" end="38075" title="primate city" label="primate city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496553" start="38084" end="38124" title="List of largest cities" label="second-most populous urban area globally"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757311" start="38174" end="38199" title="Overseas Indonesians" label="Indonesians live overseas"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="38469" end="38489" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q49230" start="38499" end="38526" title="Proto-Austronesian language" label="Proto-Austronesian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762752" start="38564" end="38575" title="Melanesians" label="Melanesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q682079" start="38886" end="38895" title="Sundanese people" label="Sundanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741539" start="38897" end="38902" title="Malay Indonesians" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q810714" start="38904" end="38909" title="Batak" label="Batak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258905" start="38911" end="38919" title="Madurese people" label="Madurese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900057" start="38921" end="38927" title="Betawi people" label="Betawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130350" start="38929" end="38940" title="Minangkabau people" label="Minangkabau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002570" start="38946" end="38951" title="Bugis people" label="Bugis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="39055" end="39065" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="39083" end="39088" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="39102" end="39118" title="Prestige (sociolinguistics)" label="prestige dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="39162" end="39175" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323022" start="39225" end="39262" title="Youth Pledge" label="promoted by nationalists in the 1920s"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="39583" end="39597" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="39632" end="39651" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian family"/>
<link wikidata="Q236425" start="39667" end="39683" title="Papuan languages" label="Papuan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33549" start="39706" end="39714" title="Javanese language" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741" start="39792" end="39802" title="Special Region of Yogyakarta" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="39809" end="39814" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116909" start="39865" end="39870" title="Indo people" label="Indos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606232" start="40351" end="40364" title="Religion in Indonesia" label="six religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q141770" start="40366" end="40371" title="Islam in Indonesia" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043346" start="40373" end="40386" title="Protestantism in Indonesia" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061558" start="40388" end="40405" title="Roman Catholicism in Indonesia" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578725" start="40407" end="40415" title="Hinduism in Indonesia" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514699" start="40417" end="40425" title="Buddhism in Indonesia" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12496183" start="40427" end="40439" title="Supreme Council for the Confucian Religion in Indonesia" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769343" start="40465" end="40484" title="indigenous religion" label="indigenous religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="41022" end="41029" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502310" start="41034" end="41042" title="Dynamism (metaphysics)" label="dynamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216336" start="41114" end="41119" title="hyang" label="hyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="41231" end="41251" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188799" start="41300" end="41313" title="Sunda Wiwitan" label="Sunda Wiwitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173931" start="41324" end="41331" title="Kejawèn" label="Kejawèn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346844" start="41349" end="41359" title="Kaharingan" label="Kaharingan"/>
<link wikidata="Q305454" start="41487" end="41494" title="abangan" label="abangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850935" start="41496" end="41513" title="Balinese Hinduism" label="Balinese Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="41940" end="41959" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="41964" end="41990" title="South Arabia" label="southern Arabian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275136" start="42086" end="42092" title="Pesantren" label="santri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082772" start="42223" end="42240" title="Islamic missionary activity" label="&amp;quot;dawah&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854751" start="42256" end="42266" title="Wali Sanga" label="Wali Sanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="42288" end="42296" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="42464" end="42470" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="42471" end="42485" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="42633" end="42642" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="42647" end="42658" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15847" start="42957" end="42963" title="Manado" label="Manado"/>
<link wikidata="Q111662659" start="43011" end="43033" title="Sha&amp;#x27;ar Hashamayim Synagogue (Tondano)" label="Sha&amp;#x27;ar Hashamayim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928494" start="43615" end="43651" title="Education in Indonesia" label="one of the largest education systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490749" start="43789" end="43832" title="Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education" label="Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q130710937" start="43838" end="43891" title="Ministry of Higher Education, Science, and Technology (Indonesia)" label="Ministry of Higher Education, Science, and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490738" start="43900" end="43929" title="Ministry of Religious Affairs (Indonesia)" label="Ministry of Religious Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q534515" start="44642" end="44665" title="University of Indonesia" label="University of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145992" start="44667" end="44689" title="Gadjah Mada University" label="Gadjah Mada University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579397" start="44699" end="44730" title="Bandung Institute of Technology" label="Bandung Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q323481" start="45071" end="45117" title="Programme for International Student Assessment" label="Programme for International Student Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047698" start="45476" end="45493" title="Healthcare in Indonesia" label="healthcare system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261887" start="45663" end="45687" title="Puskesmas" label="community health centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="45777" end="45802" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45995" end="46021" title="Healthcare in Indonesia#Universal health coverage" label="Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="46037" end="46058" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q12472745" start="46074" end="46106" title="BPJS Kesehatan" label="Social Security Agency on Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021512" start="46175" end="46195" title="Single-payer healthcare" label="single-payer systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628806" start="46856" end="46870" title="Stunted growth" label="child stunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339474" start="47099" end="47117" title="Maternal death" label="maternal mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546080" start="47195" end="47216" title="Smoking in Indonesia" label="highest smoking rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="47697" end="47758" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists" label="16 items recognised by UNESCO as Intangible Cultural Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078316" start="47770" end="47776" title="wayang" label="wayang"/>
<link wikidata="Q635427" start="47793" end="47798" title="batik" label="batik"/>
<link wikidata="Q540049" start="47800" end="47808" title="angklung" label="angklung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367252" start="47814" end="47825" title="saman dance" label="saman dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040849" start="47831" end="47843" title="pencak silat" label="pencak silat"/>
<link wikidata="Q960672" start="47876" end="47882" title="pantun" label="pantun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641029" start="47884" end="47890" title="kebaya" label="kebaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q111735185" start="47896" end="47905" title="kolintang" label="kolintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850940" start="48133" end="48152" title="Balinese art" label="artistic traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356113" start="48172" end="48179" title="Kamasan" label="Kamasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078316" start="48184" end="48190" title="Wayang" label="Wayang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736554" start="48268" end="48273" title="Candi of Indonesia" label="candi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419654" start="48399" end="48409" title="rumah adat" label="rumah adat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531550" start="48442" end="48451" title="Tongkonan" label="Tongkonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188166" start="48484" end="48496" title="Rumah Gadang" label="Rumah Gadang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740745" start="48522" end="48529" title="Pendopo" label="Pendopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q847603" start="48541" end="48546" title="Dayak people" label="Dayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q504106" start="48547" end="48556" title="longhouse" label="longhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573930" start="48758" end="48779" title="Megalithic art" label="megalithic sculptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q42798" start="49161" end="49170" title="Borobudur" label="Borobudur"/>
<link wikidata="Q47721" start="49175" end="49184" title="Prambanan" label="Prambanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q540049" start="49483" end="49491" title="angklung" label="angklung"/>
<link wikidata="Q194492" start="49493" end="49500" title="gamelan" label="gamelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585780" start="49506" end="49513" title="sasando" label="sasando"/>
<link wikidata="Q120031" start="49601" end="49607" title="Qanbūs" label="gambus"/>
<link wikidata="Q572371" start="49612" end="49618" title="qasida" label="qasida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930107" start="49641" end="49650" title="keroncong" label="keroncong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159539" start="49670" end="49677" title="dangdut" label="dangdut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261576" start="49914" end="49938" title="Comparison of Indonesian and Standard Malay" label="language intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151165" start="50087" end="50092" title="Hudoq" label="Hudoq"/>
<link wikidata="Q635427" start="50466" end="50471" title="batik" label="batik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641029" start="50476" end="50482" title="kebaya" label="kebaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282423" start="50651" end="50655" title="ulos" label="ulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q589421" start="50679" end="50686" title="songket" label="songket"/>
<link wikidata="Q140101" start="50698" end="50702" title="ikat" label="ikat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251053" start="50961" end="50967" title="Ludruk" label="Ludruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263735" start="50981" end="50989" title="Ketoprak" label="Ketoprak"/>
<link wikidata="Q13096768" start="51003" end="51012" title="Sandiwara" label="Sandiwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q10983745" start="51026" end="51032" title="Lenong" label="Lenong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737124" start="51169" end="51175" title="Randai" label="Randai"/>
<link wikidata="Q569801" start="51228" end="51233" title="silat" label="silat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038964" start="51482" end="51500" title="Loetoeng Kasaroeng" label="Loetoeng Kasaroeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089681" start="51616" end="51628" title="Usmar Ismail" label="Usmar Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162696" start="51932" end="51946" title="Satan&amp;#x27;s Slave (1980 film)" label="Pengabdi Setan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810629" start="51967" end="51988" title="Tjoet Nja&amp;#x27; Dhien" label="Tjoet Nja&amp;#x27; Dhien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034463" start="52012" end="52018" title="Warkop" label="Warkop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179411" start="52272" end="52291" title="Petualangan Sherina" label="Petualangan Sherina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678227" start="52315" end="52336" title="Ada Apa dengan Cinta?" label="Ada Apa dengan Cinta?"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493567" start="52360" end="52374" title="Laskar Pelangi" label="Laskar Pelangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q79385434" start="52409" end="52427" title="KKN di Desa Penari" label="KKN di Desa Penari"/>
<link wikidata="Q286060" start="52535" end="52559" title="Indonesian Film Festival" label="Indonesian Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q286060" start="52612" end="52623" title="Citra Award" label="Citra Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805886" start="52711" end="52716" title="Media of Indonesia" label="Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973495" start="52945" end="52949" title="TVRI" label="TVRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="53361" end="53386" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="53676" end="53684" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="53732" end="53746" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919826" start="53844" end="53849" title="syair" label="syair"/>
<link wikidata="Q960672" start="53863" end="53869" title="pantun" label="pantun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485660" start="53883" end="53890" title="hikayat" label="hikayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201337" start="53908" end="53913" title="babad" label="babad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15391547" start="53986" end="54003" title="Syair Abdul Muluk" label="Syair Abdul Muluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344720" start="54017" end="54034" title="Hikayat Hang Tuah" label="Hikayat Hang Tuah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254550" start="54048" end="54065" title="Sulalatus Salatin" label="Sulalatus Salatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273944" start="54083" end="54099" title="Babad Tanah Jawi" label="Babad Tanah Jawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880453" start="54134" end="54147" title="Balai Pustaka" label="Balai Pustaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q559017" start="54407" end="54420" title="Chairil Anwar" label="Chairil Anwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q326935" start="54422" end="54443" title="Pramoedya Ananta Toer" label="Pramoedya Ananta Toer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318953" start="54449" end="54458" title="Ayu Utami" label="Ayu Utami"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="54676" end="54687" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688975" start="54707" end="54716" title="side dish" label="side dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q841779" start="54767" end="54779" title="coconut milk" label="coconut milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q510666" start="54863" end="54874" title="nasi goreng" label="nasi goreng"/>
<link wikidata="Q209304" start="54888" end="54897" title="gado-gado" label="gado-gado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16765345" start="54911" end="54919" title="mie ayam" label="mie ayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q843795" start="54933" end="54938" title="bakso" label="bakso"/>
<link wikidata="Q209253" start="54952" end="54956" title="Satay" label="sate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117388" start="54974" end="54978" title="Soto (food)" label="soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746599" start="55078" end="55085" title="tumpeng" label="tumpeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520293" start="55237" end="55244" title="rendang" label="rendang"/>
<link wikidata="Q954297" start="55268" end="55287" title="Padang cuisine" label="Minangkabau cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256658" start="55306" end="55313" title="dendeng" label="dendeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189322" start="55330" end="55335" title="gulai" label="gulai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192299" start="55375" end="55380" title="oncom" label="oncom"/>
<link wikidata="Q120096" start="55418" end="55424" title="tempeh" label="tempeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724" start="55523" end="55532" title="West Java" label="West Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="55562" end="55570" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194788" start="55668" end="55674" title="Thomas Cup" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193650" start="55679" end="55687" title="Uber Cup" label="Uber Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83462" start="55770" end="55783" title="Olympic weightlifting" label="weightlifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q751804" start="55830" end="55866" title="Indonesia at the Olympics" label="Indonesia&amp;#x27;s Olympic medal tally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683718" start="55868" end="55874" title="Liga 1 (Indonesia)" label="Liga 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q657451" start="55955" end="55964" title="Indonesia national football team" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="56012" end="56026" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q131591" start="56030" end="56034" title="1938 FIFA World Cup" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q729312" start="56118" end="56134" title="1958 Asian Games" label="1958 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209347" start="56171" end="56175" title="1987 Southeast Asian Games" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369995" start="56177" end="56181" title="1991 Southeast Asian Games" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q22815157" start="56187" end="56213" title="2023 Southeast Asian Games" label="2023 Southeast Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q157894" start="56268" end="56281" title="AFC Asian Cup" label="AFC Asian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q369539" start="56289" end="56293" title="1996 AFC Asian Cup" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="56325" end="56331" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q167071" start="56377" end="56391" title="National Sports Week (Indonesia)" label="National Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q188818" start="56450" end="56462" title="Sepak takraw" label="Sepak takraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q12489594" start="56479" end="56491" title="karapan sapi" label="karapan sapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208134" start="56515" end="56521" title="Madura Island" label="Madura"/>
<link wikidata="Q148440" start="56684" end="56690" title="Flores" label="Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q643117" start="56701" end="56707" title="pasola" label="pasola"/>
<link wikidata="Q206368" start="56717" end="56722" title="Sumba" label="Sumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040849" start="56730" end="56742" title="Pencak silat" label="Pencak silat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144097" start="57008" end="57012" title="2011 Southeast Asian Games" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674766" start="57033" end="57065" title="List of Indonesia-related topics" label="List of Indonesia-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049124" start="57068" end="57103" title="Index of Indonesia-related articles" label="Index of Indonesia-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112296" start="57106" end="57126" title="Outline of Indonesia" label="Outline of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="57420" end="57438" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="57446" end="57473" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="57492" end="57500" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="57548" end="57569" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="57763" end="57786" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14580" wikidata="Q1239" url="?curid=14580" title="Indian Ocean">
<text>The Indian Ocean is the third-largest of the world&#x27;s five oceanic divisions, covering or approximately 20% of the water area of Earth&#x27;s surface. It is bounded by Asia to the north, Africa to the west and Australia to the east. To the south it is bounded by the Southern Ocean, or Antarctica, depending on the definition in use. The Indian Ocean has large marginal, or regional seas, such as the Andaman Sea, the Arabian Sea, the Bay of Bengal, and the Laccadive Sea.

Once called the Eastern Ocean, it is now named after India, which protrudes into it, and has been known by its current name since at least 1515. It is the only ocean named after a country. It has an average depth of 3,741 m. All of the Indian Ocean is in the Eastern Hemisphere. Unlike the Atlantic and Pacific, the Indian Ocean is bordered by landmasses and an archipelago on three sides, making it more like an embayed ocean centered on the Indian Peninsula. Its coasts and shelves differ from other oceans, with distinct features, such as a narrower continental shelf. In terms of geology, the Indian Ocean is the youngest of the major oceans, with active spreading ridges and features like seamounts and ridges formed by hotspots.

The climate of the Indian Ocean is characterized by monsoons. It is the warmest ocean, with a significant impact on global climate due to its interaction with the atmosphere. Its waters are affected by the Indian Ocean Walker circulation, resulting in unique oceanic currents and upwelling patterns. The Indian Ocean is ecologically diverse, with important marine life and ecosystems like coral reefs, mangroves, and sea grass beds. It hosts a significant portion of the world&#x27;s tuna catch and is home to endangered marine species. It faces challenges like overfishing and pollution, including a significant garbage patch.

Historically, the Indian Ocean has been a hub of cultural and commercial exchange since ancient times. It played a key role in early human migrations and the spread of civilizations. In modern times, it remains crucial for global trade, especially in oil and hydrocarbons. Environmental and geopolitical concerns in the region include the effects of climate change, piracy, and strategic disputes over island territories.

==Etymology==
The Indian Ocean has been known by its present name since at least 1515, when the Latin form &quot;Oceanus Orientalis Indicus&quot; () is attested, named after India, which projects into it. It was earlier known as the &quot;Eastern Ocean&quot;, a term that was still in use during the mid-18th century, as opposed to the &quot;Western Ocean&quot; (Atlantic) before the Pacific was surmised. In modern times, the name Afro-Asian Ocean has occasionally been used.

The Hindi name for the Ocean is (; ). Conversely, Chinese explorers (e.g., Zheng He during the Ming dynasty) who traveled to the Indian Ocean during the 15th century called it the Western Oceans. In Ancient Greek geography, the Indian Ocean region known to the Greeks was called the Erythraean Sea.

==Geography==
===Extent and data===
The borders of the Indian Ocean, as delineated by the International Hydrographic Organization in 1953, included the Southern Ocean but not the marginal seas along the northern rim. In 2002 the IHO delimited the Southern Ocean separately, which removed waters south of 60°S from the Indian Ocean but included the northern marginal seas. Meridionally, the Indian Ocean is delimited from the Atlantic Ocean by the 20° east meridian, running south from Cape Agulhas, South Africa, and from the Pacific Ocean by the meridian of 146°49&#x27;E, running south from South East Cape on the island of Tasmania in Australia. The northernmost extent of the Indian Ocean (including marginal seas) is approximately 30°N in the Persian Gulf.

The Indian Ocean covers , including the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf but excluding the Southern Ocean, or 19.5% of the world&#x27;s oceans. Its volume is or 19.8% of the world&#x27;s oceans&#x27; volume; it has an average depth of and a maximum depth of .

All of the Indian Ocean is in the Eastern Hemisphere. The centre of the Eastern Hemisphere, the 90th meridian east, passes through the Ninety East Ridge.

Within these waters are a number of islands. These include those controlled by surrounding countries, and independent island states and territories. Of the non-coastal islands, there are two broad clusters: one around Madagascar, and one south of India. A few other oceanic islands are scattered elsewhere.

===Coasts and shelves===
In contrast to the Atlantic and Pacific, the Indian Ocean is enclosed by major landmasses and an archipelago on three sides and does not stretch from pole to pole, and can be likened to an embayed ocean. It is centered on the Indian Peninsula. Although this subcontinent has played a significant role in its history, the Indian Ocean has foremostly been a cosmopolitan stage, interlinking diverse regions by innovations, trade, and religion since early in human history.

The active margins of the Indian Ocean have an average width (horizontal distance from land to shelf break) of with a maximum width of . The passive margins have an average width of .
The average width of the slopes (horizontal distance from shelf break to foot of slope) of the continental shelves are for active and passive margins respectively, with a maximum width of .

In correspondence of the Shelf break, also known as Hinge zone, the Bouguer gravity ranges from 0 to 30 mGals that is unusual for a continental region of around 16 km thick sediments. It has been hypothesized that the &quot;Hinge zone may represent the relict of continental and proto-oceanic crustal boundary formed during the rifting of India from Antarctica.&quot;

Australia, Indonesia, and India are the three countries with the longest shorelines and exclusive economic zones. The continental shelf makes up 15% of the Indian Ocean.
More than two billion people live in countries bordering the Indian Ocean, compared to 1.7 billion for the Atlantic and 2.7 billion for the Pacific (some countries border more than one ocean).

====Rivers====
The Indian Ocean drainage basin covers , virtually identical to that of the Pacific Ocean and half that of the Atlantic basin, or 30% of its ocean surface (compared to 15% for the Pacific). The Indian Ocean drainage basin is divided into roughly 800 individual basins, half that of the Pacific, of which 50% are located in Asia, 30% in Africa, and 20% in Australasia. The rivers of the Indian Ocean are shorter on average () than those of the other major oceans. The largest rivers are (order 5) the Zambezi, Ganges-Brahmaputra, Indus, Jubba, and Murray rivers and (order 4) the Shatt al-Arab, Wadi Ad Dawasir (a dried-out river system on the Arabian Peninsula) and Limpopo rivers. After the breakup of East Gondwana and the formation of the Himalayas, the Ganges-Brahmaputra rivers flow into the world&#x27;s largest delta known as the Bengal delta or Sunderbans.

===Marginal seas===
Marginal seas, gulfs, bays and straits of the Indian Ocean include:

Along the east coast of Africa, the Mozambique Channel separates Madagascar from mainland Africa, while the Sea of Zanj is located north of Madagascar.

On the northern coast of the Arabian Sea, Gulf of Aden is connected to the Red Sea by the strait of Bab-el-Mandeb. In the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Tadjoura is located in Djibouti and the Guardafui Channel separates Socotra island from the Horn of Africa. The northern end of the Red Sea terminates in the Gulf of Aqaba and Gulf of Suez. The Indian Ocean is artificially connected to the Mediterranean Sea without ship lock through the Suez Canal, which is accessible via the Red Sea. The Arabian Sea is connected to the Persian Gulf by the Gulf of Oman and the Strait of Hormuz. In the Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Bahrain separates Qatar from the Arabic Peninsula.

Along the west coast of India, the Gulf of Kutch and Gulf of Khambat are located in Gujarat in the northern end while the Laccadive Sea separates the Maldives from the southern tip of India. The Bay of Bengal is off the east coast of India. The Gulf of Mannar and the Palk Strait separate Sri Lanka from India, while Adam&#x27;s Bridge separates the two. The Andaman Sea is located between the Bay of Bengal and the Andaman Islands.

In Indonesia, the so-called Indonesian Seaway is composed of the Malacca, Sunda and Torres Straits.
The Gulf of Carpentaria is located on the Australian north coast while the Great Australian Bight constitutes a large part of its southern coast.
# Arabian Sea – 3.862 million km2
# Bay of Bengal – 2.172 million km2
# Andaman Sea – 797,700 km2
# Laccadive Sea – 786,000 km2
# Mozambique Channel – 700,000 km2
# Timor Sea – 610,000 km2
# Red Sea – 438,000 km2
# Gulf of Aden – 410,000 km2
# Persian Gulf – 251,000 km2
# Flores Sea – 240,000 km2
# Molucca Sea – 200,000 km2
# Gulf of Oman – 181,000 km2
# Great Australian Bight – 45,926 km2
# Gulf of Aqaba – 239 km2
# Gulf of Khambhat
# Gulf of Kutch
# Gulf of Suez
# Dubai Canal
# Strait of Hormuz
==Climate==

Several features make the Indian Ocean unique. It constitutes the core of the large-scale Tropical Warm Pool which, when interacting with the atmosphere, affects the climate both regionally and globally. Asia blocks heat export and prevents the ventilation of the Indian Ocean thermocline. That continent also drives the Indian Ocean monsoon, the strongest on Earth, which causes large-scale seasonal variations in ocean currents, including the reversal of the Somali Current and Indian Monsoon Current. Because of the Indian Ocean Walker circulation there are no continuous equatorial easterlies. Upwelling occurs near the Horn of Africa and the Arabian Peninsula in the Northern Hemisphere and north of the trade winds in the Southern Hemisphere. The Indonesian Throughflow is a unique Equatorial connection to the Pacific.

The climate north of the equator is affected by a monsoon climate. Strong north-east winds blow from October until April; from May until October south and west winds prevail. In the Arabian Sea, the violent Monsoon brings rain to the Indian subcontinent. In the southern hemisphere, the winds are generally milder, but summer storms near Mauritius can be severe. When the monsoon winds change, cyclones sometimes strike the shores of the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal. Some 80% of the total annual rainfall in India occurs during summer and the region is so dependent on this rainfall that many civilisations perished when the Monsoon failed in the past. The huge variability in the Indian Summer Monsoon has also occurred pre-historically, with a strong, wet phase 33,500–32,500 BP; a weak, dry phase 26,000–23,500 BC; and a very weak phase 17,000–15,000 BP,
corresponding to a series of dramatic global events: Bølling–Allerød warming, Heinrich, and Younger Dryas.
The Indian Ocean is the warmest ocean in the world. Long-term ocean temperature records show a rapid, continuous warming in the Indian Ocean, at about (compared to for the warm pool region) during 1901–2012. Research indicates that human induced greenhouse warming, and changes in the frequency and magnitude of El Niño (or the Indian Ocean Dipole), events are a trigger to this strong warming in the Indian Ocean. While the Indian Ocean warmed at a rate of 1.2 °C per century during 1950–2020, climate models predict accelerated warming, at a rate of 1.7 °C–3.8 °C per century during 2020–2100. Though the warming is basin-wide, maximum warming is in the northwestern Indian Ocean including the Arabian Sea, and reduced warming off the Sumatra and Java coasts in the southeast Indian Ocean. Global warming is projected to push the tropical Indian Ocean into a basin-wide near-permanent heatwave state by the end of the 21st century, where marine heatwaves are projected to increase from 20 days per year (during 1970–2000) to 220–250 days per year.

South of the Equator (20–5°S), the Indian Ocean is gaining heat from June to October, during the austral winter, while it is losing heat from November to March, during the austral summer.

In 1999, the Indian Ocean Experiment showed that fossil fuel and biomass burning in South and Southeast Asia caused air pollution (also known as the Asian brown cloud) that reach as far as the Intertropical Convergence Zone. This pollution has implications on both a local and global scale.

==Oceanography==
Forty percent of the sediment of the Indian Ocean is found in the Indus and Ganges fans. The oceanic basins adjacent to the continental slopes mostly contain terrigenous sediments. The ocean south of the polar front (roughly 50° south latitude) is high in biologic productivity and dominated by non-stratified sediment composed mostly of siliceous oozes. Near the three major mid-ocean ridges the ocean floor is relatively young and therefore bare of sediment, except for the Southwest Indian Ridge due to its ultra-slow spreading rate.

The ocean&#x27;s currents are mainly controlled by the monsoon. Two large gyres, one in the northern hemisphere flowing clockwise and one south of the equator moving anticlockwise (including the Agulhas Current and Agulhas Return Current), constitute the dominant flow pattern. During the winter monsoon (November–February), however, circulation is reversed north of 30°S and winds are weakened during winter and the transitional periods between the monsoons.

The Indian Ocean contains the largest submarine fans of the world, the Bengal Fan and Indus Fan, and the largest areas of slope terraces and rift valleys.
The inflow of deep water into the Indian Ocean is 11 Sv, most of which comes from the Circumpolar Deep Water (CDW). The CDW enters the Indian Ocean through the Crozet and Madagascar basins and crosses the Southwest Indian Ridge at 30°S. In the Mascarene Basin the CDW becomes a deep western boundary current before it is met by a re-circulated branch of itself, the North Indian Deep Water. This mixed water partly flows north into the Somali Basin whilst most of it flows clockwise in the Mascarene Basin where an oscillating flow is produced by Rossby waves.

Water circulation in the Indian Ocean is dominated by the Subtropical Anticyclonic Gyre, the eastern extension of which is blocked by the Southeast Indian Ridge and the 90°E Ridge. Madagascar and the Southwest Indian Ridge separate three cells south of Madagascar and off South Africa. North Atlantic Deep Water reaches into the Indian Ocean south of Africa at a depth of and flows north along the eastern continental slope of Africa. Deeper than NADW, Antarctic Bottom Water flows from Enderby Basin to Agulhas Basin across deep channels (&lt;) in the Southwest Indian Ridge, from where it continues into the Mozambique Channel and Prince Edward fracture zone.

North of 20° south latitude the minimum surface temperature is , exceeding to the east. Southward of 40° south latitude, temperatures drop quickly.

The Bay of Bengal contributes more than half () of the runoff water to the Indian Ocean. Mainly in summer, this runoff flows into the Arabian Sea but also south across the Equator where it mixes with fresher seawater from the Indonesian Throughflow. This mixed freshwater joins the South Equatorial Current in the southern tropical Indian Ocean.
Sea surface salinity is highest (more than 36 PSU) in the Arabian Sea because evaporation exceeds precipitation there. In the Southeast Arabian Sea salinity drops to less than 34 PSU. It is the lowest (c. 33 PSU) in the Bay of Bengal because of river runoff and precipitation. The Indonesian Throughflow and precipitation results in lower salinity (34 PSU) along the Sumatran west coast. Monsoonal variation results in eastward transportation of saltier water from the Arabian Sea to the Bay of Bengal from June to September and in westerly transport by the East India Coastal Current to the Arabian Sea from January to April.

An Indian Ocean garbage patch was discovered in 2010 covering at least . Riding the southern Indian Ocean Gyre, this vortex of plastic garbage constantly circulates the ocean from Australia to Africa, down the Mozambique Channel, and back to Australia in a period of six years, except for debris that gets indefinitely stuck in the centre of the gyre.
The garbage patch in the Indian Ocean will, according to a 2012 study, decrease in size after several decades to vanish completely over centuries. Over several millennia, however, the global system of garbage patches will accumulate in the North Pacific.

There are two amphidromes of opposite rotation in the Indian Ocean, probably caused by Rossby wave propagation.

Icebergs drift as far north as 55° south latitude, similar to the Pacific but less than in the Atlantic where icebergs reach up to 45°S. The volume of iceberg loss in the Indian Ocean between 2004 and 2012 was 24 Gt.

Since the 1960s, anthropogenic warming of the global ocean combined with contributions of freshwater from retreating land ice causes a global rise in sea level. Sea level also increases in the Indian Ocean, except in the south tropical Indian Ocean where it decreases, a pattern most likely caused by rising levels of greenhouse gases.

==Marine life==
Among the tropical oceans, the western Indian Ocean hosts one of the largest concentrations of phytoplankton blooms in summer, due to the strong monsoon winds. The monsoonal wind forcing leads to a strong coastal and open ocean upwelling, which introduces nutrients into the upper zones where sufficient light is available for photosynthesis and phytoplankton production. These phytoplankton blooms support the marine ecosystem, as the base of the marine food web, and eventually the larger fish species. The Indian Ocean accounts for the second-largest share of the most economically valuable tuna catch. Its fish are of great and growing importance to the bordering countries for domestic consumption and export. Fishing fleets from Russia, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan also exploit the Indian Ocean, mainly for shrimp and tuna.

Research indicates that increasing ocean temperatures are taking a toll on the marine ecosystem. A study on the phytoplankton changes in the Indian Ocean indicates a decline of up to 20% in the marine plankton in the Indian Ocean, during the past six decades. The tuna catch rates have also declined 50–90% during the past half-century, mostly due to increased industrial fisheries, with the ocean warming adding further stress to the fish species.

Endangered and vulnerable marine mammals and turtles:

80% of the Indian Ocean is open ocean and includes nine large marine ecosystems: the Agulhas Current, Somali Coastal Current, Red Sea, Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal, Gulf of Thailand, West Central Australian Shelf, Northwest Australian Shelf and Southwest Australian Shelf. Coral reefs cover c. . The coasts of the Indian Ocean includes beaches and intertidal zones covering and 246 larger estuaries. Upwelling areas are small but important. The hypersaline salterns in India covers between and species adapted for this environment, such as &quot;Artemia salina&quot; and &quot;Dunaliella salina&quot;, are important to bird life.
Coral reefs, sea grass beds, and mangrove forests are the most productive ecosystems of the Indian Ocean — coastal areas produce 20 tones of fish per square kilometre. These areas, however, are also being urbanised with populations often exceeding several thousand people per square kilometre and fishing techniques become more effective and often destructive beyond sustainable levels while the increase in sea surface temperature spreads coral bleaching.

Mangroves covers in the Indian Ocean region, or almost half of the world&#x27;s mangrove habitat, of which is located in Indonesia, or 50% of mangroves in the Indian Ocean. Mangroves originated in the Indian Ocean region and have adapted to a wide range of its habitats but it is also where it suffers its biggest loss of habitat.

In 2016, six new animal species were identified at hydrothermal vents in the Southwest Indian Ridge: a &quot;Hoff&quot; crab, a &quot;giant peltospirid&quot; snail, a whelk-like snail, a limpet, a scaleworm and a polychaete worm.

The West Indian Ocean coelacanth was discovered in the Indian Ocean off South Africa in the 1930s and in the late 1990s another species, the Indonesian coelacanth, was discovered off Sulawesi Island, Indonesia. Most extant coelacanths have been found in the Comoros. Although both species represent an order of lobe-finned fishes known from the Early Devonian (410 ) and thought extinct 66 mya, they are morphologically distinct from their Devonian ancestors. Over millions of years, coelacanths evolved to inhabit different environments — lungs adapted for shallow, brackish waters evolved into gills adapted for deep marine waters.

==Biodiversity==
Of Earth&#x27;s 36 biodiversity hotspots nine (or 25%) are located on the margins of the Indian Ocean.

* Madagascar and the islands of the western Indian Ocean (Comoros, Réunion, Mauritius, Rodrigues, the Seychelles, and Socotra), includes 13,000 (11,600 endemic) species of plants; 313 (183) birds; reptiles 381 (367); 164 (97) freshwater fishes; 250 (249) amphibians; and 200 (192) mammals.
The origin of this diversity is debated; the break-up of Gondwana can explain vicariance older than 100 mya, but the diversity on the younger, smaller islands must have required a Cenozoic dispersal from the rims of the Indian Ocean to the islands. A &quot;reverse colonisation&quot;, from islands to continents, apparently occurred more recently; the chameleons, for example, first diversified on Madagascar and then colonised Africa. Several species on the islands of the Indian Ocean are textbook cases of evolutionary processes; the dung beetles, day geckos, and lemurs are all examples of adaptive radiation.
Many bones (250 bones per square metre) of recently extinct vertebrates have been found in the Mare aux Songes swamp in Mauritius, including bones of the Dodo bird (&quot;Raphus cucullatus&quot;) and &quot;Cylindraspis&quot; giant tortoise. An analysis of these remains suggests a process of aridification began in the southwest Indian Ocean began around 4,000 years ago.
* Maputaland-Pondoland-Albany (MPA); 8,100 (1,900 endemic) species of plants; 541 (0) birds; 205 (36) reptiles; 73 (20) freshwater fishes; 73 (11) amphibians; and 197 (3) mammals.
Mammalian megafauna once widespread in the MPA was driven to near extinction in the early 20th century. Some species have been successfully recovered since then — the population of white rhinoceros (&quot;Ceratotherium simum simum&quot;) increased from less than 20 individuals in 1895 to more than 17,000 as of 2013. Other species still depend on fenced areas and management programs, including black rhinoceros (&quot;Diceros bicornis minor&quot;), African wild dog (&quot;Lycaon pictus&quot;), cheetah (&quot;Acynonix jubatus&quot;), elephant (&quot;Loxodonta africana&quot;), and lion (&quot;Panthera leo&quot;).
* Coastal forests of eastern Africa; 4,000 (1,750 endemic) species of plants; 636 (12) birds; 250 (54) reptiles; 219 (32) freshwater fishes; 95 (10) amphibians; and 236 (7) mammals.
This biodiversity hotspot (and namesake ecoregion and &quot;Endemic Bird Area&quot;) is a patchwork of small forested areas, often with a unique assemblage of species within each, located within from the coast and covering a total area of c. . It also encompasses coastal islands, including Zanzibar and Pemba, and Mafia.
* Horn of Africa; 5,000 (2,750 endemic) species of plants; 704 (25) birds; 284 (93) reptiles; 100 (10) freshwater fishes; 30 (6) amphibians; and 189 (18) mammals.

This area, one of the only two hotspots that are entirely arid, includes the Ethiopian Highlands, the East African Rift valley, the Socotra islands, as well as some small islands in the Red Sea and areas on the southern Arabic Peninsula. Endemic and threatened mammals include the dibatag (&quot;Ammodorcas clarkei&quot;) and Speke&#x27;s gazelle (&quot;Gazella spekei&quot;); the Somali wild ass (&quot;Equus africanus somaliensis&quot;) and hamadryas baboon (&quot;Papio hamadryas&quot;). It also contains many reptiles.
In Somalia, the centre of the hotspot, the landscape is dominated by Acacia-Commiphora deciduous bushland, but also includes the Yeheb nut (&quot;Cordeauxia edulus&quot;) and species discovered more recently such as the Somali cyclamen (&quot;Cyclamen somalense&quot;), the only cyclamen outside the Mediterranean. Warsangli linnet (&quot;Carduelis johannis&quot;) is an endemic bird found only in northern Somalia. An unstable political situation and mismanagement has resulted in overgrazing which has produced one of the most degraded hotspots where only c. 5% of the original habitat remains.
* The Western Ghats–Sri Lanka; 5,916 (3,049 endemic) species of plants; 457 (35) birds; 265 (176) reptiles; 191 (139) freshwater fishes; 204 (156) amphibians; and 143 (27) mammals.
Encompassing the west coast of India and Sri Lanka, until c. 10,000 years ago a land bridge connected Sri Lanka to the Indian Subcontinent, hence this region shares a common community of species.
* Indo-Burma; 13.500 (7,000 endemic) species of plants; 1,277 (73) birds; 518 (204) reptiles; 1,262 (553) freshwater fishes; 328 (193) amphibians; and 401 (100) mammals.
Indo-Burma encompasses a series of mountain ranges, five of Asia&#x27;s largest river systems, and a wide range of habitats. The region has a long and complex geological history, and long periods rising sea levels and glaciations have isolated ecosystems and thus promoted a high degree of endemism and speciation. The region includes two centres of endemism: the Annamite Mountains and the northern highlands on the China-Vietnam border.
Several distinct floristic regions, the Indian, Malesian, Sino-Himalayan, and Indochinese regions, meet in a unique way in Indo-Burma and the hotspot contains an estimated 15,000–25,000 species of vascular plants, many of them endemic.
* Sundaland; 25,000 (15,000 endemic) species of plants; 771 (146) birds; 449 (244) reptiles; 950 (350) freshwater fishes; 258 (210) amphibians; and 397 (219) mammals.
Sundaland encompasses 17,000 islands of which Borneo and Sumatra are the largest. Endangered mammals include the Bornean and Sumatran orangutans, the proboscis monkey, and the Javan and Sumatran rhinoceroses.
* Wallacea; 10,000 (1,500 endemic) species of plants; 650 (265) birds; 222 (99) reptiles; 250 (50) freshwater fishes; 49 (33) amphibians; and 244 (144) mammals.
* Southwest Australia; 5,571 (2,948 endemic) species of plants; 285 (10) birds; 177 (27) reptiles; 20 (10) freshwater fishes; 32 (22) amphibians; and 55 (13) mammals.
Stretching from Shark Bay to Israelite Bay and isolated by the arid Nullarbor Plain, the southwestern corner of Australia is a floristic region with a stable climate in which one of the world&#x27;s largest floral biodiversity and an 80% endemism has evolved. From June to September it is an explosion of colours and the Wildflower Festival in Perth in September attracts more than half a million visitors.

==Geology==
As the youngest of the major oceans, the Indian Ocean has active spreading ridges that are part of the worldwide system of mid-ocean ridges. In the Indian Ocean these spreading ridges meet at the Rodrigues Triple Point with the Central Indian Ridge, including the Carlsberg Ridge, separating the African plate from the Indian plate; the Southwest Indian Ridge separating the African plate from the Antarctic plate; and the Southeast Indian Ridge separating the Australian plate from the Antarctic plate. The Central Indian Ridge is intercepted by the Owen fracture zone.
Since the late 1990s, however, it has become clear that this traditional definition of the Indo-Australian plate cannot be correct; it consists of three plates — the Indian plate, the Capricorn plate, and Australian plate — separated by diffuse boundary zones.
Since 20 Ma the African plate is being divided by the East African Rift System into the Nubian and Somalia plates.

There are only two trenches in the Indian Ocean: the -long Java Trench between Java and the Sunda Trench and the -long Makran Trench south of Iran and Pakistan.

A series of ridges and seamount chains produced by hotspots pass over the Indian Ocean. The Réunion hotspot (active 70–40 million years ago) connects Réunion and the Mascarene Plateau to the Chagos-Laccadive Ridge and the Deccan Traps in north-western India; the Kerguelen hotspot (100–35 million years ago) connects the Kerguelen Islands and Kerguelen Plateau to the Ninety East Ridge and the Rajmahal Traps in north-eastern India; the Marion hotspot (100–70 million years ago) possibly connects Prince Edward Islands to the Eighty Five East Ridge. These hotspot tracks have been broken by the still active spreading ridges mentioned above.

There are fewer seamounts in the Indian Ocean than in the Atlantic and Pacific. These are typically deeper than and located north of 55°S and west of 80°E. Most originated at spreading ridges but some are now located in basins far away from these ridges. The ridges of the Indian Ocean form ranges of seamounts, sometimes very long, including the Carlsberg Ridge, Madagascar Ridge, Central Indian Ridge, Southwest Indian Ridge, Chagos-Laccadive Ridge, 85°E Ridge, 90°E Ridge, Southeast Indian Ridge, Broken Ridge, and East Indiaman Ridge. The Agulhas Plateau and Mascarene Plateau are the two major shallow areas.

The opening of the Indian Ocean began 156  when Africa separated from East Gondwana. The Indian Subcontinent began to separate from Australia-Antarctica 135–125 Ma and as the Tethys Ocean north of India began to close 118–84 Ma the Indian Ocean opened behind it.

==History==
The Indian Ocean, together with the Mediterranean, has connected people since ancient times, whereas the Atlantic and Pacific have had the roles of barriers or &quot;mare incognitum&quot;. The written history of the Indian Ocean, however, has been Eurocentric and largely dependent on the availability of written sources from the European colonial era. This history is often divided into an ancient period followed by an Islamic period; the subsequent colonial-era periods are often subdivided into Portuguese, Dutch, and British periods. Milo Kearney argues that the postwar time period can also be split into a period of competition for oil during the Cold War followed by American dominance.

A concept of an &quot;Indian Ocean World&quot; (IOW), similar to that of the &quot;Atlantic World&quot;, exists but emerged much more recently and is not well established. The IOW is, nevertheless, sometimes referred to as the &quot;first global economy&quot; and was based on the monsoon which linked Asia, China, India, and Mesopotamia. It developed independently from the European global trade in the Mediterranean and Atlantic and remained largely independent from them until European 19th-century colonial dominance.

The diverse history of the Indian Ocean is a unique mix of cultures, ethnic groups, natural resources, and shipping routes. It grew in importance beginning in the 1960s and 1970s and, after the Cold War, it has undergone periods of political instability, most recently with the emergence of India and China as regional powers.

===First settlements===

Pleistocene fossils of &quot;Homo erectus&quot; and other pre–&quot;H. sapiens&quot; hominid fossils, similar to &quot;H. heidelbergensis&quot; in Europe, have been found in India. According to the Toba catastrophe theory, a supereruption c. 74,000 years ago at Lake Toba, Sumatra, covered India with volcanic ashes and wiped out one or more lineages of such archaic humans in India and Southeast Asia.

The &quot;Out of Africa&quot; theory states that &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; spread from Africa into mainland Eurasia. The more recent &quot;Southern Dispersal&quot; or &quot;Coastal hypothesis&quot; instead advocates that modern humans spread along the coasts of the Arabic Peninsula and southern Asia. This hypothesis is supported by mtDNA research which reveals a rapid dispersal event during the Late Pleistocene (11,000 years ago). This coastal dispersal, however, began in East Africa 75,000 years ago and occurred intermittently from estuary to estuary along the northern perimeter of the Indian Ocean at a rate of per year. It eventually resulted in modern humans migrating from Sunda over Wallacea to Sahul (Southeast Asia to Australia). Since then, waves of migration have resettled people and, clearly, the Indian Ocean littoral had been inhabited long before the first civilisations emerged. 5000–6000 years ago six distinct cultural centres had evolved around the Indian Ocean: East Africa, the Middle East, the Indian Subcontinent, South East Asia, the Malay World and Australia; each interlinked to its neighbours.

Food globalisation began on the Indian Ocean littoral c. 4.000 years ago. Five African crops — sorghum, pearl millet, finger millet, cowpea and hyacinth bean — somehow found their way to Gujarat in India during the Late Harappan (2000–1700 BCE). Gujarati merchants evolved into the first explorers of the Indian Ocean as they traded African goods such as ivory, tortoise shells, and slaves. Broomcorn millet found its way from Central Asia to Africa, together with chicken and zebu cattle, although the exact timing is disputed. Around 2000 BCE black pepper and sesame, both native to Asia, appear in Egypt, albeit in small quantities. Around the same time the black rat and the house mouse emigrate from Asia to Egypt. Banana reached Africa around 3000 years ago.

At least eleven prehistoric tsunamis have struck the Indian Ocean coast of Indonesia between 7400 and 2900 years ago. Analysing sand beds in caves in the Aceh region, scientists concluded that the intervals between these tsunamis have varied from series of minor tsunamis over a century to dormant periods of more than 2000 years preceding megathrusts in the Sunda Trench. Although the risk for future tsunamis is high, a major megathrust such as the one in 2004 is likely to be followed by a long dormant period.

A group of scientists have argued that two large-scale impact events have occurred in the Indian Ocean: the Burckle Crater in the southern Indian Ocean in 2800 BCE and the Kanmare and Tabban craters in the Gulf of Carpentaria in northern Australia in 536 CE. Evidences for these impacts, the team argue, are micro-ejecta and Chevron dunes in southern Madagascar and in the Australian gulf. Geological evidences suggest the tsunamis caused by these impacts reached above sea level and inland. The impact events must have disrupted human settlements and perhaps even contributed to major climate changes.

===Antiquity===
The history of the Indian Ocean is marked by maritime trade; cultural and commercial exchange probably date back at least seven thousand years. Human culture spread early on the shores of the Indian Ocean and was always linked to the cultures of the Mediterranean and the Persian Gulf. Before , however, cultures on its shores were only loosely tied to each other; bronze, for example, was developed in Mesopotamia but remained uncommon in Egypt before 1800 BCE.
During this period, independent, short-distance oversea communications along its littoral margins evolved into an all-embracing network. The début of this network was not the achievement of a centralised or advanced civilisation but of local and regional exchange in the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea, and the Arabian Sea. Sherds of Ubaid (2500–500 BCE) pottery have been found in the western Gulf at Dilmun, present-day Bahrain; traces of exchange between this trading centre and Mesopotamia. The Sumerians traded grain, pottery, and bitumen (used for reed boats) for copper, stone, timber, tin, dates, onions, and pearls.
Coast-bound vessels transported goods between the Indus Valley civilisation (2600–1900 BCE) in the Indian subcontinent (modern-day Pakistan and Northwest India) and the Persian Gulf and Egypt.

The Red Sea, one of the main trade routes in Antiquity, was explored by Egyptians and Phoenicians during the last two millennia BCE. In the 6th century, BCE Greek explorer Scylax of Caryanda made a journey to India, working for the Persian king Darius, and his now-lost account put the Indian Ocean on the maps of Greek geographers. The Greeks began to explore the Indian Ocean following the conquests of Alexander the Great, who ordered a circumnavigation of the Arabian Peninsula in 323 BCE. During the two centuries that followed the reports of the explorers of Ptolemaic Egypt resulted in the best maps of the region until the Portuguese era many centuries later. The main interest in the region for the Ptolemies was not commercial but military; they explored Africa to hunt for war elephants.

The Rub&#x27; al Khali desert isolates the southern parts of the Arabic Peninsula and the Indian Ocean from the Arabic world. This encouraged the development of maritime trade in the region linking the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf to East Africa and India. The monsoon (from &quot;mawsim&quot;, the Arabic word for season), however, was used by sailors long before being &quot;discovered&quot; by Hippalus in the 1st century. Indian wood have been found in Sumerian cities, there is evidence of Akkad coastal trade in the region, and contacts between India and the Red Sea dates back to 2300 B.C. The archipelagoes of the central Indian Ocean, the Laccadive and Maldive islands, were probably populated during the 2nd century B.C. from the Indian mainland. They appear in written history in the account of merchant Sulaiman al-Tajir in the 9th century but the treacherous reefs of the islands were most likely cursed by the sailors of Aden long before the islands were even settled.

&quot;Periplus of the Erythraean Sea&quot;, an Alexandrian guide to the world beyond the Red Sea — including Africa and India — from the first century CE, not only gives insights into trade in the region but also shows that Roman and Greek sailors had already gained knowledge about the monsoon winds. The contemporaneous settlement of Madagascar by Austronesian sailors shows that the littoral margins of the Indian Ocean were being both well-populated and regularly traversed at least by this time. Albeit the monsoon must have been common knowledge in the Indian Ocean for centuries.

The Indian Ocean&#x27;s relatively calmer waters opened the areas bordering it to trade earlier than the Atlantic or Pacific oceans. The powerful monsoons also meant ships could easily sail west early in the season, then wait a few months and return eastwards. This allowed ancient Indonesian peoples to cross the Indian Ocean to settle in Madagascar around 1 CE.

In the 2nd or 1st century BCE, Eudoxus of Cyzicus was the first Greek to cross the Indian Ocean. The probably fictitious sailor Hippalus is said to have learnt the direct route from Arabia to India around this time. During the 1st and 2nd centuries AD intensive trade relations developed between Roman Egypt and the Tamil kingdoms of the Cheras, Cholas and Pandyas in Southern India. Like the Indonesian people above, the western sailors used the monsoon to cross the ocean. The unknown author of the &quot;Periplus of the Erythraean Sea&quot; describes this route, as well as the commodities that were traded along various commercial ports on the coasts of the Horn of Africa and India circa 1 CE. Among these trading settlements were Mosylon and Opone on the Red Sea littoral.

===Age of Discovery===
Unlike the Pacific Ocean where the civilization of the Polynesians reached most of the far-flung islands and atolls and populated them, almost all the islands, archipelagos and atolls of the Indian Ocean were uninhabited until colonial times. Although there were numerous ancient civilizations in the coastal states of Asia and parts of Africa, the Maldives were the only island group in the Central Indian Ocean region where an ancient civilization flourished. Maldivians, on their annual trade trip, took their oceangoing trade ships to Sri Lanka rather than mainland India, which is much closer, because their ships were dependent of the Indian Monsoon Current.

Arabic missionaries and merchants began to spread Islam along the western shores of the Indian Ocean from the 8th century, if not earlier. A Swahili stone mosque dating to the 8th–15th centuries has been found in Shanga, Kenya. Trade across the Indian Ocean gradually introduced Arabic script and rice as a staple in Eastern Africa.
Muslim merchants traded an estimated 1000 African slaves annually between 800 and 1700, a number that grew to during the 18th century, and 3700 during the period 1800–1870. Slave trade also occurred in the eastern Indian Ocean before the Dutch settled there around 1600 but the volume of this trade is unknown.

From 1405 to 1433 admiral Zheng He said to have led large fleets of the Ming dynasty on several treasure voyages through the Indian Ocean, ultimately reaching the coastal countries of East Africa.

The Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama rounded the Cape of Good Hope during his first voyage in 1497 and became the first European to sail to India. The Swahili people he encountered along the African east coast lived in a series of cities and had established trade routes to India and to China. Among them, the Portuguese kidnapped most of their pilots in coastal raids and on board ships. A few of the pilots, however, were gifts by local Swahili rulers, including the sailor from Gujarat, a gift by a Malindi ruler in Kenya, who helped the Portuguese to reach India. In expeditions after 1500, the Portuguese attacked and colonised cities along the African coast.
European slave trade in the Indian Ocean began when Portugal established Estado da Índia in the early 16th century. From then until the 1830s, slaves were exported from Mozambique annually and similar figures has been estimated for slaves brought from Asia to the Philippines during the Iberian Union (1580–1640).

The Ottoman Empire began its expansion into the Indian Ocean in 1517 with the conquest of Egypt under Sultan Selim I. Although the Ottomans shared the same religion as the trading communities in the Indian Ocean the region was unexplored by them. Maps that included the Indian Ocean had been produced by Muslim geographers centuries before the Ottoman conquests; Muslim scholars, such as Ibn Battuta in the 14th century, had visited most parts of the known world; contemporarily with Vasco da Gama, Arab navigator Ahmad ibn Mājid had compiled a guide to navigation in the Indian Ocean; the Ottomans, nevertheless, began their own parallel era of discovery which rivalled the European expansion.

The establishment of the Dutch East India Company in the early 17th century lead to a quick increase in the volume of the slave trade in the region; there were perhaps up to slaves in various Dutch colonies during the 17th and 18th centuries in the Indian Ocean. For example, some 4000 African slaves were used to build the Colombo fortress in Dutch Ceylon. Bali and neighbouring islands supplied regional networks with slaves 1620–1830. Indian and Chinese slave traders supplied Dutch Indonesia with perhaps slaves during the 17th and 18th centuries.

The East India Company (EIC) was established during the same period and in 1622 one of its ships carried slaves from the Coromandel Coast to Dutch East Indies. The EIC mostly traded in African slaves but also some Asian slaves purchased from Indian, Indonesian and Chinese slave traders. The French established colonies on the islands of Réunion and Mauritius in 1721; by 1735 some 7,200 slaves populated the Mascarene Islands, a number which had reached in 1807. The British captured the islands in 1810, however, and because the British had prohibited the slave trade in 1807 a system of clandestine slave trade developed to bring slaves to French planters on the islands; in all – slaves were exported to the Mascarene Islands from 1670 until 1848.

In all, European traders exported – slaves within the Indian Ocean between 1500 and 1850, and almost that same number were exported from the Indian Ocean to the Americas during the same period. Slave trade in the Indian Ocean was, nevertheless, very limited compared to slaves exported across the Atlantic. The island of Zanzibar was the center of the Indian Ocean slave trade in the 19th century. In the mid-19th century, as many as 50,000 slaves passed annually through the port.

===Late modern era===

Scientifically, the Indian Ocean remained poorly explored before the International Indian Ocean Expedition in the early 1960s. However, the &quot;Challenger&quot; expedition 1872–1876 only reported from south of the polar front. The &quot;Valdivia&quot; expedition 1898–1899 made deep samples in the Indian Ocean. In the 1930s, the John Murray Expedition mainly studied shallow-water habitats. The Swedish Deep Sea Expedition 1947–1948 also sampled the Indian Ocean on its global tour and the Danish &quot;Galathea&quot; sampled deep-water fauna from Sri Lanka to South Africa on its second expedition 1950–1952. The Soviet research vessel &quot;Vityaz&quot; also did research in the Indian Ocean.

The Suez Canal opened in 1869 when the Industrial Revolution dramatically changed global shipping – the sailing ship declined in importance as did the importance of European trade in favour of trade in East Asia and Australia.
The construction of the canal introduced many non-indigenous species into the Mediterranean. For example, the goldband goatfish (&quot;Upeneus moluccensis&quot;) has replaced the red mullet (&quot;Mullus barbatus&quot;); since the 1980s huge swarms of scyphozoan jellyfish (&quot;Rhopilema nomadica&quot;) have affected tourism and fisheries along the Levantian coast and clogged power and desalination plants. Plans announced in 2014 to build a new, much larger Suez Canal parallel to the 19th-century canal will most likely boost the economy in the region but also cause ecological damage in a much wider area.
Throughout the colonial era, islands such as Mauritius were important shipping nodes for the Dutch, French, and British. Mauritius, an inhabited island, became populated by slaves from Africa and indenture labour from India. The end of World War II marked the end of the colonial era. The British left Mauritius in 1974 and with 70% of the population of Indian descent, Mauritius became a close ally of India. In the 1980s, during the Cold War, the South African regime acted to destabilise several island nations in the Indian Ocean, including the Seychelles, Comoros, and Madagascar. India intervened in Mauritius to prevent a coup d&#x27;état, backed up by the United States who feared the Soviet Union could gain access to Port Louis and threaten the U.S. base on Diego Garcia.
Iranrud was an unrealised plan by Iran and the Soviet Union to build a canal between the Caspian Sea and the Persian Gulf.

Testimonies from the colonial era are stories of African slaves, Indian indentured labourers and white settlers. But, while there was a clear racial line between free men and slaves in the Atlantic World, this delineation is less distinct in the Indian Ocean — there were Indian slaves and settlers as well as black indentured labourers. There were also a string of prison camps across the Indian Ocean, such as Cellular Jail in the Andamans, in which prisoners, exiles, POWs, forced labourers, merchants and people of different faiths were forcefully united. On the islands of the Indian Ocean, therefore, a trend of creolisation emerged.

On 26 December 2004, fourteen countries around the Indian Ocean were hit by a wave of tsunamis caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. The waves radiated across the ocean at speeds exceeding , reached up to in height, and resulted in an estimated 236,000 deaths.

In the late 2000s, the ocean evolved into a hub of pirate activity. By 2013, attacks off the Horn region&#x27;s coast had steadily declined due to active private security and international navy patrols, especially by the Indian Navy.

Malaysia Airlines Flight 370, a Boeing 777-2H6ER with 239 occupants on board, disappeared on 8 March 2014 and is alleged to have crashed into the southern Indian Ocean about from the coast of southwest Western Australia. Despite an extensive search, the whereabouts of the remains of the aircraft is unknown.

The Sentinelese people of North Sentinel Island, which lies near South Andaman Island in the Bay of Bengal, have been called by experts the most isolated people in the world.

The sovereignty of the Chagos Archipelago in the Indian Ocean is disputed between the United Kingdom and Mauritius. In February 2019, the International Court of Justice in The Hague issued an advisory opinion stating that the UK must transfer the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius.

==Geopolitics==
The Indian Ocean is crucial for global trade, especially in oil and hydrocarbons. Environmental and geopolitical concerns in the region include the effects of climate change, the illegal drug trade, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, maritime safety and security, and increasing major power competition.

===Trade===
The sea lanes in the Indian Ocean are considered among the most strategically important in the world with more than 80 percent of the world&#x27;s seaborne trade in oil transits through the Indian Ocean and its vital chokepoints, with 40 percent passing through the Strait of Hormuz, 35 percent through the Strait of Malacca and 8 percent through the Bab el-Mandab Strait.
The Indian Ocean provides major sea routes connecting the Middle East, Africa, and East Asia with Europe and the Americas. It carries a particularly heavy traffic of petroleum and petroleum products from the oil fields of the Persian Gulf and Indonesia. Large reserves of hydrocarbons are being tapped in the offshore areas of Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, and Western Australia. An estimated 40% of the world&#x27;s offshore oil production comes from the Indian Ocean. Beach sands rich in heavy minerals, and offshore placer deposits are actively exploited by bordering countries, particularly India, Pakistan, South Africa, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Thailand.

In particular, the maritime part of the Silk Road leads through the Indian Ocean on which a large part of the global container trade is carried out. The Silk Road runs with its connections from the Chinese coast and its large container ports to the south via Hanoi to Jakarta, Singapore and Kuala Lumpur through the Strait of Malacca via the Sri Lankan Colombo opposite the southern tip of India via Malé, the capital of the Maldives, to the East African Mombasa, from there to Djibouti, then through the Red Sea over the Suez Canal into the Mediterranean, there via Haifa, Istanbul and Athens to the Upper Adriatic to the northern Italian junction of Trieste with its international free port and its rail connections to Central and Eastern Europe.

The Silk Road has become internationally important again on the one hand through European integration, the end of the Cold War and free world trade and on the other hand through Chinese initiatives. Chinese companies have made investments in several Indian Ocean ports, including Gwadar, Hambantota, Colombo and Sonadia. This has sparked a debate about the strategic implications of these investments. There are also Chinese investments and related efforts to intensify trade in East Africa and in European ports such as Piraeus and Trieste.

==See also==

* Connected bodies of water:
** Indo-Atlantic
** Indo-Mediterranean
** Indo-Pacific
* Indian Ocean Commission
* Indian Ocean Geoid Low
* Indian Ocean in World War II
* Indian Ocean literature
* Indian Ocean Naval Symposium
* Indian Ocean Research Group
* Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
* List of islands in the Indian Ocean
* List of sovereign states and dependent territories in the Indian Ocean
* Indian Ocean Rim Association
* Maritime Silk Road
* Territorial claims in Antarctica

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* Palat, Ravi. &quot;The Making of an Indian Ocean World-Economy, 1250–1650: Princes, Paddy fields, and Bazaars&quot; (2015).
* Pearson, Michael (2015). &quot;Trade, Circulation, and Flow in the Indian Ocean World&quot; (Palgrave Series in Indian Ocean World Studies), .
* Schnepel, Burkhard and Edward A. Alpers, eds. &quot;Connectivity in Motion: Island Hubs in the Indian Ocean World&quot; (2017).
* Schottenhammer, Angela, ed. &quot;Early Global Interconnectivity across the Indian Ocean World, Volume I: Commercial Structures and Exchanges&quot; (2019).
* Schottenhammer, Angela, ed. &quot;Early Global Interconnectivity across the Indian Ocean World, Volume II: Exchange of Ideas, Religions, and Technologies&quot; (2019).
* Serels, Steven, ed. &quot;The Impoverishment of the African Red Sea Littoral, 1640–1945&quot; (2018).

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="4" end="16" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="63" end="68" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="133" end="153" title="Earth#Surface" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960" start="214" end="223" title="Australia (continent)" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354" start="271" end="285" title="Southern Ocean" label="Southern Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="290" end="300" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="405" end="416" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="422" end="433" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="439" end="452" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q544914" start="462" end="475" title="Laccadive Sea" label="Laccadive Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="531" end="536" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q186198" start="737" end="755" title="Eastern Hemisphere" label="Eastern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="1031" end="1048" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q503269" start="1172" end="1180" title="seamount" label="seamount"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="1203" end="1210" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="1266" end="1273" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="1330" end="1344" title="global climate" label="global climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142205" start="1433" end="1451" title="Walker circulation" label="Walker circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="1776" end="1787" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="1792" end="1801" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521986" start="1827" end="1840" title="garbage patch" label="garbage patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="2193" end="2207" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="2629" end="2637" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2650" end="2657" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="2748" end="2753" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="2794" end="2811" title="Ming treasure voyages" label="Chinese explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="2819" end="2827" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="2839" end="2851" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508736" start="2943" end="2966" title="List of Graeco-Roman geographers" label="Ancient Greek geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363807" start="3027" end="3041" title="Erythraean Sea" label="Erythraean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3084" end="3111" title="Borders of the oceans#Indian Ocean" label="borders of the Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="3134" end="3173" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="International Hydrographic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354" start="3196" end="3210" title="Southern Ocean" label="Southern Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381018" start="3416" end="3426" title="Meridional" label="Meridional"/>
<link wikidata="Q796502" start="3491" end="3508" title="20th meridian east" label="20° east meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085" start="3529" end="3541" title="Cape Agulhas" label="Cape Agulhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q123871" start="3637" end="3652" title="South East Cape" label="South East Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="3670" end="3678" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256150" start="3780" end="3784" title="30th parallel north" label="30°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="3792" end="3804" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="3847" end="3854" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q186198" start="4098" end="4116" title="Eastern Hemisphere" label="Eastern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457494" start="4160" end="4178" title="90th meridian east" label="90th meridian east"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599522" start="4199" end="4216" title="Ninety East Ridge" label="Ninety East Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255282" start="5028" end="5041" title="active margin" label="active margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918464" start="5165" end="5179" title="passive margin" label="passive margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290577" start="5233" end="5239" title="Continental slope" label="slopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="5424" end="5435" title="Shelf break" label="Shelf break"/>
<link wikidata="Q749598" start="5467" end="5482" title="Bouguer gravity" label="Bouguer gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q500515" start="5503" end="5508" title="Gal (unit)" label="mGals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5749" end="5759" title="Antarctica#Geography" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="5856" end="5879" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="6164" end="6178" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422857" start="6634" end="6641" title="Strahler number" label="order 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="6647" end="6654" title="Zambezi" label="Zambezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="6656" end="6662" title="Ganges River" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="6663" end="6674" title="Brahmaputra" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="6676" end="6681" title="Indus River" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q138491" start="6683" end="6688" title="Jubba River" label="Jubba"/>
<link wikidata="Q183078" start="6694" end="6700" title="Murray River" label="Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q166966" start="6726" end="6739" title="Shatt al-Arab" label="Shatt al-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181510" start="6741" end="6756" title="Wadi Ad Dawasir" label="Wadi Ad Dawasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="6813" end="6820" title="Limpopo River" label="Limpopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="6855" end="6863" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163759" start="6984" end="6996" title="Bengal delta" label="Bengal delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526" start="7000" end="7010" title="Sunderbans" label="Sunderbans"/>
<link wikidata="Q229088" start="7033" end="7046" title="Marginal seas" label="Marginal seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="7138" end="7156" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="7167" end="7177" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306215" start="7210" end="7221" title="Sea of Zanj" label="Sea of Zanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="7284" end="7295" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41837" start="7297" end="7309" title="Gulf of Aden" label="Gulf of Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="7330" end="7337" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83318" start="7355" end="7368" title="Bab-el-Mandeb" label="Bab-el-Mandeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q772806" start="7395" end="7411" title="Gulf of Tadjoura" label="Gulf of Tadjoura"/>
<link wikidata="Q53732168" start="7443" end="7460" title="Guardafui Channel" label="Guardafui Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81611" start="7561" end="7574" title="Gulf of Aqaba" label="Gulf of Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q168277" start="7579" end="7591" title="Gulf of Suez" label="Gulf of Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="7643" end="7660" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="7691" end="7701" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="7776" end="7788" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="7796" end="7808" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Gulf of Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79883" start="7817" end="7833" title="Strait of Hormuz" label="Strait of Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074118" start="7860" end="7875" title="Gulf of Bahrain" label="Gulf of Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q844917" start="7955" end="7968" title="Gulf of Kutch" label="Gulf of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q654010" start="7973" end="7988" title="Gulf of Khambat" label="Gulf of Khambat"/>
<link wikidata="Q544914" start="8042" end="8055" title="Laccadive Sea" label="Laccadive Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="8115" end="8128" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q622811" start="8165" end="8179" title="Gulf of Mannar" label="Gulf of Mannar"/>
<link wikidata="Q186299" start="8188" end="8199" title="Palk Strait" label="Palk Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q201743" start="8237" end="8255" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="8279" end="8290" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8382" end="8399" title="Geology of Indonesia#Indonesian Seaway" label="Indonesian Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="8419" end="8426" title="Malacca Strait" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q192790" start="8428" end="8433" title="Sunda Strait" label="Sunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q179188" start="8438" end="8451" title="Torres Strait" label="Torres Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q180844" start="8458" end="8477" title="Gulf of Carpentaria" label="Gulf of Carpentaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q186733" start="8529" end="8551" title="Great Australian Bight" label="Great Australian Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="8602" end="8613" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="8636" end="8649" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="8672" end="8683" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q544914" start="8700" end="8713" title="Laccadive Sea" label="Laccadive Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="8730" end="8748" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131418" start="8765" end="8774" title="Timor Sea" label="Timor Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="8791" end="8798" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41837" start="8815" end="8827" title="Gulf of Aden" label="Gulf of Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="8844" end="8856" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q150370" start="8873" end="8883" title="Flores Sea" label="Flores Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q185291" start="8900" end="8911" title="Molucca Sea" label="Molucca Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="8928" end="8940" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Gulf of Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186733" start="8957" end="8979" title="Great Australian Bight" label="Great Australian Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q81611" start="8995" end="9008" title="Gulf of Aqaba" label="Gulf of Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q654010" start="9021" end="9037" title="Gulf of Khambhat" label="Gulf of Khambhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q844917" start="9040" end="9053" title="Gulf of Kutch" label="Gulf of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q168277" start="9056" end="9068" title="Gulf of Suez" label="Gulf of Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q20402852" start="9071" end="9082" title="Dubai Canal" label="Dubai Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79883" start="9085" end="9101" title="Strait of Hormuz" label="Strait of Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846140" start="9205" end="9223" title="Tropical Warm Pool" label="Tropical Warm Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q849599" start="9392" end="9403" title="thermocline" label="thermocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="9449" end="9456" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267550" start="9576" end="9590" title="Somali Current" label="Somali Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q600069" start="9595" end="9617" title="Indian Monsoon Current" label="Indian Monsoon Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142205" start="9647" end="9665" title="Walker circulation" label="Walker circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="9713" end="9722" title="Upwelling" label="Upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="9739" end="9753" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="9762" end="9779" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="9787" end="9806" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257715" start="9868" end="9890" title="Indonesian Throughflow" label="Indonesian Throughflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="9967" end="9974" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="9992" end="9999" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="10380" end="10391" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="10400" end="10413" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741484" start="10859" end="10882" title="Bølling–Allerød warming" label="Bølling–Allerød warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596382" start="10884" end="10892" title="Heinrich event" label="Heinrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q944279" start="10898" end="10911" title="Younger Dryas" label="Younger Dryas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41560" start="11159" end="11177" title="greenhouse warming" label="greenhouse warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="11225" end="11232" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574518" start="11241" end="11260" title="Indian Ocean Dipole" label="Indian Ocean Dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q11712092" start="12166" end="12189" title="Indian Ocean Experiment" label="Indian Ocean Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528157" start="12302" end="12319" title="Asian brown cloud" label="Asian brown cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="12346" end="12376" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q393868" start="12666" end="12677" title="polar front" label="polar front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391008" start="12687" end="12705" title="50th parallel south" label="50° south latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="12800" end="12809" title="siliceous" label="siliceous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12810" end="12815" title="Pelagic sediment#Oozes" label="oozes"/>
<link wikidata="Q153840" start="12938" end="12960" title="Southwest Indian Ridge" label="Southwest Indian Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="13017" end="13025" title="Ocean current" label="currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250263" start="13074" end="13078" title="gyre" label="gyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q398548" start="13195" end="13210" title="Agulhas Current" label="Agulhas Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q23578938" start="13215" end="13237" title="Agulhas Return Current" label="Agulhas Return Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670744" start="13499" end="13512" title="submarine fan" label="submarine fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887618" start="13532" end="13542" title="Bengal Fan" label="Bengal Fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96382132" start="13547" end="13556" title="Indus Fan" label="Indus Fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155155" start="13583" end="13597" title="Marine terrace" label="slope terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366717" start="13602" end="13613" title="rift valley" label="rift valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39274" start="13669" end="13671" title="Sverdrup" label="Sv"/>
<link wikidata="Q205912" start="13702" end="13724" title="Circumpolar Deep Water" label="Circumpolar Deep Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q201698" start="13776" end="13782" title="Crozet Islands" label="Crozet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="13787" end="13797" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q153840" start="13821" end="13843" title="Southwest Indian Ridge" label="Southwest Indian Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q85784132" start="13860" end="13875" title="Mascarene Basin" label="Mascarene Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273117" start="13899" end="13923" title="western boundary current" label="western boundary current"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14052" end="14064" title="Somali Basin" label="Somali Basin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14163" end="14175" title="Rossby wave#Oceanic waves" label="Rossby waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q921070" start="14464" end="14489" title="North Atlantic Deep Water" label="North Atlantic Deep Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913650" start="14631" end="14653" title="Antarctic Bottom Water" label="Antarctic Bottom Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376065" start="14665" end="14678" title="Enderby Plain" label="Enderby Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15781870" start="14682" end="14695" title="Agulhas Basin" label="Agulhas Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="14788" end="14806" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794513" start="14811" end="14838" title="Prince Edward fracture zone" label="Prince Edward fracture zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q950439" start="14850" end="14868" title="20th parallel south" label="20° south latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391112" start="14942" end="14960" title="40th parallel south" label="40° south latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="14994" end="15007" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="15045" end="15057" title="Surface runoff" label="runoff water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257715" start="15216" end="15238" title="Indonesian Throughflow" label="Indonesian Throughflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072306" start="15272" end="15296" title="South Equatorial Current" label="South Equatorial Current"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15336" end="15356" title="Salinity#Seawater" label="Sea surface salinity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15382" end="15385" title="Salinity#PSU" label="PSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080625" start="15967" end="15993" title="Indian Ocean garbage patch" label="Indian Ocean garbage patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089262" start="16057" end="16074" title="Indian Ocean Gyre" label="Indian Ocean Gyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="16091" end="16106" title="Plastic pollution" label="plastic garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="16174" end="16192" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q474837" start="16586" end="16597" title="Amphidromic point" label="amphidromes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053589" start="16659" end="16670" title="Rossby wave" label="Rossby wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q47568" start="16685" end="16692" title="Iceberg" label="Iceberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390853" start="16716" end="16734" title="55th parallel south" label="55° south latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="16898" end="16900" title="Gigatonne" label="Gt"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="16920" end="16941" title="Anthropogenic climate change" label="anthropogenic warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="17221" end="17235" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="17351" end="17364" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="17401" end="17408" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="17484" end="17493" title="upwelling" label="upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="17583" end="17597" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="17850" end="17854" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="18006" end="18017" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="18023" end="18029" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="18072" end="18078" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q14868764" start="18482" end="18495" title="ocean warming" label="ocean warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304561" start="18651" end="18673" title="large marine ecosystem" label="large marine ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q398548" start="18680" end="18695" title="Agulhas Current" label="Agulhas Current"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18697" end="18719" title="Somali Coastal Current" label="Somali Coastal Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="18721" end="18728" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="18730" end="18741" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="18743" end="18756" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="18758" end="18774" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18776" end="18805" title="West Central Australian Shelf" label="West Central Australian Shelf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18807" end="18833" title="Northwest Australian Shelf" label="Northwest Australian Shelf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18838" end="18864" title="Southwest Australian Shelf" label="Southwest Australian Shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="18982" end="18991" title="Estuary" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="18993" end="19002" title="Upwelling" label="Upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880708" start="19050" end="19057" title="saltern" label="saltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135229" start="19139" end="19153" title="Artemia salina" label="Artemia salina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441328" start="19170" end="19187" title="Dunaliella salina" label="Dunaliella salina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507383" start="19631" end="19654" title="sea surface temperature" label="sea surface temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="19681" end="19689" title="Mangrove" label="Mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q867648" start="20064" end="20082" title="hydrothermal vents" label="hydrothermal vents"/>
<link wikidata="Q668921" start="20248" end="20276" title="West Indian Ocean coelacanth" label="West Indian Ocean coelacanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156533" start="20385" end="20406" title="Indonesian coelacanth" label="Indonesian coelacanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="20427" end="20442" title="Sulawesi Island" label="Sulawesi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q160830" start="20555" end="20573" title="Sarcopterygii" label="lobe-finned fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q864294" start="20915" end="20935" title="biodiversity hotspot" label="biodiversity hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q37686" start="21642" end="21651" title="chameleon" label="chameleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q861966" start="21827" end="21838" title="dung beetle" label="dung beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429208" start="21841" end="21850" title="day gecko" label="day gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192405" start="21857" end="21862" title="lemur" label="lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q216818" start="21884" end="21902" title="adaptive radiation" label="adaptive radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q549716" start="21999" end="22014" title="Mare aux Songes" label="Mare aux Songes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43502" start="22058" end="22062" title="Dodo" label="Dodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q135344" start="22110" end="22122" title="Cylindraspis" label="Cylindraspis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330666" start="22278" end="22305" title="Maputaland-Pondoland-Albany Hotspot" label="Maputaland-Pondoland-Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q159918" start="22637" end="22653" title="white rhinoceros" label="white rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q95036" start="22852" end="22868" title="black rhinoceros" label="black rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q173651" start="22907" end="22923" title="African wild dog" label="African wild dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104423" start="23075" end="23108" title="Coastal forests of eastern Africa" label="Coastal forests of eastern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="23579" end="23593" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q319288" start="23818" end="23837" title="Ethiopian Highlands" label="Ethiopian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234397" start="23843" end="23867" title="East African Rift" label="East African Rift valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q82859" start="23873" end="23880" title="Socotra" label="Socotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q747627" start="24022" end="24029" title="dibatag" label="dibatag"/>
<link wikidata="Q853403" start="24067" end="24087" title="Speke&amp;#x27;s gazelle" label="Speke&amp;#x27;s gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q603135" start="24122" end="24137" title="Somali wild ass" label="Somali wild ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q189484" start="24184" end="24200" title="hamadryas baboon" label="hamadryas baboon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="24333" end="24339" title="Acacia" label="Acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648255" start="24340" end="24350" title="Commiphora" label="Commiphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321124" start="24393" end="24402" title="Yeheb nut" label="Yeheb nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q147295" start="24491" end="24499" title="cyclamen" label="cyclamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075855" start="24579" end="24595" title="Warsangli linnet" label="Warsangli linnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="24746" end="24757" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="24867" end="24880" title="Western Ghats" label="Western Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="24881" end="24890" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150505" start="25240" end="25250" title="Indo-Burma" label="Indo-Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="25604" end="25621" title="sea level rise" label="rising sea levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="25711" end="25721" title="speciation" label="speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q842139" start="25772" end="25790" title="Annamite Mountains" label="Annamite Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q429976" start="25864" end="25880" title="floristic region" label="floristic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366175" start="26085" end="26094" title="Sundaland" label="Sundaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q599672" start="26363" end="26370" title="Bornean orangutan" label="Bornean"/>
<link wikidata="Q543424" start="26375" end="26393" title="Sumatran orangutan" label="Sumatran orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192029" start="26400" end="26416" title="proboscis monkey" label="proboscis monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q170311" start="26426" end="26431" title="Javan rhinoceros" label="Javan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29220" start="26436" end="26455" title="Sumatran rhinoceros" label="Sumatran rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991326" start="26461" end="26469" title="Wallacea" label="Wallacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502879" start="26622" end="26641" title="Southwest Australia (ecoregion)" label="Southwest Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217487" start="26803" end="26812" title="Shark Bay" label="Shark Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087695" start="26816" end="26829" title="Israelite Bay" label="Israelite Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q381050" start="26855" end="26870" title="Nullarbor Plain" label="Nullarbor Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698" start="27330" end="27345" title="mid-ocean ridge" label="mid-ocean ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037802" start="27403" end="27425" title="Rodrigues Triple Point" label="Rodrigues Triple Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q190604" start="27435" end="27455" title="Central Indian Ridge" label="Central Indian Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037261" start="27471" end="27486" title="Carlsberg Ridge" label="Carlsberg Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q203548" start="27503" end="27516" title="African plate" label="African plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q499481" start="27526" end="27538" title="Indian plate" label="Indian plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q153840" start="27544" end="27566" title="Southwest Indian Ridge" label="Southwest Indian Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q501705" start="27605" end="27620" title="Antarctic plate" label="Antarctic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q558898" start="27630" end="27652" title="Southeast Indian Ridge" label="Southeast Indian Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q783056" start="27668" end="27684" title="Australian plate" label="Australian plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q501705" start="27694" end="27709" title="Antarctic plate" label="Antarctic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q728745" start="27758" end="27776" title="Owen fracture zone" label="Owen fracture zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="27869" end="27890" title="Indo-Australian plate" label="Indo-Australian plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q499481" start="27944" end="27956" title="Indian plate" label="Indian plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579442" start="27962" end="27977" title="Capricorn plate" label="Capricorn plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q783056" start="27983" end="27999" title="Australian plate" label="Australian plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203548" start="28055" end="28068" title="African plate" label="African plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234397" start="28093" end="28110" title="East African Rift" label="East African Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q203548" start="28127" end="28133" title="Nubian plate" label="Nubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415528" start="28138" end="28145" title="Somali plate" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q118394" start="28214" end="28225" title="Java Trench" label="Java Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009262" start="28274" end="28287" title="Makran Trench" label="Makran Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q503269" start="28340" end="28354" title="seamount chain" label="seamount chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="28368" end="28376" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="hotspots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393388" start="28409" end="28424" title="Réunion hotspot" label="Réunion hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="28467" end="28474" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982024" start="28483" end="28500" title="Mascarene Plateau" label="Mascarene Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066888" start="28508" end="28530" title="Chagos-Laccadive Ridge" label="Chagos-Laccadive Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q55819" start="28539" end="28551" title="Deccan Traps" label="Deccan Traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393385" start="28580" end="28597" title="Kerguelen hotspot" label="Kerguelen hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q46772" start="28638" end="28655" title="Kerguelen Islands" label="Kerguelen Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308629" start="28660" end="28677" title="Kerguelen Plateau" label="Kerguelen Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599522" start="28685" end="28702" title="Ninety East Ridge" label="Ninety East Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286308" start="28711" end="28725" title="Rajmahal Traps" label="Rajmahal Traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q46623" start="28814" end="28835" title="Prince Edward Islands" label="Prince Edward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349164" start="28843" end="28865" title="Eighty Five East Ridge" label="Eighty Five East Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037261" start="29307" end="29322" title="Carlsberg Ridge" label="Carlsberg Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29324" end="29340" title="Madagascar Ridge" label="Madagascar Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q190604" start="29342" end="29362" title="Central Indian Ridge" label="Central Indian Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q153840" start="29364" end="29386" title="Southwest Indian Ridge" label="Southwest Indian Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066888" start="29388" end="29410" title="Chagos-Laccadive Ridge" label="Chagos-Laccadive Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349164" start="29412" end="29422" title="Eighty Five East Ridge" label="85°E Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599522" start="29424" end="29434" title="Ninety East Ridge" label="90°E Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q558898" start="29436" end="29458" title="Southeast Indian Ridge" label="Southeast Indian Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579477" start="29460" end="29472" title="Broken Ridge" label="Broken Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29478" end="29497" title="East Indiaman Ridge" label="East Indiaman Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23578929" start="29503" end="29518" title="Agulhas Plateau" label="Agulhas Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982024" start="29523" end="29540" title="Mascarene Plateau" label="Mascarene Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="29650" end="29658" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="29750" end="29762" title="Tethys Ocean" label="Tethys Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q130778103" start="29869" end="29900" title="Indo-Mediterranean" label="together with the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q587153" start="30017" end="30032" title="Terra incognita" label="mare incognitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q376717" start="30099" end="30110" title="Eurocentrism" label="Eurocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234208" start="30181" end="30202" title="Western imperialism in Asia" label="European colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="30350" end="30360" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="30362" end="30367" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="30373" end="30380" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201472" start="30419" end="30426" title="Post-war" label="postwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="30505" end="30513" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816595" start="30630" end="30644" title="Atlantic World" label="Atlantic World"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="30873" end="30884" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="31452" end="31464" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105784" start="31542" end="31560" title="Homo heidelbergensis" label="H. heidelbergensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123218" start="31621" end="31644" title="Toba catastrophe theory" label="Toba catastrophe theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q183360" start="31685" end="31694" title="Lake Toba" label="Lake Toba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="31831" end="31856" title="Recent African origin of modern humans" label="&amp;quot;Out of Africa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455077" start="31965" end="31983" title="Southern Dispersal" label="Southern Dispersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="32160" end="32165" title="Mitochondrial DNA" label="mtDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q498831" start="32224" end="32240" title="Late Pleistocene" label="Late Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366175" start="32511" end="32516" title="Sundaland" label="Sunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991326" start="32522" end="32530" title="Wallacea" label="Wallacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960" start="32534" end="32539" title="Australia (continent)" label="Sahul"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="33050" end="33057" title="Sorghum bicolor" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q50840653" start="33059" end="33071" title="Pennisetum glaucum" label="pearl millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q932258" start="33073" end="33086" title="Eleusine coracana" label="finger millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q498940" start="33088" end="33094" title="Vigna unguiculata" label="cowpea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077410" start="33099" end="33112" title="Lablab purpureus" label="hyacinth bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="33142" end="33149" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="33170" end="33183" title="Late Harappan" label="Late Harappan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165196" start="33346" end="33362" title="Panicum miliaceum" label="Broomcorn millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q46889" start="33432" end="33436" title="zebu" label="zebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="33500" end="33512" title="Piper nigrum" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763698" start="33517" end="33523" title="Sesamum indicum" label="sesame"/>
<link wikidata="Q106133" start="33616" end="33625" title="Rattus rattus" label="black rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q83310" start="33634" end="33645" title="Mus musculus" label="house mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021904" start="34344" end="34358" title="Burckle Crater" label="Burckle Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q180844" start="34442" end="34461" title="Gulf of Carpentaria" label="Gulf of Carpentaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705697" start="34561" end="34568" title="Chevron (land form)" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="34569" end="34573" title="dune" label="dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q581103" start="34816" end="34837" title="Extreme weather events of 535–536" label="major climate changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="35400" end="35408" title="littoral" label="littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q245156" start="35648" end="35653" title="Ubaid period" label="Ubaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q748846" start="35716" end="35722" title="Dilmun" label="Dilmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="35736" end="35743" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="35796" end="35807" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="35813" end="35818" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="35850" end="35857" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q373613" start="35868" end="35877" title="reed boat" label="reed boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="35989" end="36014" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Indus Valley civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="36026" end="36029" title="BCE" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q203859" start="36205" end="36214" title="First Dynasty of Egypt" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="36219" end="36228" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q453311" start="36305" end="36323" title="Scylax of Caryanda" label="Scylax of Caryanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="36378" end="36384" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="36538" end="36557" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="36698" end="36713" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="36917" end="36929" title="war elephant" label="war elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q229269" start="36937" end="36955" title="Rub&amp;#x27; al Khali" label="Rub&amp;#x27; al Khali"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="37194" end="37201" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9347981" start="37748" end="37765" title="Sulaiman al-Tajir" label="Sulaiman al-Tajir"/>
<link wikidata="Q664162" start="37923" end="37953" title="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea" label="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="37964" end="37974" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="38204" end="38211" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="38253" end="38263" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="38267" end="38279" title="Austronesian people" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="38845" end="38855" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q673550" start="38901" end="38919" title="Eudoxus of Cyzicus" label="Eudoxus of Cyzicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388785" start="38998" end="39006" title="Hippalus" label="Hippalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="39052" end="39058" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008214" start="39132" end="39147" title="Roman commerce" label="trade relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="39166" end="39177" title="Roman Egypt" label="Roman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="39186" end="39200" title="Tamil people" label="Tamil kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="39208" end="39214" title="Chera Dynasty" label="Cheras"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="39216" end="39222" title="Chola Dynasty" label="Cholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="39227" end="39234" title="Pandyas" label="Pandyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="39238" end="39252" title="South India" label="Southern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q664162" start="39377" end="39407" title="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea" label="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917050" start="39606" end="39613" title="Mosylon" label="Mosylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098410" start="39618" end="39623" title="Opone" label="Opone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="39728" end="39739" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="40022" end="40030" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562783" start="40135" end="40145" title="Dhivehi people" label="Maldivians"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="40212" end="40221" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q600069" start="40314" end="40336" title="Indian Monsoon Current" label="Indian Monsoon Current"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40382" end="40439" title="Spread of Islam#East Africa" label="spread Islam along the western shores of the Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="40480" end="40487" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q23585053" start="40552" end="40558" title="Shanga, Pate Island" label="Shanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="40646" end="40652" title="Staple food" label="staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="41010" end="41018" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="41056" end="41068" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="41080" end="41096" title="treasure voyages" label="treasure voyages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="41207" end="41220" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="41233" end="41250" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q721854" start="41335" end="41349" title="Swahili people" label="Swahili people"/>
<link wikidata="Q271411" start="41686" end="41693" title="Malindi" label="Malindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="41922" end="41937" title="Portuguese India" label="Estado da Índia"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="42136" end="42149" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="42168" end="42182" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="42273" end="42280" title="Selim I" label="Selim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142012" start="42468" end="42486" title="Muslim geographers" label="Muslim geographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="42552" end="42563" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919866" start="42678" end="42693" title="Ahmad ibn Mājid" label="Ahmad ibn Mājid"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="42885" end="42909" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="43052" end="43066" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277589" start="43184" end="43200" title="Fort (Colombo)" label="Colombo fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841483" start="43204" end="43216" title="Dutch Ceylon" label="Dutch Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="43417" end="43435" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q182561" start="43534" end="43550" title="Coromandel Coast" label="Coromandel Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="43554" end="43571" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="43751" end="43758" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="43763" end="43772" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q205695" start="43822" end="43839" title="Mascarene Islands" label="Mascarene Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="43881" end="43888" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q770832" start="43956" end="43982" title="Slave Trade Act 1807" label="prohibited the slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="44487" end="44495" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q105322255" start="44518" end="44542" title="Indian Ocean slave trade" label="Indian Ocean slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q25588857" start="44741" end="44778" title="International Indian Ocean Expedition" label="International Indian Ocean Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q644521" start="44812" end="44845" title="Challenger expedition" label="&amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312945" start="44905" end="44936" title="Valdivia Expedition" label="&amp;quot;Valdivia&amp;quot; expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709464" start="45070" end="45097" title="Albatross expedition" label="Swedish Deep Sea Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491732" start="45172" end="45192" title="Galathea expeditions" label="&amp;quot;Galathea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516653" start="45312" end="45330" title="RV Vityaz (1939)" label="&amp;quot;Vityaz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="45375" end="45385" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="45410" end="45431" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482121" start="45733" end="45752" title="Upeneus moluccensis" label="Upeneus moluccensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171" start="45795" end="45810" title="Mullus barbatus" label="Mullus barbatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272388" start="45850" end="45859" title="scyphozoa" label="scyphozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377584" start="45878" end="45896" title="Rhopilema nomadica" label="Rhopilema nomadica"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211063" start="46036" end="46071" title="Suez Canal Area Development Project" label="build a new, much larger Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="46256" end="46265" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252699" start="46407" end="46423" title="Indian indenture system" label="indenture labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223330" start="46447" end="46459" title="Indian Ocean in World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929" start="46938" end="46948" title="Port Louis" label="Port Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184851" start="46979" end="46991" title="Diego Garcia" label="Diego Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961314" start="46993" end="47000" title="Iranrud" label="Iranrud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345501" start="47529" end="47542" title="Cellular Jail" label="Cellular Jail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030628" start="47735" end="47747" title="creolisation" label="creolisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="47844" end="47851" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="47867" end="47895" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q214451" start="48077" end="48083" title="Piracy in Somalia" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q356359" start="48247" end="48258" title="Indian Navy" label="Indian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908324" start="48261" end="48289" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="48293" end="48309" title="Boeing 777" label="Boeing 777-2H6ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="48463" end="48480" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q917695" start="48575" end="48586" title="Sentinelese" label="Sentinelese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260331" start="48597" end="48618" title="North Sentinel Island" label="North Sentinel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473243" start="48636" end="48656" title="South Andaman Island" label="South Andaman Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q672979" start="48716" end="48731" title="Uncontacted peoples" label="isolated people"/>
<link wikidata="Q192188" start="48770" end="48788" title="Chagos Archipelago" label="Chagos Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066892" start="48812" end="48820" title="Chagos Archipelago sovereignty dispute" label="disputed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="48852" end="48861" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="48885" end="48915" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="48919" end="48928" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q65077749" start="48956" end="48963" title="Legal Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965" label="stating"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="49203" end="49217" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="49223" end="49241" title="illegal drug trade" label="illegal drug trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q675637" start="49243" end="49286" title="illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing" label="illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="50444" end="50453" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="50663" end="50668" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="50672" end="50679" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="50681" end="50690" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="50695" end="50707" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="50720" end="50737" title="Strait of Malacca" label="Strait of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="50757" end="50764" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9347" start="50804" end="50808" title="Malé" label="Malé"/>
<link wikidata="Q225641" start="50859" end="50866" title="Mombasa" label="Mombasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="50882" end="50890" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="50926" end="50936" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="50971" end="50976" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="50978" end="50986" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="50991" end="50997" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="51056" end="51063" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="51125" end="51132" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q580533" start="51434" end="51440" title="Gwadar" label="Gwadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025283" start="51442" end="51452" title="Hambantota" label="Hambantota"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="51454" end="51461" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348160" start="51466" end="51473" title="Sonadia" label="Sonadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="51675" end="51682" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="51687" end="51694" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903677" start="51743" end="51756" title="Indo-Atlantic" label="Indo-Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130778103" start="51760" end="51778" title="Indo-Mediterranean" label="Indo-Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="51782" end="51794" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115631" start="51797" end="51820" title="Indian Ocean Commission" label="Indian Ocean Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190615" start="51823" end="51845" title="Indian Ocean Geoid Low" label="Indian Ocean Geoid Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223330" start="51848" end="51876" title="Indian Ocean in World War II" label="Indian Ocean in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256779" start="51879" end="51902" title="Indian Ocean literature" label="Indian Ocean literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800731" start="51905" end="51933" title="Indian Ocean Naval Symposium" label="Indian Ocean Naval Symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080639" start="51936" end="51963" title="Indian Ocean Research Group" label="Indian Ocean Research Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q12613354" start="51966" end="51994" title="Indian Ocean Tuna Commission" label="Indian Ocean Tuna Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141766" start="51997" end="52032" title="List of islands in the Indian Ocean" label="List of islands in the Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640192" start="52035" end="52105" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories in the Indian Ocean" label="List of sovereign states and dependent territories in the Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297691" start="52108" end="52136" title="Indian Ocean Rim Association" label="Indian Ocean Rim Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149509" start="52139" end="52157" title="Maritime Silk Road" label="Maritime Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q783953" start="52160" end="52192" title="Territorial claims in Antarctica" label="Territorial claims in Antarctica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14581" wikidata="Q443" url="?curid=14581" title="Ich bin ein Berliner">
<text>&quot;&quot; (; &quot;I am a Berliner&quot;) is a speech by United States President John F. Kennedy given on June 26, 1963, in West Berlin. It is one of the best-known speeches of the Cold War and among the most famous anti-communist speeches.

Twenty-two months earlier, East Germany had erected the Berlin Wall to prevent mass emigration to West Berlin. The speech was aimed as much at the Soviet Union as it was at West Berliners. Another phrase in the speech was also spoken in German, &quot;Lasst sie nach Berlin kommen&quot; (&quot;Let them come to Berlin&quot;), addressed at those who claimed &quot;we can work with the Communists&quot;, a remark at which Nikita Khrushchev scoffed only days later.

The speech is considered one of Kennedy&#x27;s finest, delivered at the height of the Cold War and the New Frontier.

Speaking to an audience of 120,000 on the steps of Rathaus Schöneberg, Kennedy said,

Kennedy used the phrase twice in his speech, including at the end, reading from his note &quot;ish bin ein Bear&quot;lee&quot;ner&quot;, which he had written out using English orthography to approximate the German pronunciation – his actual pronunciation though is fairly close to correct German and much better than how he is usually quoted. He also used the classical Latin pronunciation of &quot;civis romanus sum&quot;, with the c pronounced and the v as (i.e. &quot;kiwis romanus sum&quot;).

For decades, competing claims about the origins of the &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner&quot; overshadowed the history of the speech. In 2008, historian Andreas Daum provided a comprehensive explanation, based on archival sources and interviews with contemporaries and witnesses. He highlighted the authorship of Kennedy himself and his 1962 speech in New Orleans as a precedent, and demonstrated that by straying from the prepared script in Berlin, Kennedy created the climax of an emotionally charged political performance, which became a hallmark of the Cold War epoch.

There is a widespread misconception that Kennedy accidentally said that he was a Berliner, a type of German doughnut. This is an urban legend which emerged two decades after the speech, and it is not true that residents of Berlin in 1963 would have mainly understood the word &quot;Berliner&quot; to refer to a jelly doughnut or that the audience laughed at Kennedy&#x27;s use of this expression – if nothing else because this type of doughnut is called &quot;Pfannkuchen&quot; (literally: Pan cake) in Berlin and the word &quot;Berliner&quot; is only used outside of Berlin.

==Background==

Germany&#x27;s capital, Berlin, was deep within the area controlled by the Soviet Union after World War II. Initially governed in four sectors controlled by the four Allied powers (United States, United Kingdom, France and the Soviet Union), tensions of the Cold War escalated until the Soviet forces implemented the Berlin Blockade of the city&#x27;s western sectors, which the Western allies relieved with the dramatic airlift. Afterward, the sectors controlled by the NATO Allies became an effective exclave of West Germany, completely surrounded by East Germany. Starting in 1952, the border between East and West was closed everywhere but in Berlin. Hundreds of thousands of East Germans defected to the West via West Berlin, a labour drain that threatened East Germany with economic collapse.

In 1961, the East German government under Walter Ulbricht erected a barbed-wire barrier around West Berlin, officially called the &quot;antifaschistischer Schutzwall&quot; (anti-fascist protective barrier). The East German authorities argued that it was meant to prevent spies and agents of West Germany from crossing into the East. However, it was universally known as the Berlin Wall and its main purpose was to keep East German citizens from escaping to the West. Over a period of months the wall was rebuilt using concrete, and buildings were demolished to create a &quot;death zone&quot; in view of East German guards armed with machine guns. The Wall closed the biggest loophole in the Iron Curtain, and Berlin went from being one of the easiest places to cross from East Europe to West Europe to being one of the most difficult.

The West, including the U.S., was accused of failing to respond forcefully to the erection of the Wall. Officially, Berlin was under joint occupation by the four allied powers, each with primary responsibility for a certain zone. Kennedy&#x27;s speech marked the first instance where the U.S. acknowledged that East Berlin was part of the Soviet bloc along with the rest of East Germany. On July 25, 1961, Kennedy insisted in a presidential address that the U.S. would defend West Berlin, asserting its Four-Power rights, while making it clear that challenging the Soviet presence in Germany was not possible.

==Genesis and execution of the speech==

===Origins===

The &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner&quot; speech is in part derived from a speech Kennedy gave at a Civic Reception on May 4, 1962, in New Orleans; there also he used the phrase &quot;civis Romanus sum&quot; by saying,

The phrases &quot;I am a Berliner&quot; and &quot;I am proud to be in Berlin&quot; were typed already a week before the speech on a list of expressions to be used, including a phonetic transcription of the German translation. Such transcriptions are also found in the third draft of the speech (in Kennedy&#x27;s own handwriting), from June 25. The final typed version of the speech does not contain the transcriptions, which are added by hand by Kennedy himself.

In practice sessions before the trip, Kennedy had run through a number of sentences, even paragraphs, to recite in German; in these sessions, he was helped by Margaret Plischke, a translator working for the US State Department; by Ted Sorensen, Kennedy&#x27;s counsel and habitual speechwriter; and by an interpreter, Robert Lochner, who had grown up in Berlin. It became clear quickly that the president did not have a gift for languages and was more likely to embarrass himself if he were to cite in German for any length.

But there are differing accounts on the origin of the phrase &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner&quot;. Plischke wrote a 1997 account of visiting Kennedy at the White House weeks before the trip to help compose the speech and teach him the proper pronunciation; she also claims that the phrase had been translated stateside already by the translator scheduled to accompany him on the trip (&quot;a rather unpleasant man who complained bitterly that he had had to interrupt his vacation just to watch the President’s mannerisms&quot;). Additionally, Ted Sorensen claimed in his memoir &quot;Counselor: A Life at the Edge of History&quot; (2008) to have had a hand in the speech, and said he had incorrectly inserted the word &quot;ein&quot;, incorrectly taking responsibility for the &quot;jelly doughnut misconception&quot;, below, a claim apparently supported by Berlin mayor Willy Brandt but dismissed by later scholars since the final typed version, which does not contain the words, is the last one Sorensen could have worked on. Robert Lochner claimed in his memoirs that Kennedy had asked him for a translation of &quot;I am a Berliner&quot;, and that they practiced the phrase in Brandt&#x27;s office. Daum credited the origin of the phrase &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner&quot; to Kennedy and his 1962 speech in New Orleans quoted above. According to Daum, Kennedy was affected by seeing the Berlin Wall, so that he &quot;falls back on the most memorable passage of his New Orleans speech given the year before, changing pride in being an American in being a Berliner.&quot;

===Delivery===

Behind the long table set up on the steps of the Rathaus Schöneberg were U.S. and German dignitaries, including Dean Rusk (Kennedy&#x27;s Secretary of State), Lucius D. Clay (the former US administrator of Germany), Konrad Adenauer (the German chancellor), Willy Brandt, the Mayor of Berlin and Otto Bach (President of the &quot;Abgeordnetenhaus&quot; of Berlin). The crowd was estimated at 450,000 people. Bach spoke first, of the recent developments in Berlin, especially the wall. He was followed by Konrad Adenauer, who spoke briefly and introduced the president.

Kennedy was accompanied not by Robert Lochner, but by Heinz Weber of the Berlin mission; Weber translated the president&#x27;s speech to the audience. Besides the typescript, Kennedy had a cue card on which he himself had written the phonetic spelling, and he surprised everyone by completely disregarding the speech, which had taken weeks to prepare. Instead, he improvised: &quot;He says more than he should, something different from what his advisers had recommended, and is more provocative than he had intended to be.&quot;

The speech culminated with the second use in the speech of the &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner&quot; phrase: &quot;Today, in the world of freedom, the proudest boast is &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner!&quot;&quot; The crowd was quiet while Weber translated and repeated the president&#x27;s German line; Kennedy was obviously relieved at the crowd&#x27;s positive response and thanked Weber for his translation. Weber translated this compliment also. According to Daum, after this first successful delivery, &quot;Kennedy, who fiddles a bit with his suit jacket, is grinning like a boy who has just pulled off a coup.&quot;

Kennedy&#x27;s National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy thought the speech had gone &quot;a little too far&quot;, and the two revised the text of a second major speech scheduled at the Freie Universität Berlin later that day for a softer stance which &quot;amounted to being a bit more conciliatory toward the Soviets.&quot;

==Consequences and legacy==

While the immediate response from the West German population was positive, the Soviet authorities were less pleased with the combative &quot;Lasst sie nach Berlin kommen&quot;. Only two weeks before, in his American University speech (formally titled &quot;A Strategy of Peace&quot;), Kennedy had spoken in a more conciliatory tone, speaking of &quot;improving relations with the Soviet Union&quot;: in response to Kennedy&#x27;s Berlin speech, Nikita Khrushchev, days later, remarked that &quot;one would think that the speeches were made by two different presidents.&quot;

Ronald Reagan would evoke both the sentiment and the legacy of Kennedy&#x27;s speech 24 years later in his &quot;Tear down this wall!&quot; speech.

There are commemorative sites to Kennedy in Berlin, such as the German-American John F. Kennedy School and the John F. Kennedy-Institute for North American Studies of the FU Berlin. The public square in front of the Rathaus Schöneberg was renamed John-F.-Kennedy-Platz. A large plaque dedicated to Kennedy is mounted on a column at the entrance of the building and the room above the entrance and overlooking the square is dedicated to Kennedy and his visit. A video of Kennedy delivering the speech plays as part of the main exhibit at the Checkpoint Charlie Museum.

The original manuscript of the speech is stored with the National Archives and Records Administration.

==&quot;I am a doughnut&quot; confusion==

There is a widespread false belief that Kennedy made a mistake by saying &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner&quot;. By including the indefinite article &quot;ein,&quot; he supposedly changed the meaning of the sentence from the intended &quot;I am a citizen of Berlin&quot; to &quot;I am a Berliner&quot; (a Berliner being a type of German pastry, similar to a jam- or jelly-filled doughnut), amusing Germans throughout the city. However, this is incorrect from both a grammatical perspective and a historical perspective.

While the phrase &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner&quot; can be understood as having a double meaning, it is not incorrect to use it the way Kennedy did. The indefinite article &quot;ein&quot; can be omitted in German when speaking of an individual&#x27;s profession or origin but is used in any case when speaking in a figurative sense. Furthermore, although the word &quot;Berliner&quot; is used for a doughnut filled with fruit jam or jelly in the north, west, and southwest of Germany, this use of the word is not traditional to the dialects of Berlin or the surrounding regions, where the usual word is &quot;Pfannkuchen&quot; (literally &quot;pancake&quot;).

A further part of the misconception is that the audience to his speech laughed at his supposed error. The laughters from the crowd came a few seconds after the first use of the phrase when Kennedy joked with the interpreter: &quot;I appreciate my interpreter translating my German.&quot;

The misconception appears to have originated in Len Deighton&#x27;s 1983 spy novel &quot;Berlin Game&quot;, which contains the following passage, spoken by Bernard Samson:

In Deighton&#x27;s novel, Samson is an unreliable narrator, and his words cannot be taken at face value. However, &quot;The New York Times&quot;&#x27; review of Deighton&#x27;s novel appeared to treat Samson&#x27;s remark as factual and added the detail that Kennedy&#x27;s audience found his remark funny:

Four years later, it found its way into a &quot;New York Times&quot; op-ed:

The doughnut misconception has since been repeated by media such as the BBC (by Alistair Cooke in his &quot;Letter from America&quot; program), &quot;The Guardian&quot;, MSNBC, CNN, &quot;Time&quot; magazine, and &quot;The New York Times&quot;; mentioned in several books about Germany written by English-speaking authors, including Norman Davies and Kenneth C. Davis; and used in the manual for the Speech Synthesis Markup Language. It is also mentioned in Robert Dallek&#x27;s 2003 biography of Kennedy, &quot;An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917–1963&quot;.

Another reference to this misconception appears in David Foster Wallace&#x27;s 1996 novel &quot;Infinite Jest&quot;, which contains the following passage:

In the &quot;Discworld&quot; novel &quot;Monstrous Regiment&quot; by Terry Pratchett, special envoy Sam Vimes, tasked with ending a war between the bellicose nation of Borogravia and an alliance of its aggrieved neighbours, intended to express his support for Borogravia by saying &quot;I am a citizen of Borogravia&quot; in its native language. However, Polly Perks, the main character, corrects him, saying he called himself a cherry pancake.

The stand up comedy tour Dress to Kill by comedian Eddie Izzard also mentioned Kennedy&#x27;s speech, speculating the German audience thought it must just be American slang, for an American.

The jelly doughnut myth was largely unknown to Germans until the social web enhanced cross-cultural exchange in the 2000s. At the death of Robert Lochner in September 2003, German media retold the story on the creation of Kennedy&#x27;s phrase without mentioning the myth, while on the same occasion English language media still added the myth as fact, as for example the New York Times informed by Associated Press. The German Historical Museum in Berlin opened an exhibition in 2003 without providing a hint to the myth either. The myth entered the German Wikipedia article &quot;Ich bin Berliner&quot; in May 2005 brought over from the English version where it had been discussed since the creation of the article in October 2001. It was already marked as an urban legend at the time in 2005. The German version settled on a section title &quot;misconception in the english-speaking world&quot; () by January 2007. The Kennedy Museum in Berlin picked up the story in November 2008, debunking the myth, while an English article in Spiegel International about the opening of the museum in 2006 did quote the myth as fact. A reference to the myth in the national newspaper &quot;Die Welt&quot; as of July 2008 shows that the knowledge about the misconception in the US was well understood by then, referencing Wikipedia in the text.

==See also==
* &quot;Je suis Charlie&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* Daum, Andreas (2014). &quot;Berlin&quot;, in &quot;A Companion to John F. Kennedy&quot;, ed. Marc J. Selverstone. Malden, Mass.: Wiley Blackwell, 2014, 209–227.
* Daum, Andreas (2014). &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner: John F. Kennedys Ansprache vor dem Schöneberger Rathaus in Berlin&quot;, in &quot;Der Sound des Jahrhunderts&quot;, ed. Gerhard Paul and Ralph Schock. Göttingen: Wallstein, 392–396 (in German).

==External links==
* Who famously said &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner&quot; on this day in 1963?
* Text, audio, video of address 
* About.com article 
* John F. Kennedy Letter On Success of Trip to Europe 1963 Shapell Manuscript Foundation
* Text: Kennedy&#x27;s Berlin speech text </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q443" start="22" end="37" title="Ich bin ein Berliner" label="I am a Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="84" end="99" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="127" end="138" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="184" end="192" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="219" end="233" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="272" end="284" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="301" end="312" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="392" end="404" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255990" start="418" end="432" title="Demographics of Berlin" label="West Berliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="628" end="638" title="Communists" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="664" end="681" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439991" start="811" end="823" title="New Frontier" label="New Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q695194" start="877" end="895" title="Rathaus Schöneberg" label="Rathaus Schöneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234399" start="1272" end="1301" title="Latin pronunciation" label="classical Latin pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q501116" start="1557" end="1569" title="Andreas Daum" label="Andreas Daum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1961" end="1969" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1989" end="2013" title="Ich bin ein Berliner#&amp;quot;I am a doughnut&amp;quot; confusion" label="widespread misconception"/>
<link wikidata="Q152526" start="2059" end="2067" title="Berliner (doughnut)" label="Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176900" start="2289" end="2303" title="jelly doughnut" label="jelly doughnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q44541" start="2468" end="2476" title="Pan cake" label="Pan cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="2481" end="2487" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2646" end="2658" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2665" end="2677" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2737" end="2743" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="2888" end="2903" title="Berlin Blockade" label="Berlin Blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="2992" end="2999" title="Berlin Airlift" label="airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3042" end="3046" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="3074" end="3081" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="3085" end="3097" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q332988" start="3264" end="3272" title="defection" label="defected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628" start="3413" end="3428" title="Walter Ulbricht" label="Walter Ulbricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="3544" end="3556" title="anti-fascism" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="3745" end="3756" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="4519" end="4530" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="4547" end="4558" title="Eastern bloc" label="Soviet bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q277476" start="4711" end="4728" title="Potsdam Agreement" label="Four-Power rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="5005" end="5016" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q518197" start="5786" end="5798" title="Ted Sorensen" label="Ted Sorensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157424" start="5873" end="5887" title="Robert Lochner" label="Robert Lochner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6861" end="6902" title="Ich bin ein Berliner#&amp;quot;I am a doughnut&amp;quot; urban legend" label="jelly doughnut misconception&amp;quot;, below"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="6949" end="6961" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q695194" start="7716" end="7734" title="Rathaus Schöneberg" label="Rathaus Schöneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q313258" start="7779" end="7788" title="Dean Rusk" label="Dean Rusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="7805" end="7823" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q369360" start="7826" end="7840" title="Lucius D. Clay" label="Lucius D. Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="7883" end="7898" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="7904" end="7921" title="Chancellor of Germany (Federal Republic of Germany)" label="German chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="7924" end="7936" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q641159" start="7942" end="7957" title="Governing Mayor of Berlin" label="Mayor of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7962" end="7971" title="Otto Bach" label="Otto Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q640859" start="7973" end="8028" title="Abgeordnetenhaus of Berlin" label="President of the &amp;quot;Abgeordnetenhaus&amp;quot; of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758829" start="8425" end="8433" title="cue card" label="cue card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="9396" end="9421" title="United States National Security Advisor" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575845" start="9422" end="9436" title="McGeorge Bundy" label="McGeorge Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153006" start="9566" end="9590" title="Free University of Berlin" label="Freie Universität Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745325" start="9943" end="9969" title="American University speech" label="American University speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="10312" end="10325" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994106" start="10425" end="10445" title="Tear down this wall!" label="Tear down this wall!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672802" start="10541" end="10563" title="John F. Kennedy School, Berlin" label="John F. Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699029" start="10572" end="10624" title="John F. Kennedy-Institute for North American Studies" label="John F. Kennedy-Institute for North American Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q153006" start="10632" end="10641" title="Free University of Berlin" label="FU Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779189" start="10708" end="10729" title="John-F.-Kennedy-Platz" label="John-F.-Kennedy-Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q382575" start="11002" end="11027" title="Checkpoint Charlie Museum" label="Checkpoint Charlie Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="11087" end="11131" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives and Records Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="11301" end="11319" title="indefinite article" label="indefinite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q152526" start="11458" end="11466" title="Berliner (doughnut)" label="Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q152526" start="12299" end="12310" title="Berliner pfannkuchen" label="Pfannkuchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q505274" start="12688" end="12700" title="Len Deighton" label="Len Deighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20664331" start="12713" end="12722" title="spy novel" label="spy novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892427" start="12729" end="12740" title="Berlin Game" label="Berlin Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893620" start="12796" end="12810" title="Bernard Samson" label="Bernard Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q650118" start="12852" end="12871" title="unreliable narrator" label="unreliable narrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="12933" end="12951" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602337" start="13190" end="13195" title="op-ed" label="op-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094347" start="13278" end="13292" title="Alistair Cooke" label="Alistair Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533551" start="13306" end="13325" title="Letter from America" label="Letter from America"/>
<link wikidata="Q376303" start="13531" end="13544" title="Norman Davies" label="Norman Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q379350" start="13549" end="13565" title="Kenneth C. Davis" label="Kenneth C. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971947" start="13598" end="13630" title="Speech Synthesis Markup Language" label="Speech Synthesis Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q513338" start="13656" end="13669" title="Robert Dallek" label="Robert Dallek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13710" end="13756" title="An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917–1963" label="An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917–1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q313246" start="13816" end="13836" title="David Foster Wallace" label="David Foster Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077445" start="13861" end="13874" title="Infinite Jest" label="Infinite Jest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="13934" end="13943" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637773" start="13962" end="13980" title="Monstrous Regiment (novel)" label="Monstrous Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q514782" start="14021" end="14030" title="Sam Vimes" label="Sam Vimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307057" start="14392" end="14405" title="Dress to Kill (Eddie Izzard)" label="Dress to Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q254022" start="14418" end="14430" title="Eddie Izzard" label="Eddie Izzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q131164" start="14624" end="14634" title="Web 2.0" label="social web"/>
<link wikidata="Q688335" start="14980" end="15004" title="German Historical Museum" label="German Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18720579" start="15914" end="15929" title="Je suis Charlie" label="Je suis Charlie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14582" wikidata="Q2030" url="?curid=14582" title="Iqaluit">
<text>Iqaluit is the capital of the Canadian territory of Nunavut. It is the territory&#x27;s largest community and its only city, and the northernmost city in Canada. It was known as Frobisher Bay from 1942 to 1987, after the large bay on the coast on which the city is situated. Its traditional Inuktitut name was restored in 1987.

In 1999, Iqaluit was designated the capital of Nunavut after the division of the Northwest Territories into two separate territories. Before this event, Iqaluit was a small city and not well known outside the Canadian Arctic or Canada, with population and economic growth highly limited. This is due to Iqaluit&#x27;s isolation and heavy dependence on expensive imported supplies, as the city, like the rest of Nunavut, has no road or rail connections to the rest of Canada, and has ship connections for only part of the year. Iqaluit has a polar climate, influenced by the cold deep waters of the Labrador Current just off Baffin Island, which makes the city cold, although it is well south of the Arctic Circle.

As of the 2021 Canadian census, the population was 7,429 (population centre: 6,991), a decrease of 4.0 per cent from the 2016 census. Iqaluit has the lowest population of any capital city in Canada. Inhabitants of Iqaluit are called &quot;Iqalummiut&quot; (singular: &quot;Iqalummiuq&quot;).

== History ==
Iqaluit has been a traditional fishing location used by Inuit and their predecessors, the Paleo-Eskimo (Dorset culture) and Thule, for thousands of years. The name, &quot;Iqaluit,&quot; comes from Inuktitut Iqaluit (ᐃᖃᓗᐃᑦ), which means &quot;place of many fish&quot;.

World War II resulted in an influx of non-Inuit to the area in 1942, when the United States built Frobisher Bay Air Base there, on a long-term lease from the Government of Canada, in order to provide a stop-over and refuelling site for the short-range aircraft being ferried to Europe to support the war effort. Iqaluit&#x27;s first permanent resident was Nakasuk, an Inuk guide who helped United States Army Air Forces planners to choose a site with a large flat area suitable for a landing strip. The wartime airstrip was known as Crystal Two, was part of the Crimson Route and operates today as Iqaluit Airport.

It had long been used as a campsite and fishing spot by the Inuit, who called it &quot;Iqaluit&quot; – &quot;place of many fish&quot; in Inuktitut. The US and Canadian authorities named it &quot;Frobisher Bay&quot;, after the name of the body of water it borders.

In 1949, after the war, the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company moved its south Baffin operations to the neighbouring valley of &quot;Niaqunngut&quot;, officially called Apex, in order to use the airfield. In the mid-1950s, the population of Frobisher Bay increased rapidly during the construction of the Distant Early Warning Line (DEW line), a system of defensive radar stations—see NORAD (North American Aerospace Defense Command).

Hundreds of mostly non-Inuit construction workers, military personnel, and administrative staff moved into the community, and several hundred Inuit followed, to take advantage of the access to jobs and medical care provided by the base operations. By 1957, 489 of the town&#x27;s 1,200 residents were reported to be Inuit. After 1959, the Canadian government established permanent services at Frobisher Bay, including full-time doctors, a school, and social services. The Inuit population grew rapidly in response, as the government encouraged Inuit to settle permanently in communities supported by government services.

Naval Radio Station (NRS) Frobisher Bay (HMCS Frobisher Bay), callsign CFI, was established in July 1954 as a result of the closure of NRS Chimo, Quebec. Station CFI was part of the Supplementary Radio network. Because of its remoteness and size, it was very expensive to operate. Renamed CFS Frobisher Bay in 1966, advancing technology eventually forced the closure of CFI later that year.

The American military left Iqaluit in 1963, as their development of the intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) diminished the strategic value of the DEW line and Arctic airbases. Canada continued to operate an administrative and logistical centre for much of the eastern Arctic at Frobisher Bay. In 1964, the first local elections were held for a community council, and in 1979 for the first mayor. The founding of the Gordon Robertson Educational Centre, now Inuksuk High School, in the early 1970s at Iqaluit confirmed the government&#x27;s commitment to the community as an administrative centre. At the time of its founding, this was the sole high school operating in what constituted more than one-seventh of Canadian territory.

On 1 January 1987, the name of the municipality was changed from &quot;Frobisher Bay&quot; to &quot;Iqaluit&quot; – aligning official usage with the name that the Inuit population had always used, although many documents were made that referred to Iqaluit as Frobisher Bay for several years after 1987. In the non-binding 1995 Nunavut capital plebiscite, held 11 December, the residents of what would become the new territory selected Iqaluit (over Rankin Inlet) to serve as the future capital. On 19 April 2001, it was designated a city.

Canada designated Iqaluit as the host city for the 2010 meeting of the G7 (Group of Seven) finance ministers, held on 5–6 February. The requirements for the international meeting strained the northern communications technology infrastructure and required supplemental investment.

=== Timeline ===
*1576 – Englishman Martin Frobisher sails into Frobisher Bay believing he has found the westward route to China. He held the first Anglican church service in North America here.
*1861 – Charles Francis Hall, an American, camps at the Sylvia Grinnell River and explores the waters of Koojesse Inlet, which he names after his Inuit guide.
*1942 – The United States Army Air Forces selects this area as the site of a major air base to support war efforts in the United Kingdom and Europe.
*1949 – The Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company (HBC) moves its trading post from Ward Inlet to nearby Apex.
*1955 – Frobisher Bay becomes the centre for the United States/Canada DEW Line construction operations. Many Inuit continue to settle here for local services.
*1958 – Telephone exchange service established by Bell Canada.
*1963 – United States military move out, resulting in some population loss.
*1964 – First community council formed; the population of Frobisher Bay is 900.
*1970 – Frobisher Bay officially recognized as a settlement.
*1974 – Settlement of Frobisher Bay gains village status.
*1976 – Inuit present a proposal for a separate Nunavut Territory to the Federal government.
*1979 – The first mayor elected, Bryan Pearson.
*1980 – Frobisher Bay designated as a town.
*1982 – Government of Canada agrees in principle to the creation of Nunavut.
*1987 – Frobisher Bay is renamed as &quot;Iqaluit,&quot; its original Inuktitut name meaning &quot;place of (many) fish&quot;.
*1993 – The Nunavut Land Claims Agreement is signed in Iqaluit.
*1995 – Nunavut residents select Iqaluit as the capital of the new territory
*1 April 1999 – The territory of Nunavut is established.
*19 April 2001 – Iqaluit is chartered as a city.
*2002 – Iqaluit, along with Nuuk, Greenland, co-host the first jointly hosted Arctic Winter Games; the Arctic Winter Games Arena was constructed in Iqaluit for the event.
*5 February 2010 – Canada designates Iqaluit to host the finance meeting as part of the 2010 G7 summit.
*29 July 2022 – Pope Francis visits Iqaluit to meet with a group of former residential school alumni on his penitential apostolic visit to Canada. He is the first Pope to visit Nunavut.

== Geography ==

Iqaluit is the northernmost city in Canada, at 63 degrees north of the Equator. Iqaluit is located in the Everett Mountains, which rise from Koojesse Inlet, an inlet of Frobisher Bay, on the southeast part of Baffin Island. It is well to the east of Nunavut&#x27;s mainland, and northeast of Hudson Bay.

=== Climate ===

Iqaluit has a tundra climate (Köppen: &quot;ET&quot;, Trewartha: &quot;Ftkd&quot;) typical of the Arctic region, although it is well outside the Arctic Circle. The city features long, cold winters and brief, cool summers. Average monthly temperatures are below freezing for eight months of the year. Iqaluit averages just over of precipitation annually, much wetter than many other localities in the Arctic Archipelago, with the summer being the wettest season. Temperatures of the winter months are comparable to other northern communities further west on the continent such as Yellowknife and to some extent even Fairbanks, Alaska, even though Iqaluit is a few degrees colder than the latter. Summer temperatures are, however, much colder due to its easterly maritime position affected by the waters of the cold Baffin Island Current. This means that the tree line is much further south in the eastern part of Canada, being as southbound, in spite of low elevation, as northern Labrador.

Although it is north of the natural tree line, there are some short, south-facing imported black spruce (&quot;Picea mariana&quot;) specimens protected by snowdrifts in the winter, in addition to a few shrubs, which are woody plants. These include the Arctic willow (&quot;Salix arctica&quot;). The Arctic willow may be up to around horizontally, but only tall.

The climate of Iqaluit is also colder than Gulf Stream locations on the same latitude. For example, the Norwegian city of Trondheim has an annual mean temperature that is milder.

The lowest temperature ever recorded was on 10 February 1967. The highest temperature ever recorded in Iqaluit was on 21 July 2008.

Iqaluit&#x27;s climate is changing. In 1979, the mean temperature was , but in 2023, it was . Furthermore, during the first 23 years of that period, there were 14 years which displayed a negative temperature anomaly and 9 which displayed a positive one, whereas in the second 23 years, there were only 3 negative and 20 positive temperature anomaly years.

==Cityscape==
===Neighbourhoods===

*Downtown (central)
*Happy Valley (north)
*Lake Subdivision (north) – residential area
*Lower Base (south)
*Lower Iqaluit (southeast)
*North 40 (northwest) – located on the north side of the airport
*Plateau Subdivision (northwest) – residential area
*Road To Nowhere (north)
*Tundra Valley (west)
*Tundra Ridge (west) – home to two of the city&#x27;s schools and youth centre
*West 40 (southwest) – commercial area

=== Suburbs ===
Apex (Niaqunngut), officially and functionally part of the City of Iqaluit, is a small community about southeast () from Iqaluit&#x27;s centre and is known in Inuktitut as &quot;Niaqunngut&quot;. It is located on a small peninsula separating Koojesse Inlet from Tarr Inlet. There is a women&#x27;s shelter, a church, a primary school (Nanook Elementary School), a design shop and a bed and breakfast in the community. Apex was where most Inuit lived when Iqaluit was a military site and off-limits to anyone not working at the base.

===Architecture and attractions===
Much of Iqaluit&#x27;s architecture is functionaldesigned to minimize material costs, while retaining heat and withstanding the climate. Early architecture runs from the 1950s military barracks of the original DEW line installation, through the 1970s white hyper-modernist fibreglass block of the Nakasuk School and Municipal Offices and Arena, to the lines of the steel-reinforced concrete high-rise complex on the hill above it. A number of older Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company (HBC) and early 1950s buildings have been retained and restored in Apex (the former nursing station has been revived as the Rannva Bed and Breakfast, the HBC buildings as an art gallery). The newer buildings are more colourful and diverse, and closer to the norms of southern architecture.

The principal exception is the Nunavut Legislative Assembly Building, which is remarkable for its colourful interior, adorned with some of the very best in Inuit art. A new legislative building is in planning to be developed and built outside the city on the Apex Road.

Another distinctive building is St. Jude&#x27;s Anglican Cathedral, see of the Anglican Diocese of The Arctic, which is a white building shaped like an igloo. The old St Jude&#x27;s Cathedral, also in the shape of an igloo, was built in 1972 but arson severely affected the Cathedral structure and interior on 5 November 2005, and it was demolished on 1 June 2006. Its altar was built by the parishioners, under the guidance of Markoosie Peter, a traditional master carpenter. It was shaped like a traditional Inuit sled, and the cross composed of two crossed narwhal tusks.

In December 2010, the exterior of a similarly shaped replacement cathedral was completed, and interior work was planned for 2011 with a potential opening for Christmas 2011. The current building, informally referred to as the Igloo Cathedral, was opened on 3 June 2012. The unique building, in the shape of an igloo, has traditionally been a landmark and tourist attraction in Iqaluit, besides its important spiritual role for Iqalummiut (people of Iqaluit).

On a ridge overlooking the city is the distinctive blue and white Inuksuk High School. The school is made up of four square sections joined that give a cloverleaf shape when viewed from the air.

The city is also the location of the Nunatta Sunakkutaangit Museum, which houses a large collection of Inuit and Arctic objects. The museum is housed in a restored and extended Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company building, clad in the HBC signature red and white, transported to Iqaluit from its original site on the Apex Beach.

Just west of Iqaluit is the Sylvia Grinnell Territorial Park. This park is dominated by the valley of the Sylvia Grinnell River. A small visitor&#x27;s centre with viewing platform is located on top of a hill overlooking scenic waterfalls, tidal flats and traditional fishing sites.

Nearby on an island near Peterhead Inlet, is the Qaummaarviit Territorial Park. It is a site with a long Inuit history and numerous artifacts have been recovered, including the remains of 11 semi-buried sod houses.

A little farther, across Frobisher Bay, are the Katannilik Territorial Park Reserve and the Soper River, a Canadian Heritage River, forming a park corridor linking Iqaluit along traditional overland travel routes with Kimmirut (formerly Lake Harbour). Frobisher Bay extends for almost to the east, with moderate hills, glaciers and traditional and summer camp sites, opening into the Davis Strait, which divides Nunavut from Greenland.

Iqaluit, like many Nunavut communities, has a volunteer-run annual spring festival. Called Toonik Tyme it involves a combination of traditional Inuit activities combined with more modern events, while the Alianait Music and Arts Festival is held for a week each 21 June. The festival has attracted Canadian and international artists such as Joshua Haulli, Quantum Tangle, Washboard Hank and Namgar.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Canadian census conducted by Statistics Canada, Iqaluit had a population of 7,429 living in 2,708 of its 3,297 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 7,740. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

The median value of these dwellings is $376,639, quite a bit higher than the national median at $280,552. The average household has about 2.8 people living in it, and the average family has 1.4 children living at home with them. The median (after-tax) household income in Iqaluit is quite high, $98,921, almost double the national rate at $54,089. The median income for an individual in the city, is also high, $60,688. 5.9 per cent of people (over 15 years old) are either divorced or separated, which is quite a bit lower than the national rate at 8.6 per cent. Also, 53.3 per cent of the population is either married or living with a common law partner.

Iqaluit has quite a young population, the median age of the population is more than 10 years younger than the national rate, 30.1 years old compared to 40.6 years old.

For those over the age of 25:
*75.7% are high school educated (15.9% as their highest level of education)
*59.8% are post-secondary school educated
*24.3% have no certificate, diploma or degree

The 2021 census reported that immigrants (individuals born outside Canada) comprise 750 persons or 10.3% of the total population of Iqaluit. Of the total immigrant population, the top countries of origin were Philippines (195 persons or 26.0%), Cameroon (50 persons or 6.7%), United Kingdom (40 persons or 5.3%), Nigeria (40 persons or 5.3%), Zimbabwe (40 persons or 5.3%), United States of America (35 persons or 4.7%), India (25 persons or 3.3%), Pakistan (20 persons or 2.7%), China (20 persons or 2.7%), Jamaica (20 persons or 2.7%), and Ethiopia (20 persons or 2.7%).

=== Ethnicity ===
As of 2016, Iqaluit has the most Inuit in both numbers (3,900) and percentages (59.1 per cent), of all Canadian cities with populations greater than 5,000.

=== Language ===
There is no &quot;majority mother tongue&quot; in Iqaluit, as 45.4 per cent reported their mother tongue as being English, and 45.4 per cent also reported their mother tongue as Inuktitut. English is spoken by 97.2 per cent of Iqaluit residents, however, whereas only 53.1 per cent can speak Inuktitut. French was the mother tongue of 4.8 per cent of the population, which is the same figure of the population who can speak the language. As of 2012, &quot;Pirurvik, Iqaluit&#x27;s Inuktitut language training centre, has a new goal: to train instructors from Nunavut communities to teach Inuktitut in different ways and in their own dialects when they return home.&quot;

=== Religion ===
According to the 2021 census, religious groups in Iqaluit included:
*Christianity (3,975 persons or 54.4%)
*Irreligion (3,060 persons or 41.9%)
*Islam (90 persons or 1.2%)
*Indigenous spirituality (50 persons or 0.7%)
*Hinduism (30 persons or 0.4%)
*Judaism (20 persons or 0.3%)
*Buddhism (10 persons or 0.1%)
*Other (75 persons or 1.0%)

==Education==

The Qikiqtani School Operations based in Pond Inlet operates five schools in the area. Nanook Elementary School, located in Apex, Nakasuk School and Joamie Ilinniarvik School offer kindergarten to grade 5. Aqsarniit Ilinniarvik School offers grades 6 to 8 and Inuksuk High School offers grades 9 to 12.

The Commission scolaire francophone du Nunavut runs École des Trois-Soleils and offers kindergarten to grade 12.

At the post-secondary level there are two, Nunavut Arctic College (Nunatta Campus) and Akitsiraq Law School.

==Infrastructure==
===Emergency services===
Emergency services (fire and ambulance) are provided by city from a single station on Niaqunngusiariaq.

The emergency services fleet consists of:
*1 engine
*1 ladder
*2 staff vehicles
*3 ambulances

Iqaluit Airport Emergency Services is responsible for fire services at the airport. Following a fire at the airport in 1998, the Government of Nunavut re-opened the fire station at the airport. Their fleet consists of:

*Waltek C-5500 ARFF
*Oshkosh T3000 ARFF

Policing in Iqaluit, as with the rest of Nunavut, is contracted to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) V Division and the city is home to the divisional headquarters.

Iqaluit also has a Municipal Enforcement Service that enforces local city bylaws. The services include handling of noise and traffic violations and animal control.

===Medical services===
Qikiqtani General Hospital is the primary care facility in the city. There is also a Family Practice Clinic providing primary care services by Nurse Practitioners. Two dental clinics exist in the city.

===Sports facilities===
Iqaluit features two arenas, the Arctic Winter Games Arena and Arnaitok, the Iqaluit Aquaplex, a curling rink, Timmianut Pikiuqarvik, an eighteen hole disc golf course, the Frobisher Inn Fitness Centre, in the W.G. Brown Building / Astro Hill Complex, a golf course, outdoor basketball courts, soccer nets, seasonal outdoor ice rinks, a shooting range, a skatepark, and more.

===Waste and water treatment===
The city&#x27;s infrastructure is stressed by growth and lack of means to upgrade. Waste from the city is disposed of into an open air dump on Akilliq Drive (West 40) located south of the city.

Although the city has water treatment facilities, raw sewage from the city is often dumped untreated into nearby Frobisher Bay.

As the dump has reached capacity, the city plans to open a second dump north of the city. Iqaluit does not have a recycling program in place; all recyclable materials are sent into the waste stream.

In October 2021, residents of Iqaluit, experienced a water crisis when their tap water was found to be contaminated with fuel. The contamination was traced to a decades-old underground fuel tank that had leaked into the city&#x27;s water supply. The crisis led to a state of emergency, with residents relying on bottled water and water from nearby rivers for drinking, cooking, and other daily needs. The situation highlighted the challenges of providing safe and reliable water services in remote and Arctic communities.

==Transportation==

Iqaluit is the smallest Canadian capital in terms of population, and the only capital that is not connected to other settlements by a highway. Located on an island remote from the Canadian highway system, Iqaluit is generally only accessible by aircraft and, subject to ice conditions, by boat.

Iqaluit Airport is a modern facility with a runway long enough for most modern jet aircraft. A new, larger passenger terminal building north of the old terminal was completed in 2018.

Canadian North serves Iqaluit from Ottawa, Yellowknife, and several communities in Nunavut. Locally based airlines Air Nunavut, Canadian Helicopters, Nunasi Helicopters, and Unaalik Aviation provide air charters, and Air Nunavut and Keewatin Air provide MEDIVAC / air ambulance service. Jazz Aviation provided daily service to Iqaluit from Ottawa in 2010 and 2011, but cancelled service due to rising fuel costs, which prevented the route from being profitable.

Iqaluit shared its runway with the Royal Canadian Air Force until the Canadian Armed Forces stopped using Iqaluit as a Canadian NORAD Region Forward Operating Location. The barracks and CF-188 hangars are maintained. The airport has been a centre for cold-weather testing of new aircraft, such as the Airbus A380 in February 2006.

A deep sea port opened in Iqaluit in July 2023, after five years of construction. The port features a dredged fixed dock, mooring space, a cargo laydown area, an all-tide barge ramp, and a fuel manifold.

Initial plans for the port included facilities for a vehicle ferry connection to Happy Valley-Goose Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador, however these plans were dropped due to high cost. Experienced locals also cross the Hudson Strait from the Canadian mainland when it freezes over, either on foot or by dog sled or snowmobile, a distance of over .

Iqaluit has a local road system only stretching from the nearby community of Apex to the Sylvia Grinnell Territorial Park, west of town. Iqaluit has no public transportation, although there is citywide taxi service. Iqaluit Public Transit used to offer bus service in the city, but the service was cancelled due to low ridership. Motor cars are increasing in number, to the extent of causing occasional traffic jams known locally as &quot;the rush minute&quot;. The cost of shipping automobiles and the wear-and-tear of the harsh Arctic climate combined with its notoriously rough roadways mean that snowmobiles remain the preferred form of personal transportation. All-terrain vehicles are also common in most of the Canadian Arctic. Snowmobiles are used to travel within the city and in the surrounding area. In winter, dog sleds are still used, but primarily for recreation. In winter, the nearby Qaummaarviit Territorial Park and the more remote Katannilik Territorial Park Reserve are only accessible by snowmobile, dog sled or foot. In the summer, both are accessible by boat. Most major roads within Iqaluit are paved with asphalt, but local and smaller roads are gravel. Roads do not have traffic signals, but use stop signs to control intersections.

Residents and businesses identify their locations mostly by building number, and occasionally by the name of a prominent structure. Residents know where in the city certain series of building numbers are located; numbers tend to be aggregated in blocks, so someone might say that they live in the 2600s. Around 2003, street names were developed, although there were delays in finalizing them and posting the signs. Street numbers have not been assigned, and building numbers continue to be used. Iqaluit is the only Canadian capital city not to have traffic signals, although some have been installed on a temporary basis.

==Communications==
Landline services in Iqaluit (established in 1958 by Bell Canada) and throughout northern Canada (established by Northwestel in five western Nunavut communities, and by Bell Canada elsewhere in Nunavut), are provided since 1992 by Northwestel.

Cell service is provided by Ice Wireless, Bell Mobility, and Qiniq.

Internet service is available through Northwestel, Ice Wireless, Qiniq (SSi Canada), Starlink and Meshnet. Meshnet Community WiFi is a free community WiFi and paid service available in most areas of the city. Free services include access to Isuma.tv, and many other resources.

== Media ==
===Press===
*&quot;Nunatsiaq News &quot;
*&quot;News/North&quot;
===Radio===

===Television===

Iqaluit was served by CFFB-TV channel 8, a CBC Television/CBC North repeater of CFYK-DT (Yellowknife) until 31 July 2012 when it was closed because of budget cuts at the CBC.

== Notable people ==

*Eva Aariak, politician, former Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) and second Premier of Nunavut
*Paul-André Brasseur, child actor
*Alexander Fathoullin, speed skater
*Ann Meekitjuk Hanson, former Commissioner of Nunavut
*Kenn Harper, grocer, amateur historian, and entrepreneur
*Lucie Idlout, rock singer, songwriter
*Matty McNair, US-born explorer
*Mosha Michael, filmmaker
*Simonie Michael, first Inuk to be elected to what is now the Legislative Assembly of the Northwest Territories in 1966
*Nakasuk, founder of Iqaluit
*Paul Okalik, lawyer, politician, member of the Legislative Assembly of Nunavut, first Premier of Nunavut and former Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Nunavut. Unsuccessful federal Liberal candidate for Nunavut
*Abe Okpik, politician, worked on Project Surname to obtain family names for Inuit rather than disc numbers and first Inuk to sit (appointed) on what is now the NWT Legislative Assembly
*Dennis Patterson, politician, former MLA and Premier of the NWT (prior to division), former Canadian Senator for Nunavut
*Bryan Pearson, politician, former MLA, first mayor of Iqaluit, businessman
*Ed Picco, politician, former MLA in NWT and Nunavut
*Annabella Piugattuk, actress
*Elisapee Sheutiapik, ex-politician &amp; mayor
*Enooyaq Sudlovenick, marine biologist
*Hunter Tootoo, territorial and federal politician, and former speaker of the Nunavut Legislative Assembly
*Sheila Watt-Cloutier, politician, environmental activist, Nobel nominee
==See also==
*List of municipalities in Nunavut

== Notes ==
==References==
== Further reading ==

*Baffin Regional Health Board (Nunavut), and Health Needs Assessment Project (Nunavut). &quot;Iqaluit Community Profile&quot;. Iqaluit, Nunavut?: Health Needs Assessment Project, Baffin Regional Health Board?, 1994.
*Eno, Robert V. &quot;Crystal Two: The Origin of Iqaluit&quot;. Arctic. 2003.
*Hodgson, D. A. Quaternary geology of western Meta Incognita Peninsula and Iqaluit area, Baffin Island, Nunavut. Ottawa: Geological Survey of Canada, 2005. 
*Keen, Jared. Iqaluit Gateway to the Arctic. Calgary: Weigl Educational Publishers Limited, 2000. 
*Kublu, Alexina, and Mélanie Gagnon. &quot;Inuit Recollections on the Military Presence in Iqaluit&quot;. Memory and history in Nunavut, v. 2. Iqaluit, N.W.T.: Nunavut Arctic College, 2002. 
*Newbery, Nick. &quot;Iqaluit gateway to Baffin&quot;. Iqaluit, NT: Published for the Royal Canadian Legion Branch No. 4, Iqaluit by Nortext Pub. Co, 1995. 
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2030" start="0" end="7" title="Iqaluit" label="Iqaluit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="30" end="48" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="52" end="59" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030" start="178" end="191" title="Iqaluit" label="Frobisher Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004067" start="221" end="230" title="Frobisher Bay" label="large bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="291" end="300" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="410" end="431" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q764146" start="538" end="553" title="Northern Canada" label="Canadian Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193372" start="870" end="883" title="polar climate" label="polar climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47954" start="927" end="943" title="Labrador Current" label="Labrador Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q81178" start="953" end="966" title="Baffin Island" label="Baffin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="1028" end="1041" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="1054" end="1074" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Canadian census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1102" end="1119" title="Census geographic units of Canada#Population centres" label="population centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029304" start="1165" end="1176" title="2011 Canadian census" label="2016 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="1407" end="1412" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659059" start="1441" end="1453" title="Paleo-Eskimo" label="Paleo-Eskimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q603749" start="1455" end="1469" title="Dorset culture" label="Dorset culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q72813" start="1475" end="1480" title="Thule people" label="Thule"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="1548" end="1557" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1620" end="1632" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1718" end="1740" title="Iqaluit Airport#History" label="Frobisher Bay Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="1778" end="1798" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211031" start="1976" end="1983" title="Nakasuk" label="Nakasuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="1988" end="1992" title="Inuit" label="Inuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="2010" end="2039" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185706" start="2182" end="2195" title="Crimson Route" label="Crimson Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415100" start="2218" end="2233" title="Iqaluit Airport" label="Iqaluit Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="2373" end="2382" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="2529" end="2554" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779408" start="2661" end="2665" title="Apex, Iqaluit" label="Apex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229395" start="2796" end="2822" title="Distant Early Warning Line" label="Distant Early Warning Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q748010" start="2876" end="2881" title="NORAD" label="NORAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010836" start="3838" end="3855" title="CFS Frobisher Bay" label="CFS Frobisher Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="4013" end="4047" title="intercontinental ballistic missile" label="intercontinental ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229395" start="4094" end="4102" title="Distant Early Warning Line" label="DEW line"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="4107" end="4113" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059290" start="4405" end="4424" title="Inuksuk High School" label="Inuksuk High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069756" start="5002" end="5033" title="1995 Nunavut capital plebiscite" label="1995 Nunavut capital plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021766" start="5129" end="5141" title="Rankin Inlet" label="Rankin Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="5291" end="5293" title="G7" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q80288" start="5537" end="5553" title="Martin Frobisher" label="Martin Frobisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004067" start="5565" end="5578" title="Frobisher Bay" label="Frobisher Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q940601" start="5704" end="5724" title="Charles Francis Hall" label="Charles Francis Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233466" start="5752" end="5773" title="Sylvia Grinnell River" label="Sylvia Grinnell River"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="5867" end="5896" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="6016" end="6041" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q39463" start="6058" end="6070" title="trading post" label="trading post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969028" start="6076" end="6086" title="Ward Inlet" label="Ward Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229395" start="6173" end="6181" title="Distant Early Warning Line" label="DEW Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="6312" end="6323" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="6793" end="6813" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426709" start="7001" end="7030" title="Nunavut Land Claims Agreement" label="Nunavut Land Claims Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q226" start="7264" end="7268" title="Nuuk" label="Nuuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="7270" end="7279" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495164" start="7314" end="7333" title="Arctic Winter Games" label="Arctic Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787564" start="7339" end="7364" title="Arctic Winter Games Arena" label="Arctic Winter Games Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="7500" end="7502" title="G7" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="7527" end="7539" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q113297348" start="7619" end="7656" title="Visit by Pope Francis to Canada" label="penitential apostolic visit to Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="7786" end="7793" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417042" start="7821" end="7838" title="Everett Mountains" label="Everett Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="8007" end="8017" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8051" end="8065" title="Tundra#Climatic classification" label="tundra climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="8067" end="8073" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174435" start="8091" end="8100" title="Trewartha climate classification" label="Trewartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="8182" end="8195" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q85377" start="8437" end="8455" title="Arctic Archipelago" label="Arctic Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061" start="8616" end="8627" title="Yellowknife" label="Yellowknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q79638" start="8652" end="8669" title="Fairbanks, Alaska" label="Fairbanks, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278535" start="8851" end="8872" title="Baffin Island Current" label="Baffin Island Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="8894" end="8903" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q380307" start="9017" end="9025" title="Labrador" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q218425" start="9119" end="9131" title="Picea mariana" label="black spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q611668" start="9183" end="9192" title="snowdrift" label="snowdrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="9230" end="9235" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q757163" start="9248" end="9259" title="woody plant" label="woody plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q674096" start="9280" end="9293" title="Salix arctica" label="Arctic willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="9434" end="9445" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9513" end="9522" title="Trondheim#Climate" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779408" start="10530" end="10547" title="Apex, Iqaluit" label="Apex (Niaqunngut)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211431" start="10865" end="10889" title="Qikiqtani School Operations" label="Nanook Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q367914" start="10912" end="10929" title="bed and breakfast" label="bed and breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229395" start="11309" end="11317" title="Distant Early Warning Line" label="DEW line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="11372" end="11382" title="fiberglass" label="fibreglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211431" start="11396" end="11410" title="Qikiqtani School Operations" label="Nakasuk School"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="11548" end="11573" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772064" start="11896" end="11933" title="Legislative Building of Nunavut" label="Nunavut Legislative Assembly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589398" start="12168" end="12202" title="St. Jude&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Iqaluit)" label="St. Jude&amp;#x27;s Anglican Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279019" start="12215" end="12245" title="Diocese of The Arctic" label="Anglican Diocese of The Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101805" start="12288" end="12293" title="igloo" label="igloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159426" start="12696" end="12703" title="narwhal" label="narwhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059290" start="13238" end="13257" title="Inuksuk High School" label="Inuksuk High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q105409707" start="13405" end="13434" title="Nunatta Sunakkutaangit Museum" label="Nunatta Sunakkutaangit Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233466" start="13716" end="13748" title="Sylvia Grinnell Territorial Park" label="Sylvia Grinnell Territorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267192" start="14021" end="14050" title="Qaummaarviit Territorial Park" label="Qaummaarviit Territorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106766" start="14175" end="14184" title="sod house" label="sod house"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375102" start="14236" end="14271" title="Katannilik Territorial Park Reserve" label="Katannilik Territorial Park Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571301" start="14280" end="14291" title="Soper River" label="Soper River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032150" start="14295" end="14318" title="Canadian Heritage Rivers System" label="Canadian Heritage River"/>
<link wikidata="Q284160" start="14406" end="14414" title="Kimmirut" label="Kimmirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q189262" start="14572" end="14584" title="Davis Strait" label="Davis Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q84500762" start="14966" end="14979" title="Joshua Haulli" label="Joshua Haulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467595" start="14981" end="14995" title="Quantum Tangle" label="Quantum Tangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28095050" start="14997" end="15011" title="Washboard Hank" label="Washboard Hank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4312746" start="15016" end="15022" title="Namgar" label="Namgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="15051" end="15071" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Canadian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="15085" end="15102" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="16328" end="16339" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983893" start="16354" end="16364" title="Immigration to Canada" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="17117" end="17130" title="First language" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="17268" end="17277" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="17796" end="17807" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193115" start="17848" end="17860" title="Christianity in Canada" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073649" start="17887" end="17897" title="Irreligion in Canada" label="Irreligion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022915" start="17924" end="17929" title="Islam in Canada" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11937089" start="17952" end="17975" title="Mythologies of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766557" start="17998" end="18006" title="Hinduism in Canada" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995" start="18029" end="18036" title="History of the Jews in Canada" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097993" start="18059" end="18067" title="Buddhism in Canada" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211431" start="18137" end="18164" title="Qikiqtani School Operations" label="Qikiqtani School Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017702" start="18174" end="18184" title="Pond Inlet" label="Pond Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059290" start="18393" end="18412" title="Inuksuk High School" label="Inuksuk High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q19461105" start="18441" end="18483" title="Commission scolaire francophone du Nunavut" label="Commission scolaire francophone du Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q8077975" start="18489" end="18512" title="École des Trois-Soleils" label="École des Trois-Soleils"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994706" start="18594" end="18616" title="Nunavut Arctic College" label="Nunavut Arctic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701244" start="18638" end="18658" title="Akitsiraq Law School" label="Akitsiraq Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415100" start="18905" end="18920" title="Iqaluit Airport" label="Iqaluit Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969091" start="19146" end="19153" title="Oshkosh Corporation" label="Oshkosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="19237" end="19266" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630896" start="19527" end="19553" title="Qikiqtani General Hospital" label="Qikiqtani General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787564" start="19787" end="19812" title="Arctic Winter Games Arena" label="Arctic Winter Games Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q83131592" start="19865" end="19886" title="Timmianut Pikiuqarvik" label="Timmianut Pikiuqarvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q876737" start="19905" end="19914" title="disc golf" label="disc golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945203" start="19986" end="20004" title="Astro Hill Complex" label="Astro Hill Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004067" start="20471" end="20484" title="Frobisher Bay" label="Frobisher Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415100" start="21526" end="21541" title="Iqaluit Airport" label="Iqaluit Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="21605" end="21617" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032237" start="21711" end="21725" title="Canadian North" label="Canadian North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="21746" end="21752" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061" start="21754" end="21765" title="Yellowknife" label="Yellowknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560210" start="21826" end="21837" title="Air Nunavut" label="Air Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035803" start="21839" end="21859" title="Canadian Helicopters" label="Canadian Helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074304" start="21910" end="21921" title="air charter" label="air charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042123" start="21944" end="21956" title="Keewatin Air" label="Keewatin Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q655177" start="21965" end="21972" title="Medical evacuation" label="MEDIVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q763256" start="21975" end="21988" title="Air medical services" label="air ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458703" start="21998" end="22011" title="Jazz Aviation" label="Jazz Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="22209" end="22233" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="22244" end="22265" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955343" start="22293" end="22341" title="Canadian NORAD Region Forward Operating Locations" label="Canadian NORAD Region Forward Operating Location"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742617" start="22360" end="22366" title="McDonnell Douglas CF-18 Hornet" label="CF-188"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830" start="22475" end="22486" title="Airbus A380" label="Airbus A380"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266964" start="22792" end="22814" title="Happy Valley-Goose Bay" label="Happy Valley-Goose Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="22816" end="22841" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q207702" start="22928" end="22941" title="Hudson Strait" label="Hudson Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339732" start="23012" end="23020" title="dog sled" label="dog sled"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="23024" end="23034" title="snowmobile" label="snowmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779408" start="23135" end="23139" title="Apex, Iqaluit" label="Apex"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233466" start="23147" end="23179" title="Sylvia Grinnell Territorial Park" label="Sylvia Grinnell Territorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065719" start="23274" end="23296" title="Iqaluit Public Transit" label="Iqaluit Public Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q340134" start="23588" end="23602" title="Climate of the Arctic" label="Arctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210988" start="23724" end="23743" title="All-terrain vehicle" label="All-terrain vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q764146" start="23776" end="23791" title="Northern Canada" label="Canadian Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339732" start="23880" end="23888" title="dog sled" label="dog sled"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267192" start="23958" end="23987" title="Qaummaarviit Territorial Park" label="Qaummaarviit Territorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375102" start="24008" end="24043" title="Katannilik Territorial Park Reserve" label="Katannilik Territorial Park Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618162" start="24229" end="24235" title="Gravel road" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="24868" end="24883" title="Traffic light" label="traffic signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="25014" end="25025" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060284" start="25074" end="25085" title="Northwestel" label="Northwestel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985503" start="25234" end="25246" title="Ice Wireless" label="Ice Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894594" start="25248" end="25261" title="Bell Mobility" label="Bell Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267886" start="25267" end="25272" title="Qiniq (company)" label="Qiniq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393008" start="25347" end="25357" title="SSi Canada" label="SSi Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867977" start="25360" end="25368" title="Starlink" label="Starlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089452" start="25516" end="25521" title="Isuma" label="Isuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069742" start="25584" end="25598" title="Nunatsiaq News" label="Nunatsiaq News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019185" start="25613" end="25623" title="News/North" label="News/North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010615" start="25683" end="25690" title="CFFB-TV" label="CFFB-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="25704" end="25718" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009026" start="25719" end="25728" title="CBC North" label="CBC North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010914" start="25741" end="25748" title="CFYK-DT" label="CFYK-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061" start="25750" end="25761" title="Yellowknife" label="Yellowknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q466891" start="25860" end="25870" title="Eva Aariak" label="Eva Aariak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230427" start="25891" end="25925" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly" label="Member of the Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377222" start="25943" end="25961" title="Premier of Nunavut" label="Premier of Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148904" start="25963" end="25982" title="Paul-André Brasseur" label="Paul-André Brasseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q21448395" start="25997" end="26017" title="Alexander Fathoullin" label="Alexander Fathoullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766571" start="26033" end="26053" title="Ann Meekitjuk Hanson" label="Ann Meekitjuk Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15212701" start="26062" end="26085" title="Commissioner of Nunavut" label="Commissioner of Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389486" start="26087" end="26098" title="Kenn Harper" label="Kenn Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696974" start="26145" end="26157" title="Lucie Idlout" label="Lucie Idlout"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791920" start="26184" end="26196" title="Matty McNair" label="Matty McNair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916051" start="26216" end="26229" title="Mosha Michael" label="Mosha Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q70425833" start="26242" end="26257" title="Simonie Michael" label="Simonie Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867078" start="26303" end="26352" title="Legislative Assembly of the Northwest Territories" label="Legislative Assembly of the Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211031" start="26362" end="26369" title="Nakasuk" label="Nakasuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396220" start="26391" end="26402" title="Paul Okalik" label="Paul Okalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867082" start="26438" end="26469" title="Legislative Assembly of Nunavut" label="Legislative Assembly of Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574283" start="26507" end="26553" title="Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Nunavut" label="Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666429" start="26607" end="26616" title="Abe Okpik" label="Abe Okpik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26640" end="26655" title="Disc number#Project Surname" label="Project Surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281391" start="26701" end="26712" title="disc number" label="disc number"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258849" start="26793" end="26809" title="Dennis Patterson" label="Dennis Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980301" start="26915" end="26928" title="Bryan Pearson (politician)" label="Bryan Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335275" start="26991" end="26999" title="Ed Picco" label="Ed Picco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256200" start="27044" end="27063" title="Annabella Piugattuk" label="Annabella Piugattuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361630" start="27074" end="27093" title="Elisapee Sheutiapik" label="Elisapee Sheutiapik"/>
<link wikidata="Q89742678" start="27122" end="27141" title="Enooyaq Sudlovenick" label="Enooyaq Sudlovenick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195363" start="27161" end="27174" title="Hunter Tootoo" label="Hunter Tootoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q486584" start="27268" end="27288" title="Sheila Watt-Cloutier" label="Sheila Watt-Cloutier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210983" start="27354" end="27387" title="List of municipalities in Nunavut" label="List of municipalities in Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769918" start="27944" end="27980" title="Weigl Educational Publishers Limited" label="Weigl Educational Publishers Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q128665228" start="27990" end="28004" title="Alexina Kublu" label="Kublu, Alexina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14587" wikidata="Q23442" url="?curid=14587" title="Island">
<text>An island or isle is a piece of land, distinct from a continent, completely surrounded by water. There are continental islands, which were formed by being split from a continent by plate tectonics, and oceanic islands, which have never been part of a continent. Oceanic islands can be formed from volcanic activity, grow into atolls from coral reefs, and form from sediment along shorelines, creating barrier islands. River islands can also form from sediment and debris in rivers. Artificial islands are those made by humans, including small rocky outcroppings built out of lagoons and large-scale land reclamation projects used for development.

Islands are host to diverse plant and animal life. Oceanic islands have the sea as a natural barrier to the introduction of new species, causing the species that do reach the island to evolve in isolation. Continental islands share animal and plant life with the continent they split from. Depending on how long ago the continental island formed, the life on that island may have diverged greatly from the mainland due to natural selection.

Humans have lived on and traveled between islands for thousands of years at a minimum. Some islands became host to humans due to a land bridge or a continental island splitting from the mainland, or by boat travel. In the far north or south some islands are joined by seasonal or glacial ice. Today, up to 10% of the world&#x27;s population lives on islands. Islands are popular targets for tourism due to their perceived natural beauty, isolation, and unique cultures.

Islands became the target of colonization by Europeans, resulting in the majority of islands in the Pacific being put under European control. Decolonization has resulted in some but not all island nations becoming self-governing, with lasting effects related to industrialisation, invasive species, nuclear weapons testing, and tourism. Islands and island countries are threatened by climate change. Sea level rise threatens to submerge nations such as Maldives, the Marshall Islands, and Tuvalu completely. Increases in the frequency and intensity of tropical cyclones can cause widespread destruction of infrastructure and animal habitats. Species that live exclusively on islands are some of those most threatened by extinction.

== Definition ==

An island is an area of land surrounded by water on all sides that is distinct from a continent. There is no standard of size that distinguishes islands and continents. Continents have an accepted geological definition – they are the largest landmass of a particular tectonic plate. Islands can occur in any body of water, including lakes, rivers, seas. Low-tide elevations, areas of land that are not above the surface during a high tide, are generally not considered islands. Islands that have been bridged or otherwise joined to a mainland with land reclamation are sometimes considered &quot;de-islanded&quot;, but not in every case.

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;island&quot; derives from Middle English &#x27;, from Old English &quot;igland&quot; (from &quot;ig&quot; or &quot;ieg&quot;, similarly meaning &#x27;island&#x27; when used independently, and -land carrying its contemporary meaning. Old English &quot;ieg&quot; is actually a cognate of Swedish &quot;ö&quot; and German &quot;Aue&quot;, and more distantly related to Latin &#x27; (water).

The spelling of the word was modified in the 15th century because of a false etymology caused by an association with the Old French loanword &quot;isle&quot;, which itself comes from the Latin word &quot;insula&quot;. 

== Geology ==

=== Formation in oceans ===
Islands often are found in archipelagos or island chains, which are collections of islands. These chains are thought to form from volcanic hotspots, areas of the lithosphere where the mantle is hotter than the surrounding area. These hotspots would give rise to volcanoes whose lava would form the rock the islands are made of. For some islands, the movement of tectonic plates above stationary hotspots would form islands in a linear chain, with the islands further away from the hotspot being progressively older and more eroded, before disappearing under the sea entirely. An example is the Hawaiian Islands, with the oldest island being 25 million years old, and the youngest, Hawaii, still being an active volcano. However, not all island chains are formed this way. Some may be formed all at once by fractures in the tectonic plates themselves, simultaneously creating multiple islands. One supporting piece of evidence is that of the Line Islands, which are all estimated to be 8 million years old, rather than being different ages.

Other island chains form due to being separated from existing continents. The Japanese archipelago may have been separated from Eurasia due to seafloor spreading, a phenomenon where new oceanic crust is formed, pushing away older crust. Islands sitting on the continental shelf may be called continental islands. Other islands, like those that make up New Zealand, are what remains of continents that shrank and sunk beneath the sea. It was estimated that Zealandia, the continent-like area of crust that New Zealand sits on, has had 93% of its original surface area submerged.

Some islands are formed when coral reefs grow on volcanic islands that have submerged beneath the surface. When these coral islands encircle a central lagoon, the island is known as an atoll. The formation of reefs and islands related to those reefs is aided by the buildup of sediment in shallow patches of water. In some cases, tectonic movements lifting a reef out of the water by as little as 1 meter can cause sediment to accumulate and an island to form.

Barrier islands are long, sandy bars that form along shorelines due to the deposition of sediment by waves. These islands erode and grow as the wind and waves shift. Barrier islands have the effect of protecting coastal areas from severe weather because they absorb some of the energy of large waves before they can reach the shore.

Antarctic islands, are sometimes permanently connected to another land mass by sea or glacial ice. An example of this is Ross Island in Antarctica.

=== Formation in freshwater ===
A fluvial island is an island that forms from the erosion and sedimentation of debris in rivers; almost all rivers have some form of fluvial islands. These islands may only be a few meters high, and are usually temporary. Changes in the flow speed, water level, and sediment content of the river may effect the rate of fluvial island formation and depletion. Permanent river islands also exist, the largest of which (that is completely inland) is Bananal Island in the Tocantins of Brazil, which has a maximum width of 55 kilometers.

Lakes form for a variety of reasons, including glaciers, plate tectonics, and volcanism. Lake islands can form as part of these processes.

== Life on islands ==
The field of insular biogeography studies the ecological processes that take place on islands, with a focus on what factors effect the evolution, extinction, and richness of species. Scientists often study islands as an isolated model of how the process of natural selection takes place. Island ecology studies organisms on islands and their environment. It has yielded important insights for its parent field of ecology since the time of Charles Darwin.

=== Endemism ===
In biology, endemism is defined as the phenomenon where species or genus is only found in a certain geographical area. Islands isolate land organisms from others with water, and isolate aquatic organisms living on them with land. Island ecosystems have the highest rates of endemism globally. This means that islands contribute heavily to global biodiversity. Areas with high lives of biodiversity are a priority target of conservation efforts, to prevent the extinction of these species. Despite high levels of endemism, the total species richness, the total number of unique species in a region, is lower on islands than on mainlands. The level of species richness on islands is proportional to the area of that island, a phenomenon known as the species-area relationship. This is because larger areas have more resources and thus can support more organisms. Populations with a higher carrying capacity also have more genetic diversity, which promotes speciation.

=== Dispersal ===

Oceanic islands, ones that have never been connected to shore, are only populated by life that can cross the sea. This means that any animals present on the island had to have flown there, in the case of birds or bats, were carried by such animals, or were carried in a sea current in what is known as a &quot;rafting event&quot;. This phenomenon is known as oceanic dispersal. Tropical cyclones have the capacity to transport species over great distances. Animals like tortoises can live for weeks without food or water, and are able to survive floating on debris in the sea. One case study showed that in 1995, fifteen iguanas survived a 300 km journey to Anguilla in the Caribbean, an island which no iguana had lived on previously. They survived floating on a mass of uprooted trees from a storm. Plant species are thought to be able to travel great distances of ocean. New Zealand and Australia share 200 native plant species, despite being separated by 1500 km.

Continental islands, islands that were at one point connected to a continent, are expected to share a common history of plant and animal life up until the point that the island broke away from the continent. For example, the presence of freshwater fish on an island surrounded by ocean would indicate that it once was attached to a continent, since these fish cannot traverse the ocean on their own. Over the course of time, evolution and extinction changes the nature of animal life on a continental island, but only once it splits from the mainland. An example is that of the southern beech, a tree that is present in Australia, New Zealand, parts of South American, and New Guinea, places that today are geographically distant. A possible explanation for this phenomenon is that these landmasses were once all part of the continent Gondwana and separated by tectonic drift. However, there are competing theories that suggest this species may have reached faraway places by way of oceanic dispersal.

=== Evolution on island groups ===

Species that colonize island archipelagos exhibit a specific property known as adaptive radiation. In this process, a species that arrives on a group of islands rapidly becomes more diverse over time, splitting off into new species or subspecies. A species that reaches an island ecosystem may face little competition for resources, or may find that the resources that they found in their previous habitat are not available. These factors together result in individual evolutionary branches with different means of survival.

The classical example of this is Darwin&#x27;s finches, a group of up to fifteen tanager species that are endemic to the Galápagos Islands. These birds evolved different beaks in order to eat different kinds of food available on the islands. The large ground finch has a large bill used to crack seeds and eat fruit. The Genovesa cactus finch prefers cacti as a food source, and has a beak adapted for removing pulp and flowers from cacti. The green warbler-finch (in the habit of true warbler species) consumes spiders and insects that live on plants. Other examples of this phenomenon exist worldwide, including in Hawaii and Madagascar, and are not limited to island ecosystems.

==== The island rule ====

Species endemic to islands show a common evolutionary trajectory. Foster&#x27;s rule (also known as the island rule), states that small mammals such as rodents evolve to become larger, known as island gigantism. One such example is the giant tortoise of the Seychelles, though it is unknown if it grew in size before or after reaching the island. Larger animals such as the hippopotamus tend to become smaller, such as in the case of the pygmy hippopotamus. This is known as insular dwarfism. In the case of smaller animals, it has been hypothesized that animals on islands may have fewer predators and competitors, resulting in selection pressure towards larger animals. Larger animals may exhaust food resources quickly due to their size, causing malnutrition in their young, resulting in a selection pressure for smaller animals that require less food. Having fewer predators would mean these animals did not need not be large to survive.

=== Darwin, the Galápagos, and natural selection ===
Charles Darwin formulated the theory of natural selection through the study of island ecology. The species he observed on the Galápagos Islands, including tanager birds, contributed to his understanding of how evolution works. He first traveled to the islands as a naturalist on HMS Beagle in 1835, as part of a five-year circumnavigation of Earth. He wrote that &quot;the different islands to a considerable extent are inhabited by a different set of beings&quot;. Through the study of the finches and other animals he realized that organisms survive by changing to adapt to their habitat. It would be over twenty years before he published his theories in &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;.

== Humans and islands ==

=== History of exploration ===


The first evidence of humans colonizing islands probably occurred in the Paleolithic era, 100,000 to 200,000 years ago. Reaching the Indonesian islands of Flores and Timor would have required crossing distances of water of at least . Some islands, such as Honshu, were probably connected to the mainland with a land bridge that allowed humans to colonize it before it became an island.

The first people to colonize distant oceanic islands were the Polynesians. Many of the previous island settlements required traveling distances of less than , whereas Polynesians may have traveled to settle islands such as Tahiti. They would send navigators to sail the ocean without the aid of navigational instruments to discover new islands for settlement. Between 1100 and 800 BC, Polynesians sailed East from New Guinea and the Solomon Islands and reached the islands that make up the modern-day Fiji and Samoa. The furthest extent of this migration would be Easter Island in the East, and New Zealand in the South, with New Zealand&#x27;s first settlements between 1250 and 1300. 

Historians have sought to understand why some remote islands have always been uninhabited, while others, especially in the Pacific Ocean, have long been populated by humans. Generally, larger islands are more likely to be able to sustain humans and thus are more likely to have been settled. Small islands that cannot sustain populations on their own can still be habitable if they are within a &quot;commuting&quot; distance to an island that has enough resources to be sustainable. The presence of an island is marked by seabirds, differences in cloud and weather patterns, as well as changes in the direction of waves. It is also possible for human populations to have gone extinct on islands, evidenced by explorers finding islands that show evidence of habitation but no life.

Not all islands were or are inhabited by maritime cultures. In the past, some societies were found to have lost their seafaring ability over time, such as the case of the Canary Islands, which were occupied by an indigenous people since the island&#x27;s first discovery in the first century until being conquered by the Spanish Empire in 1496. It has been hypothesized that since the inhabitants had little incentive for trade and had little to any contact with the mainland, they had no need for boats. 

The motivation for island exploration has been the subject of research and debate. Some early historians previously argued that early island colonization was unintentional, perhaps by a raft being swept out to sea. Others compare the motivations of Polynesian and similar explorers with those of Christopher Columbus, the explorer who sailed westward over the Atlantic Ocean in search of an alternate route to the East Indies. These historians theorize that successful explorers were rewarded with recognition and wealth, leading others to attempt possibly dangerous expeditions to discover more islands, usually with poor results.

=== Lifestyle ===
About 10% of the world&#x27;s population lives on islands. The study of the culture of islands is known as island studies. The interest in the study of islands is due to their unique cultures and natural environments that differ from mainland cultures. This is for a few reasons: First, the obvious political and geographic isolation from mainland cultures. Second, unique restraints on resources and ecology creating marine-focused cultures with a focus on fishing and sailing. Third, a lasting historical and political significance of islands.

==== Diet ====
The Polynesian diet got most of its protein from fishing. Polynesians were known to fish close to shore, as well as in deep water. It was reported that Rapa Nui people were known to fish as far as from shore at coral reefs. Spear, line, and net fishing were all used, to catch tuna as well as sharks and stingrays. Island cultures also cultivate native and non-native crops. Polynesians grew the native yam, taro, breadfruit, banana, coconut and other fruits and vegetables. Different island climates made different resources more important, such as the Hawaiian islands being home to irrigated fields of taro, whereas in some islands, like Tahiti, breadfruit was more widely cultivated and fermented in order to preserve it. There is archeological evidence that Canary Islanders would chew the roots of ferns for sustenance, a practice that wore heavily on their molars. These islanders would also grow barley and raised livestock such as goats.

=== Island nations and territories ===

Many island nations have little land and a restricted set of natural resources. However, these nations control some of the largest fisheries in the world, deposits of copper, gold, and nickel, as well as oil deposits. The natural beauty of island nations also makes them a magnet for tourism. Islands also have geopolitical value for naval bases, weapons testing, and general territorial control. One such example is French Polynesia, a territory that receives substantial military expenditure and aid from France. Three others, Palau, Federated States of Micronesia, and the Marshall Islands, are island nations of the Pacific region that maintain a defense, aid, and immigration agreement with the United States called a Compact of Free Association.

==== Colonization ====

Since the first discoveries of Polynesian, Micronesian, and other islands by Westerners, these nations have been the subject of colonization. Islands were the target of Christian missionaries. These missionaries faced resistance, but found success when some local chiefs used European support to centralize power. Beginning in the 16th century, European states placed most of Oceania in under colonial administration. Pohnpei was colonized by Spain as early as 1526. It changed hands from Germany to Japan to the United States before joining the Federated States of Micronesia in 1982, maintaining a &quot;free association&quot; status with the U.S. Guam was a Spanish territory until 1898, and now is a unincorporated territory of the U.S.

The decolonization era saw many island states achieve independence or some form of self-governance. Nuclear weapons testing on the Marshall Islands left many atolls destroyed or uninhabitable, causing the forced displacement of people from their home islands as well as increases in cancer rates due to radiation. Colonization has resulted in a decline of observance of traditional cultural practices in places such as Hawaii, where Native Hawaiians are now a minority. Cultural attitudes related to communal ownership of land as well as a lack of individualistic decision-making may make some island cultures less compatible with the global capitalist economy, causing these nations to experience less economic growth.
=== Tourism ===
Islands have long been a popular target for tourism, thanks to their unique climates, cultures, and natural beauty. However, islands may suffer from poor transportation connectivity from airplanes and boats and strains on infrastructure from tourist activity. Islands in colder climates often rely on seasonal tourists seeking to enjoy nature or local cultures, and may only be one aspect of an island&#x27;s economy. In contrast, tourism on tropical islands can often make up the majority of the local economy and built environment. These islands sometimes also require consistent foreign aid on top of tourism in order to ensure economic growth. This reliance can result in social inequality and environmental degradation. During tourism downturns, these economies struggle to make up the lost inflow of cash with other industries.

== Threats to islands ==

Climate change threatens human development on islands due to sea level rise, more dangerous tropical cyclones, coral bleaching, and an increase in invasive species. For example, in 2017 Hurricane Maria caused a loss of almost all the infrastructure in Dominica. Sea level rise and other climate changes can reduce freshwater reserves, resulting in droughts. These risks are expected to decrease the habitability of islands, especially small ones. Beyond risks to human life, plant and animal life are threatened. It has been estimated that almost 50 percent of land species threatened by extinction live on islands. In 2017, a detailed review of 1,288 islands found that they were home to 1,189 highly-threatened vertebrate species, which was 41 percent of the global figure. Coral bleaching is expected to occur with more frequency, threatening marine ecosystems, some of which island economies are dependent on.

Some islands that are low-lying may cease to exist given high enough amounts of sea level rise. Tuvalu received media attention for a press conference publicizing the ongoing submerging of the island country. Tuvalu signed a cooperation agreement with Australia agreeing to annually allow 280 of its citizens to become permanent residents of Australia. The Marshall Islands, a country of 1,156 islands, have also been identified as a country that may be existentially threatened by rising seas.

Increasing intensity of tropical storms also increases the distances and frequency with which invasive species may be transported to islands. Floodwaters from these storms may also wash plants further inland than they would travel on their own, introducing them to new habitats. Agriculture and trade also have introduced non-native life to islands. These processes result in an introduction of invasive species to ecosystems that are especially small and fragile. One example is the apple snail, initially introduced to the U.S. by aquarium owners. It has since been transported by hurricanes across the Gulf Coast and neighboring islands. These species compete for resources with native animals, and some may grow so densely that they displace other forms of existing life.

== Artificial islands ==


For hundreds of years, islands have been created through land reclamation. One of the first recorded instances of this when people of the Solomon Islands created eighty such islands by piling coral and rock in the Lau Lagoon. One traditional way of constructing islands is with the use of a revetment. Sandbags or stones are dropped with a barge into the sea to bring the land level slightly out of the water. The island area is then filled with sand or gravel, followed by a construction of this revetment to hold it together. Islands have also been constructed with a permanent caisson, a steel or concrete structure built in a closed loop and then filled with sand.

Some modern islands have been constructed by pouring millions of tons of sand into the sea, such as with Pearl Island in Qatar or the Palm Islands in Dubai. These islands are usually created for real estate development, and are sold for private ownership or construction of housing. Offshore oil platforms have also been described as a type of island. Some atolls have been covered in concrete to create artificial islands for military purposes, such as those created by China in the South China Sea. These atolls were previously low-tide elevations, landmasses that are only above water during low tide. The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea indicates that these islands may not have the same legal status as a naturally occurring island, and as such may not confer the same legal rights.

== See also ==

* Lists of islands
* List of archipelagos
* List of artificial islands
* List of divided islands
* List of fictional islands
* List of island countries
* List of islands by area
* List of islands by country
* List of islands by highest point
* List of islands by name
* List of islands by population
* List of islands by population density
* List of islands named after people
* 
* 
* 


== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="3" end="9" title="Island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="13" end="17" title="Island" label="isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="168" end="177" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="181" end="196" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="297" end="305" title="volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="326" end="331" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="338" end="348" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="365" end="373" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="401" end="415" title="barrier island" label="barrier island"/>
<link wikidata="Q162602" start="418" end="430" title="River island" label="River island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13691" start="482" end="499" title="Artificial island" label="Artificial island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="599" end="615" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="676" end="681" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="686" end="692" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="724" end="727" title="sea" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="1070" end="1087" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q864812" start="1221" end="1232" title="land bridge" label="land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="1481" end="1488" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="1590" end="1602" title="colonization" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="1703" end="1717" title="Decolonization" label="Decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="1775" end="1789" title="self-governance" label="self-governing"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="1823" end="1840" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="1842" end="1858" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="1860" end="1883" title="nuclear weapons testing" label="nuclear weapons testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="1889" end="1896" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="1910" end="1926" title="island country" label="island countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1945" end="1959" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="1961" end="1975" title="Sea level rise" label="Sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="2014" end="2022" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="2028" end="2044" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="2050" end="2056" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="2113" end="2129" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="2281" end="2291" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="2469" end="2478" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q205895" start="2554" end="2562" title="landmass" label="landmass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583739" start="2579" end="2593" title="list of tectonic plates" label="tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="2645" end="2649" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="2652" end="2657" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="2660" end="2663" title="sea" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692795" start="2666" end="2684" title="Low-tide elevation" label="Low-tide elevation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2741" end="2750" title="Tide#Characteristics" label="high tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="3008" end="3022" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3036" end="3047" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545015" start="3174" end="3179" title="-land" label="-land"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3215" end="3226" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="3257" end="3264" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="3268" end="3275" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3294" end="3300" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013103" start="3442" end="3457" title="false etymology" label="false etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="3492" end="3502" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3558" end="3563" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="3661" end="3673" title="archipelagos" label="archipelagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="3764" end="3781" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="volcanic hotspots"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="3796" end="3807" title="lithosphere" label="lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="3818" end="3824" title="Mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="3896" end="3905" title="volcanoes" label="volcanoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="3912" end="3916" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="3984" end="4011" title="Plate tectonics" label="movement of tectonic plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="4158" end="4164" title="eroded" label="eroded"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="4228" end="4244" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="4315" end="4321" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330974" start="4338" end="4352" title="active volcano" label="active volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="4575" end="4587" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q841337" start="4753" end="4773" title="Japanese archipelago" label="Japanese archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="4803" end="4810" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215920" start="4818" end="4836" title="seafloor spreading" label="seafloor spreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q238851" start="4861" end="4874" title="oceanic crust" label="oceanic crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="4935" end="4952" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="5027" end="5038" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q150408" start="5131" end="5140" title="Zealandia" label="Zealandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="5283" end="5294" title="coral reefs" label="coral reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324426" start="5372" end="5385" title="coral islands" label="coral islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="5405" end="5411" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="5439" end="5444" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="5716" end="5731" title="Barrier islands" label="Barrier islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="5817" end="5822" title="Wave" label="waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="5947" end="5961" title="Extreme weather" label="severe weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q209899" start="6171" end="6182" title="Ross Island" label="Ross Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q162602" start="6233" end="6247" title="fluvial island" label="fluvial island"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="6281" end="6288" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q635485" start="6293" end="6306" title="sedimentation" label="sedimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q282059" start="6678" end="6692" title="Bananal Island" label="Bananal Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q43695" start="6700" end="6709" title="Tocantins" label="Tocantins"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="6766" end="6771" title="Lakes" label="Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211302" start="6813" end="6821" title="Glacial lake" label="glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q863974" start="6855" end="6867" title="Lake island" label="Lake islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664460" start="6941" end="6961" title="insular biogeography" label="insular biogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="7063" end="7072" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="7074" end="7084" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146659" start="7090" end="7098" title="Species richness" label="richness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979154" start="7157" end="7162" title="model" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="7185" end="7202" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083479" start="7216" end="7230" title="Island ecology" label="Island ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="7341" end="7348" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="7367" end="7381" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="7747" end="7759" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="7824" end="7836" title="Conservation movement" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146659" start="7933" end="7949" title="species richness" label="species richness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267118" start="8149" end="8174" title="species-area relationship" label="species-area relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q866283" start="8288" end="8305" title="carrying capacity" label="carrying capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="8321" end="8338" title="genetic diversity" label="genetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="8355" end="8365" title="speciation" label="speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="8591" end="8596" title="birds" label="birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="8600" end="8604" title="bats" label="bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q787296" start="8746" end="8763" title="oceanic dispersal" label="oceanic dispersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="8765" end="8781" title="Tropical cyclone" label="Tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q205531" start="9008" end="9015" title="iguanas" label="iguanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228" start="9045" end="9053" title="Anguilla" label="Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="9061" end="9070" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072742" start="9593" end="9608" title="freshwater fish" label="freshwater fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q218274" start="9934" end="9948" title="southern beech" label="southern beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="10191" end="10199" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q216818" start="10474" end="10492" title="adaptive radiation" label="adaptive radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q756311" start="10954" end="10975" title="Darwin&amp;#x27;s finches" label="Darwin&amp;#x27;s finches"/>
<link wikidata="Q666222" start="11002" end="11009" title="tanager" label="tanager"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="11091" end="11096" title="beaks" label="beaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q923644" start="11167" end="11185" title="large ground finch" label="large ground finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686680" start="11242" end="11263" title="Genovesa cactus finch" label="Genovesa cactus finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14560" start="11272" end="11277" title="cacti" label="cacti"/>
<link wikidata="Q226120" start="11365" end="11384" title="green warbler-finch" label="green warbler-finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067559" start="11407" end="11414" title="warbler" label="warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296350" start="11697" end="11715" title="Foster&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Foster&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="11783" end="11790" title="rodents" label="rodents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417877" start="11825" end="11841" title="island gigantism" label="island gigantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981205" start="11867" end="11881" title="giant tortoise" label="giant tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="11889" end="11899" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="12005" end="12017" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22110899" start="12069" end="12087" title="pygmy hippopotamus" label="pygmy hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q749639" start="12106" end="12122" title="insular dwarfism" label="insular dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="12220" end="12229" title="predators" label="predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="12380" end="12392" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="12627" end="12641" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="12667" end="12684" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="12753" end="12770" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galápagos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="12892" end="12902" title="naturalist" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35926" start="12906" end="12916" title="HMS Beagle" label="HMS Beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135885" start="12949" end="12965" title="circumnavigation" label="circumnavigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="13290" end="13314" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="13455" end="13466" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142361" start="13515" end="13533" title="Indonesian islands" label="Indonesian islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q148440" start="13537" end="13543" title="Flores" label="Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q83067" start="13548" end="13553" title="Timor" label="Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="13638" end="13644" title="Honshu" label="Honshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q864812" start="13693" end="13704" title="land bridge" label="land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="13789" end="13797" title="colonize" label="colonize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="13831" end="13842" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="13992" end="13998" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780422" start="14064" end="14088" title="navigational instruments" label="navigational instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="14183" end="14193" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="14202" end="14217" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="14270" end="14274" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="14279" end="14284" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="14333" end="14346" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="14364" end="14375" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="14580" end="14593" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="14980" end="14988" title="seabirds" label="seabirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="15411" end="15425" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="15453" end="15470" title="indigenous people" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="15561" end="15575" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="15662" end="15667" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="16043" end="16063" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="16107" end="16121" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="16161" end="16172" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q120727705" start="16505" end="16519" title="island studies" label="island studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="16856" end="16863" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q852486" start="17112" end="17127" title="Rapa Nui people" label="Rapa Nui people"/>
<link wikidata="Q765706" start="17184" end="17189" title="Spearfishing" label="Spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415280" start="17191" end="17195" title="Fishing line" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q271598" start="17201" end="17204" title="Fishing net" label="net"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="17237" end="17241" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="17253" end="17259" title="sharks" label="sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328202" start="17264" end="17273" title="stingrays" label="stingrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="17363" end="17366" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="17368" end="17372" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="17374" end="17384" title="breadfruit" label="breadfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="17386" end="17392" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="17394" end="17401" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="17545" end="17554" title="irrigated" label="irrigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="17651" end="17660" title="fermented" label="fermented"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="17764" end="17769" title="ferns" label="ferns"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="17824" end="17830" title="molars" label="molars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="17864" end="17870" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="17900" end="17905" title="goats" label="goats"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="18079" end="18088" title="fisheries" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="18115" end="18121" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="18123" end="18127" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="18133" end="18139" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="18152" end="18164" title="Petroleum reservoir" label="oil deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="18232" end="18239" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324633" start="18282" end="18293" title="Naval base" label="naval bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="18295" end="18310" title="Nuclear weapons testing" label="weapons testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="18365" end="18381" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="18477" end="18482" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="18484" end="18514" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="18524" end="18540" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478583" start="18671" end="18698" title="Compact of Free Association" label="Compact of Free Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="18768" end="18779" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="18894" end="18916" title="Christian missionaries" label="Christian missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="19101" end="19108" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="19118" end="19141" title="Colonialism" label="colonial administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q319836" start="19143" end="19150" title="Pohnpei" label="Pohnpei"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="19271" end="19301" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="19375" end="19379" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="19429" end="19453" title="Territories of the United States" label="unincorporated territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="19471" end="19485" title="decolonization" label="decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="19550" end="19565" title="self-governance" label="self-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="19598" end="19614" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="19672" end="19691" title="forced displacement" label="forced displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366475" start="19770" end="19779" title="Effects of nuclear explosions" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="20109" end="20119" title="capitalist" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="20247" end="20254" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="20390" end="20399" title="airplanes" label="airplanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986688" start="20718" end="20735" title="built environment" label="built environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="20785" end="20796" title="foreign aid" label="foreign aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431887" start="20879" end="20896" title="social inequality" label="social inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="20901" end="20926" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="21064" end="21078" title="Climate change" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="21125" end="21139" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="21156" end="21173" title="tropical cyclones" label="tropical cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q568916" start="21175" end="21190" title="coral bleaching" label="coral bleaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="21211" end="21227" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178187" start="21250" end="21265" title="Hurricane Maria" label="Hurricane Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="21412" end="21420" title="droughts" label="droughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="21652" end="21662" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="22075" end="22081" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q689095" start="22298" end="22317" title="permanent residents" label="permanent residents"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="22754" end="22765" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="22870" end="22886" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q907757" start="22959" end="22970" title="apple snail" label="apple snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="23008" end="23016" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="23080" end="23090" title="Gulf Coast" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="23336" end="23352" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="23417" end="23432" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497630" start="23493" end="23503" title="Lau Lagoon" label="Lau Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742014" start="23570" end="23579" title="revetment" label="revetment"/>
<link wikidata="Q846451" start="23859" end="23866" title="Caisson (engineering)" label="caisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q682615" start="24054" end="24066" title="The Pearl Island" label="Pearl Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q211844" start="24083" end="24095" title="Palm Islands" label="Palm Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q695829" start="24144" end="24167" title="real estate development" label="real estate development"/>
<link wikidata="Q689880" start="24232" end="24254" title="Oil platform" label="Offshore oil platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="24433" end="24448" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="24544" end="24552" title="low tide" label="low tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="24558" end="24605" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q120647565" start="24772" end="24788" title="Lists of islands" label="Lists of islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167901" start="24791" end="24811" title="List of archipelagos" label="List of archipelagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248463" start="24814" end="24840" title="List of artificial islands" label="List of artificial islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156779" start="24843" end="24866" title="List of divided islands" label="List of divided islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q20900298" start="24869" end="24894" title="List of fictional islands" label="List of fictional islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859151" start="24897" end="24921" title="List of island countries" label="List of island countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q104176" start="24924" end="24947" title="List of islands by area" label="List of islands by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q120647565" start="24950" end="24976" title="List of islands by country" label="List of islands by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381625" start="24979" end="25011" title="List of islands by highest point" label="List of islands by highest point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624399" start="25014" end="25037" title="List of islands by name" label="List of islands by name"/>
<link wikidata="Q911018" start="25040" end="25069" title="List of islands by population" label="List of islands by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624431" start="25072" end="25109" title="List of islands by population density" label="List of islands by population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624442" start="25112" end="25146" title="List of islands named after people" label="List of islands named after people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14591" wikidata="Q423539" url="?curid=14591" title="Iao Valley">
<text>ʻĪao Valley (Hawaiian: &quot;Īao&quot;: &quot;cloud supreme&quot;, pronounced similar to &quot;EE-yow&quot;) is a lush, stream-cut valley in West Maui, Hawaii, located west of Wailuku. Because of its natural environment and history, it has become a tourist location. It was designated a National Natural Landmark in 1972.

== ʻĪao Valley State Monument ==

The state park is located on at the end of ʻĪao Valley Road (Highway 32). The ʻĪao Needle (Kūkaʻemoku), a landmark in the state park, is a vegetation-covered lava remnant rising from the valley floor or above sea level. The &quot;needle&quot; is a sharp ridge that gives the appearance of being a spire when viewed end-on. The needle is an extension of and surrounded by the cliffs of the West Maui Mountains, an extinct volcano. There is a short trail (ʻĪao Needle Lookout Trail and Ethnobotanical Loop) to a windy overlook.

== Rainforest ==
ʻĪao Valley is covered in dense rainforest, most of which consists of introduced vegetation on the valley floor. The Puu Kukui summit area at the valley&#x27;s head receives an average of rainfall per year, making it the state&#x27;s second wettest location after The Big Bog, slightly wetter than Mount Waialeale. Much of this rainfall ends up flowing into the ʻĪao Stream. Trails in the State Park run alongside ʻĪao Stream and through the forest.

Above the ʻĪao valley at the Puʻu Kukui watershed is a native cloud forest of ʻOhiʻa and Koa. This forest is home to many native species including birds like the ʻIʻiwi, ʻApapane, and ʻAmakihi.

== History ==

The Hawaiian god Kāne is considered to be the procreator and the provider of life. He is associated with wai (fresh water) as well as clouds, rain, streams, and springs. Kanaloa, the Hawaiian god of the underworld, is represented by the phallic stone of the ʻĪao Needle.

Kapawa, the king of Hawaii prior to Pili, was buried here. Maui&#x27;s ruler Kakae, in the late 15th century, designated ʻĪao Valley as an alii burial ground. The remains were buried in secret places. In 1790, the Battle of Kepaniwai took place there, in which Kamehameha the Great defeated Kalanikūpule and the Maui army during his campaign to unify the islands. The battle was said to be so bloody that dead bodies blocked ʻĪao Stream, and the battle site was named &quot;Kepaniwai&quot; (&quot;the damming of the waters&quot;).

== Kepaniwai Park and Heritage Gardens ==
Established in 1952, the Heritage Gardens in Kepaniwai Park recognize the multicultural history of Maui. Tributes and structures celebrate the contributions of Hawaiian, American missionary, Chinese, Japanese, Portuguese, Korean, and Filipino cultures. The gardens had become overgrown and were restored in 1994. The Hawaii nature center, just outside the gardens, has a museum and children&#x27;s education about Hawaii and conservation.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q423539" start="0" end="11" title="Iao Valley" label="ʻĪao Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="13" end="21" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188705" start="146" end="150" title="Maui" label="Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="152" end="158" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087831" start="176" end="183" title="Wailuku, Hawaii" label="Wailuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967511" start="287" end="312" title="National Natural Landmark" label="National Natural Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225973" start="746" end="765" title="West Maui Mountains" label="West Maui Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="778" end="785" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817150" start="933" end="943" title="Hawaiian tropical rainforests" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="971" end="981" title="invasive species" label="introduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262536" start="1018" end="1027" title="Puu Kukui" label="Puu Kukui"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741620" start="1165" end="1176" title="Big Bog, Maui" label="The Big Bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541056" start="1199" end="1214" title="Mount Waialeale" label="Mount Waialeale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710783" start="1431" end="1436" title="Metrosideros polymorpha" label="Ohiʻa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777801" start="1441" end="1444" title="Acacia koa" label="Koa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075754" start="1514" end="1520" title="ʻIʻiwi" label="ʻIʻiwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q943686" start="1522" end="1530" title="ʻApapane" label="ʻApapane"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075776" start="1536" end="1544" title="Hawaiʻi ʻamakihi" label="ʻAmakihi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885773" start="1579" end="1583" title="Kane Milohai" label="Kāne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6360529" start="1732" end="1739" title="Kanaloa" label="Kanaloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q168552" start="1799" end="1806" title="phallic" label="phallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349155" start="1911" end="1916" title="Kakae" label="Kakae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726594" start="1973" end="1977" title="Alii" label="alii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871415" start="2048" end="2067" title="Battle of Kepaniwai" label="Battle of Kepaniwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q214910" start="2095" end="2115" title="Kamehameha I" label="Kamehameha the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350594" start="2125" end="2137" title="Kalanikupule" label="Kalanikūpule"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14594" wikidata="Q11281" url="?curid=14594" title="Troll (slang)">
<text>In slang, a troll is a person who posts deliberately offensive or provocative messages online (such as in social media, a newsgroup, a forum, a chat room, an online video game) or who performs similar behaviors in real life. The methods and motivations of trolls can range from benign to sadistic. These messages can be inflammatory, insincere, digressive, , or off-topic, and may have the intent of provoking others into displaying emotional responses, or manipulating others&#x27; perceptions, thus acting as a bully or a provocateur. The behavior is typically for the troll&#x27;s amusement, or to achieve a specific result such as disrupting a rival&#x27;s online activities or purposefully causing confusion or harm to other people. Trolling behaviors involve tactical aggression to incite emotional responses, which can adversely affect the target&#x27;s well-being.

In this context, the noun and the verb forms of &quot;troll&quot; are frequently associated with Internet discourse. Recently, media attention has equated trolling with online harassment. &quot;The Courier-Mail&quot; and &quot;The Today Show&quot; have used &quot;troll&quot; to mean &quot;a person who defaces Internet tribute sites with the aim of causing grief to families&quot;. In addition, depictions of trolling have been included in popular fictional works, such as the HBO television program &quot;The Newsroom&quot;, in which a main character encounters harassing persons online and tries to infiltrate their circles by posting negative sexual comments.

== Usage ==

Application of the term &quot;troll&quot; is subjective. Some readers may characterize a post as &quot;trolling&quot;, while others may regard the same post as a legitimate contribution to the discussion, even if controversial. More potent acts of trolling are blatant harassment or off-topic banter. However, the term &quot;Internet troll&quot; has also been applied to information warfare, hate speech, and even political activism.

The &quot;Trollface&quot; is an image occasionally used to indicate trolling in Internet culture.

The word is sometimes incorrectly used to refer to anyone with controversial or differing opinions. Such usage goes against the ordinary meaning of troll in multiple ways. While psychologists have determined that psychopathological sadism, dark triad, and dark tetrad personality traits are common among Internet trolls, some observers claim that trolls do not believe the controversial views they claim. Farhad Manjoo criticises this view, noting that if the person is trolling, they are more intelligent than their critics would believe.

== Responses ==

One common strategy for dealing with online trolls is to ignore them. This approach, known as &quot;don&#x27;t feed the trolls&quot;, is based on the idea that trolls feed on attention and reactions. By withholding these, the troll may lose interest and stop their disruptive behavior. 

However, ignoring trolls is not always effective. Trolls may interpret a lack of response as a weakness and escalate their harassment. Reporting the troll to the platform administrators may be necessary in such cases. Most online platforms have guidelines against harassment and abuse, and reporting the troll can lead to their account being suspended or banned.

== Origin and etymology ==

There are competing theories of where and when &quot;troll&quot; was first used in Internet slang, with numerous unattested accounts of BBS and Usenet origins in the early 1980s or before.

The English noun &quot;troll&quot; in the standard sense of ugly dwarf or giant dates to 1610 and originates from the Old Norse word &quot;troll&quot; meaning giant or demon. The word evokes the trolls of Scandinavian folklore and children&#x27;s tales: antisocial, quarrelsome and slow-witted creatures which make life difficult for travelers. Trolls have existed in folklore and fantasy literature for centuries, and online trolling has been around for as long as the Internet has existed.

In modern English usage, &quot;trolling&quot; may describe the fishing technique of slowly dragging a lure or baited hook from a moving boat, whereas &quot;trawling&quot; describes the generally commercial act of dragging a fishing net. Early non-Internet slang use of &quot;trolling&quot; can be found in the military: by 1972 the term &quot;trolling for MiGs&quot; was documented in use by US Navy pilots in Vietnam. It referred to use of &quot;...decoys, with the mission of drawing...fire away...&quot; The contemporary use of the term is said to have appeared on the Internet in the late 1980s, but the earliest known attestation according to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; is in 1992.

The context of the quote cited in the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; sets the origin in Usenet in the early 1990s as in the phrase &quot;trolling for newbies&quot;, as used in &quot;alt.folklore.urban&quot; (AFU). Commonly, what is meant is a relatively gentle inside joke by veteran users, presenting questions or topics that had been so overdone that only a new user would respond to them earnestly. For example, a veteran of the group might make a post on the common misconception that glass flows over time. Long-time readers would both recognize the poster&#x27;s name and know that the topic had been discussed repeatedly, but new subscribers to the group would not realize, and would thus respond. These types of trolls served as a practice to identify group insiders. This definition of trolling, considerably narrower than the modern understanding of the term, was considered a positive contribution. One of the most notorious AFU trollers, David Mikkelson, went on to create the urban folklore website Snopes.com.

By the late 1990s, &quot;alt.folklore.urban&quot; had such heavy traffic and participation that trolling of this sort was frowned upon. Others expanded the term to include the practice of playing a seriously misinformed user, even in newsgroups where one was not a regular; these were often attempts at humor rather than provocation. The noun &quot;troll&quot; usually referred to an act of trolling – or to the resulting discussion – rather than to the author, though some posts punned on the dual meaning of &quot;troll.&quot;

The August 26, 1997 strip of webcomic &quot;Kevin and Kell&quot; used the word &quot;troll&quot; to describe those that deliberately harass or provoke other Internet users, similar to the modern sense of the word.

=== In other languages ===
In Chinese, trolling is referred to as &quot;bái mù&quot; (), which can be straightforwardly explained as &quot;eyes without pupils&quot;, in the sense that while the pupil of the eye is used for vision, the white section of the eye cannot see, and trolling involves blindly talking nonsense over the Internet, having total disregard to sensitivities or being oblivious to the situation at hand, akin to having eyes without pupils. An alternative term is &quot;bái làn&quot; (), which describes a post completely nonsensical and full of folly made to upset others, and derives from a Taiwanese slang term for the male genitalia, where genitalia that is pale white in color represents that someone is young, and thus foolish. Both terms originate from Taiwan, and are also used in Hong Kong and mainland China. Another term, &quot;xiǎo bái&quot; (), is a derogatory term for both &quot;bái mù&quot; and &quot;bái làn&quot; that is used on anonymous posting Internet forums. Another common term for a troll used in mainland China is &quot;pēn zi&quot; ().

In Hebrew the word refers both to internet trolls, who engage in disruptive behavior on social media and online platforms, or to the mythical creatures similar to trolls found in European mythology. The word is also inflected into a verb form, , which means to engage in trolling behavior on the internet or social media.

In Icelandic, &quot;&quot; (a thurs) or &quot;&quot; (a troll) may refer to trolls, the verbs &quot;þursa&quot; (to troll) or &quot;þursast&quot; (to be trolling, to troll about) may be used.

In Japanese, means &quot;fishing&quot; and refers to intentionally misleading posts whose only purpose is to get the readers to react, i.e. get trolled. means &quot;laying waste&quot; and can also be used to refer to simple spamming.

In Korean, &quot;nak-si&quot; (낚시) means &quot;fishing&quot; and refers to Internet trolling attempts, as well as purposely misleading post titles. A person who recognizes the troll after having responded (or, in case of a post title, &quot;nak-si&quot;, having read the actual post) would often refer to themselves as a caught fish.

In Portuguese, more commonly in its Brazilian variant, troll (pronounced in most of Brazil as spelling pronunciation) is the usual term to denote Internet trolls (examples of common derivate terms are &quot;trollismo&quot; or &quot;trollagem&quot;, &quot;trolling&quot;, and the verb &quot;trollar&quot;, &quot;to troll&quot;, which entered popular use), but an older expression, used by those which want to avoid anglicisms or slangs, is &quot;complexo do pombo enxadrista&quot; to denote trolling behavior, and &quot;pombos enxadristas&quot; (literally, &quot;chessplayer pigeons&quot;) or simply &quot;pombos&quot; are the terms used to name the trolls. The terms are explained by an adage or popular saying: &quot;Arguing with &quot;fulano&quot; (i.e., John Doe) is the same as playing chess with a pigeon: it defecates on the table, drops the pieces and simply flies off, claiming victory.&quot;

In Thai, the term &quot;krian&quot; (เกรียน) has been adopted to address Internet trolls. According to the Royal Institute of Thailand, the term, which literally refers to a closely cropped hairstyle worn by schoolboys in Thailand, is from the behaviour of these schoolboys who usually gather to play online games and, during which, make annoying, disruptive, impolite, or unreasonable expressions.

== Trolling, identity, and anonymity ==

Early incidents of trolling were considered to be the same as flaming, but this has changed with modern usage by the news media to refer to the creation of any content that targets another person. The Internet dictionary, NetLingo, suggests there are four grades of trolling: playtime trolling, tactical trolling, strategic trolling, and domination trolling.

The relationship between trolling and flaming was observed in open-access forums in California, on a series of modem-linked computers. &quot;CommuniTree&quot; was begun in 1978 but was closed in 1982 when accessed by high school teenagers, becoming a ground for trashing and abuse.

Some psychologists have suggested that flaming would be caused by deindividuation or decreased self-evaluation: the anonymity of online postings would lead to disinhibition amongst individuals. Others have suggested that although flaming and trolling is often unpleasant, it may be a form of normative behavior that expresses the social identity of a certain user group.

According to Tom Postmes, a professor of social and organisational psychology at the universities of Exeter, England, and Groningen, The Netherlands, and the author of &quot;Individuality and the Group&quot;, who has studied online behavior for 20 years, &quot;Trolls aspire to violence, to the level of trouble they can cause in an environment. They want it to kick off. They want to promote antipathetic emotions of disgust and outrage, which morbidly gives them a sense of pleasure.&quot; Someone who brings something off topic into the conversation in order to make that person mad is trolling.

The practice of trolling has been documented by a number of academics since the 1990s. This included Steven Johnson in 1997 in the book &quot;Interface Culture&quot;, and a paper by Judith Donath in 1999. Donath&#x27;s paper outlines the ambiguity of identity in a disembodied &quot;virtual community&quot; such as Usenet:

Donath provides a concise overview of identity deception games which trade on the confusion between physical and epistemic community:

Whitney Phillips observes in &quot;This is Why We Can&#x27;t Have Nice Things: Mapping the Relationship Between Online Trolling and Mainstream Culture&quot; that certain behaviors are consistent among different types of trolls. First, trolls of the subcultural variety self-identify as trolls. Trolls are also motivated by what is known as lulz, a type of unsympathetic, ambiguous laughter. The final behavior is the insistent need for anonymity. According to Phillips, anonymity allows trolls to engage in behaviors they would not replicate in professional or public settings, with the effectiveness of trolling often being dependent upon the target&#x27;s lack of anonymity. This can include the disclosure of real-life attachments, interests, and vulnerabilities of the target.

A troll can disrupt the discussion on a newsgroup or online forum, disseminate bad advice, and damage the feeling of trust in the online community. In a group that has become sensitized to trollingwhere the rate of deception is highmany honestly naïve questions may be quickly rejected as trolling. This can be quite off-putting to the new user who upon first posting is immediately bombarded with angry accusations. Even if the accusations are unfounded, being branded a troll may be damaging to one&#x27;s online reputation.

Susan Herring and colleagues, in &quot;Searching for Safety Online: Managing &#x27;Trolling&#x27; in a Feminist Forum&quot;, point out the difficulty inherent in monitoring trolling and maintaining freedom of speech in online communities: &quot;harassment often arises in spaces known for their freedom, lack of censure, and experimental nature&quot;. Free speech may lead to tolerance of trolling behavior, complicating the members&#x27; efforts to maintain an open, yet supportive discussion area, especially for sensitive topics such as race, gender, and sexuality.

Cyberbullying laws vary by state, as trolling is not a crime under U.S. federal law. In an effort to reduce uncivil behavior by increasing accountability, many web sites (e.g. Reuters, Facebook, and Gizmodo) now require commenters to register their names and e-mail addresses.

Trolling itself has become its own form of Internet subculture and has developed its own set of rituals, rules, specialized language, and dedicated spaces of practice. The appeal of trolling primarily comes from the thrill of how long one can keep the ruse going before getting caught, and exposed as a troll. When understood this way, Internet trolls are less like vulgar, indiscriminate bullies, and closer to countercultural respondents to a (so called) overly sensitive public.

The main elements of why people troll are interactions; trolling exists in the interactive communications between Internet users, influencing people&#x27;s views both from objective and emotional standpoints. Further, trolling does not target a single individual, but rather targets multiple members of a discussion. Trolling can be easily identified by its offensive content, intended to provoke an emotional reaction from an audience.

== Corporate, political, and special-interest sponsored trolls ==
Organizations and countries may utilize trolls to manipulate public opinion as part and parcel of an astroturfing initiative. When trolling is sponsored by the government, it is often called state-sponsored Internet propaganda or state-sponsored trolling. Teams of sponsored trolls are sometimes referred to as sockpuppet armies.

A 2016 study by Harvard political scientist Gary King reported that the Chinese government&#x27;s 50 Cent Party creates 440 million pro-government social media posts per year. The report said that government employees were paid to create pro-government posts around the time of national holidays to avoid mass political protests. The Chinese Government ran an editorial in the state-funded &quot;Global Times&quot; defending censorship and 50 Cent Party trolls.

A 2016 study for the NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence on hybrid warfare notes that the Russo-Ukrainian War &quot;demonstrated how fake identities and accounts were used to disseminate narratives through social media, blogs, and web commentaries in order to manipulate, harass, or deceive opponents.&quot; The NATO report describes that a &quot;Wikipedia troll&quot; uses a type of message design where a troll does not add &quot;emotional value&quot; to reliable &quot;essentially true&quot; information in re-posts, but presents it &quot;in the wrong context, intending the audience to draw false conclusions.&quot; For example, information, without context, from Wikipedia about the military history of the United States &quot;becomes value-laden if it is posted in the comment section of an article criticizing Russia for its military actions and interests in Ukraine. The Wikipedia troll is &#x27;tricky&#x27;, because in terms of actual text, the information is true, but the way it is expressed gives it a completely different meaning to its readers.&quot;

Unlike &quot;classic trolls&quot;, Wikipedia trolls &quot;have no emotional input, they just supply misinformation&quot; and are one of &quot;the most dangerous&quot; as well as one of &quot;the most effective trolling message designs.&quot; Even among people who are &quot;emotionally immune to aggressive messages&quot; and apolitical, &quot;training in critical thinking&quot; is needed, according to the NATO report, because &quot;they have relatively blind trust in Wikipedia sources and are not able to filter information that comes from platforms they consider authoritative.&quot; While Russian-language hybrid trolls use the Wikipedia troll message design to promote anti-Western sentiment in comments, they &quot;mostly attack aggressively to maintain emotional attachment to issues covered in articles.&quot; Discussions about topics other than international sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War &quot;attracted very aggressive trolling&quot; and became polarized, according to the NATO report, which &quot;suggests that in subjects in which there is little potential for re-educating audiences, emotional harm is considered more effective&quot; for pro-Russian Latvian-language trolls.

A 2016 study on fluoridation decision-making in Israel coined the term &quot;Uncertainty Bias&quot; to describe the efforts of power in government, public health and media to aggressively advance agendas by misrepresentation of historical and scientific fact. The authors noted that authorities tended to overlook or to deny situations that involve uncertainty while making unscientific arguments and disparaging comments in order to undermine opposing positions.

&quot;The New York Times&quot; reported in late October 2018 that Saudi Arabia used an online army of Twitter trolls to harass the late Saudi dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi and other critics of the Saudi government.

In October 2018, &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; reported that Facebook &quot;banned hundreds of pages and accounts which it says were fraudulently flooding its site with partisan political content – although they came from the US instead of being associated with Russia.&quot;

While corporate networking site LinkedIn is considered a platform of good taste and professionalism, companies searching for personal information by promoting jobs that were not real and fake accounts posting political messages has caught the company off guard.

== Psychological characteristics ==

Researcher Ben Radford wrote about the phenomenon of clowns in history and the modern day in his book &quot;Bad Clowns&quot;, and found that &quot;bad clowns&quot; have evolved into Internet trolls. They do not dress up as traditional clowns but, for their own amusement, they tease and exploit &quot;human foibles&quot; in order to speak the &quot;truth&quot; and gain a reaction. Like clowns in make-up, Internet trolls hide behind &quot;anonymous accounts and fake usernames&quot;. In their eyes, they are the trickster and are performing for a nameless audience via the Internet. Studies conducted in the fields of human–computer interaction and cyberpsychology by other researchers have corroborated Radford&#x27;s analysis on the phenomenon of Internet trolling as a form of deception-serving entertainment and its correlations to aggressive behaviour, katagelasticism, black humor, and the Dark tetrad.

Trolling correlates positively with sadism, trait psychopathy, and Machiavellianism (see dark triad). Trolls take pleasure from causing pain and emotional suffering. Their ability to upset or harm gives them a feeling of power. Psychological researches conducted in the fields of personality psychology and cyberpsychology report that trolling behaviour qualifies as an anti-social behaviour and is strongly correlated to sadistic personality disorder (SPD). Researches have shown that men, compared with women, are more likely to perpetrate trolling behaviour; these gender differences in online anti-social behaviour may be a reflection of gender stereotypes, where agentic characteristics such as competitiveness and dominance are encouraged in men. The results corroborated that gender (male) is a significant predictor of trolling behaviour, alongside trait psychopathy and sadism to be significant positive predictors. Moreover, these studies have shown that people who enjoy trolling online tend to also enjoy hurting other people in everyday life, therefore corroborating a longstanding and persistent pattern of psychopathological sadism.

A psychoanalytic and sexologic study on the phenomenon of Internet trolling asserts that anonymity increases the incidence of the trolling behaviour, and that &quot;the internet is becoming a medium to invest our anxieties and not thinking about the repercussions of trolling and affecting the victims mentally and incite a sense of guilt and shame within them&quot;.

== Concern troll ==

&quot;Concern trolls&quot; pretend to be sympathetic to a certain point of view which they are actually critical of. A concern troll will often declare an interest in joining or allying with a certain cause, while subtly ridiculing it. The concern troll posts in web forums devoted to their declared point of view and attempts to sway the group&#x27;s actions or opinions while claiming to share their goals, but with professed &quot;concerns&quot;. The goal is to sow fear, uncertainty, and doubt within the group, sometimes by appealing to outrage culture.

For example, a person who wishes to shame obese people, but disguises this impulse as concern for the health of overweight people, could be considered a concern troll.

A verifiable example of concern trolling within politics occurred in 2006 when Tad Furtado, a member of staff for then-Congressman Charles Bass (R-N.H.), was caught posing as a &quot;concerned&quot; supporter of Bass&#x27;s opponent, Democrat Paul Hodes, on several liberal New Hampshire blogs, using the pseudonyms &quot;IndieNH&quot; or &quot;IndyNH&quot;. &quot;IndyNH&quot; expressed concern that Democrats might just be wasting their time or money on Hodes, because Bass was unbeatable. Hodes eventually won the election.

Although the term &quot;concern troll&quot; originated in discussions of online behavior, it now sees increasing use to describe similar offline behaviors. For example, James Wolcott of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; accused a conservative &quot;New York Daily News&quot; columnist of &quot;concern troll&quot; behavior in his efforts to downplay the Mark Foley scandal. Wolcott links what he calls concern trolls to what Saul Alinsky calls &quot;Do-Nothings&quot;, giving a long quote from Alinsky on the Do-Nothings&#x27; method and effects:

&quot;The Hill&quot; published an op-ed piece by Markos Moulitsas of the liberal blog &quot;Daily Kos&quot; titled &quot;Dems: Ignore &#x27;Concern Trolls. The concern trolls in question were not Internet participants but rather Republicans offering public advice and warnings to the Democrats that could be considered deceptive.

== Troll sites ==
The online forum TOTSE, as created in 1997, is considered one of the earliest trolling communities, predating 4chan by several years. A &quot;New York Times&quot; article discussed troll activity at 4chan and at Encyclopedia Dramatica, which it described as &quot;an online compendium of troll humor and troll lore&quot;. 4chan&#x27;s /b/ board is recognized as &quot;one of the Internet&#x27;s most infamous and active trolling hotspots&quot;. This site and others are often used as a base to troll against sites that their members cannot normally post on. These trolls feed off the reactions of their victims because &quot;their agenda is to take delight in causing trouble&quot;. Places like Reddit, 4chan, and other anonymous message boards are prime real-estate for online trolls. Because there is no easy way of tracing who someone is, trolls can post very inflammatory content without repercussion.

The online French group Ligue du LOL has been accused of organized harassment and described as a troll group.

== Media coverage and controversy ==
Mainstream media outlets have focused their attention on the willingness of some Internet users to go to extreme lengths to participate in organized psychological harassment.

=== Australia ===

In February 2010, the Australian government became involved after users defaced the Facebook tribute pages of murdered children Trinity Bates and Elliott Fletcher. Australian communications minister Stephen Conroy decried the attacks, committed mainly by 4chan users, as evidence of the need for greater Internet regulation, stating, &quot;This argument that the Internet is some mystical creation that no laws should apply to, that is a recipe for anarchy and the wild west.&quot; Facebook responded by strongly urging administrators to be aware of ways to ban users and remove inappropriate content from Facebook pages. In 2012, the &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; started a campaign to take action against &quot;Twitter trolls&quot;, who abuse and threaten users. Several high-profile Australians including Charlotte Dawson, Robbie Farah, Laura Dundovic, and Ray Hadley have been victims of this phenomenon.

=== India ===
According to journalist Swati Chaturvedi and others, the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) runs networks of social media trolls tasked with intimidating political opponents.

Bollywood celebrities can face strong social media backlash for their political comments. When actor Shah Rukh Khan criticized the country&#x27;s intolerance and called for secularism, many promoted a boycott of his upcoming movie, including several right-wing politicians, one of whom compared Khan to a terrorist. In 2015, when the Maharashtra state government banned the sale and consumption of cattle meat (reflecting Hindu beliefs), online trolls attacked stars who criticized the law; actor Rishi Kapoor received insults and had his Hindu faith questioned. Though the death sentence of convicted terrorist Yakub Memon was criticized by &quot;many&quot;, including human rights activists and a former Supreme Court chief justice, Bollywood star Salman Khan received &quot;overwhelming&quot; online anger for expressing the same views; the trolling spilled over into real life, with some protestors burning his effigy.

Newslaundry covered the phenomenon of &quot;Twitter trolling&quot; in its &quot;Criticles&quot;, also characterizing Twitter trolls in its weekly podcasts.

The troll community of Kerala has birthed some troll slang in Malayalam due to the use of such new words in trolling events that have become viral; some examples are &quot;Kummanadi&quot; (&quot;using public transportation without a ticket&quot;), &quot;OMKV&quot; (&quot;GTFO&quot;), and &quot;kiduve&quot; or &quot;kidu&quot; (&quot;cool&quot;; &quot;awesome&quot;). 

===Japan===

In July 2022, Japanese law banned &quot;online insults&quot;, punishable by up to one year of imprisonment. Under this law, an &quot;insult&quot; () is defined as &quot;publicly demeaning someone&#x27;s social standing without referring to specific facts about them or a specific action.&quot;

=== United Kingdom ===

In the United Kingdom, contributions made to the Internet are covered by the Malicious Communications Act 1988 as well as Section 127 of the Communications Act 2003, under which jail sentences were, until 2015, limited to a maximum of six months. In October 2014, the UK&#x27;s Justice Secretary, Chris Grayling, said that &quot;Internet trolls&quot; would face up to two years in jail, under measures in the Criminal Justice and Courts Bill that extend the maximum sentence and time limits for bringing prosecutions. The House of Lords Select Committee on Communications had earlier recommended against creating a specific offence of trolling. Sending messages which are &quot;grossly offensive or of an indecent, obscene or menacing character&quot; is an offence whether they are received by the intended recipient or not. Several people have been imprisoned in the UK for online harassment.

Trolls of the testimonial page of Georgia Varley faced no prosecution due to misunderstandings of the legal system in the wake of the term trolling being popularized. In October 2012, a twenty-year-old man was jailed for twelve weeks for posting offensive jokes to a support group for friends and family of April Jones.

Between 2008 and 2017, 5,332 people in London were arrested and charged for behavior on social media deemed in violation of Communications Act 2003.

=== United States ===

On 31 March 2010, NBC&#x27;s &quot;Today&quot; ran a segment detailing the deaths of three separate adolescent girls and trolls&#x27; subsequent reactions to their deaths. Shortly after the suicide of high school student Alexis Pilkington, anonymous posters began performing organized psychological harassment across various message boards, referring to Pilkington as a &quot;suicidal slut&quot;, and posting graphic images on her Facebook memorial page. The segment also included an exposé of a 2006 accident, in which an eighteen-year-old fatally crashed her father&#x27;s car into a highway pylon; trolls emailed her grieving family the leaked pictures of her mutilated corpse (see Nikki Catsouras photographs controversy).

In 2007, the media was fooled by trollers into believing that students were consuming a drug called Jenkem, purportedly made of human waste. A user named Pickwick on TOTSE posted pictures implying that he was inhaling this drug. Major news corporations such as Fox News Channel reported the story and urged parents to warn their children about this drug. Pickwick&#x27;s pictures of Jenkem were fake and the pictures did not actually feature human waste.

In August 2012, the subject of trolling was featured on the HBO television series &quot;The Newsroom&quot;. The character Neal Sampat encounters harassing individuals online, particularly looking at 4chan, and he ends up choosing to post negative comments himself on an economics-related forum. The attempt by the character to infiltrate trolls&#x27; inner circles attracted debate from media reviewers critiquing the series.

In 2019, it was alleged that progressive Democrats had created a fake Facebook page which mis-represented the political stance of Roy Moore, a Republican candidate, in the attempt to alienate him from pro-business Republicans. It was also alleged that a &quot;false flag&quot; experiment attempted to link Moore to the use of Russian Twitter bots. &quot;The New York Times&quot;, when exposing the scam, quoted a New Knowledge report that boasted of its fabrications: &quot;We orchestrated an elaborate &#x27;false flag&#x27; operation that planted the idea that the [Roy] Moore campaign was amplified on social media by a Russian botnet.

The 2020 Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders has faced criticism for the behavior of some of his supporters online, but has deflected such criticism, suggesting that &quot;Russians&quot; were impersonating people claiming to be &quot;Bernie Bro&quot; supporters. Twitter rejected Sanders&#x27; suggestion that Russia could be responsible for the bad reputation of his supporters. A Twitter spokesperson told CNBC: &quot;Using technology and human review in concert, we proactively monitor Twitter to identify attempts at platform manipulation and mitigate them. As is standard, if we have reasonable evidence of state-backed information operations, we&#x27;ll disclose them following our thorough investigation to our public archive — the largest of its kind in the industry.&quot; Twitter had suspended 70 troll accounts that posted content in support of Michael Bloomberg&#x27;s presidential campaign.

The 45th U.S. president Donald Trump infamously used Twitter to denigrate his political opponents and spread misinformation for which he earned the moniker &quot;Troll-In-Chief&quot; by The New Yorker.

== Examples ==
So-called Gold Membership trolling originated in 2007 on 4chan boards, when users posted fake images claiming to offer upgraded 4chan account privileges; without a &quot;Gold&quot; account, one could not view certain content. This turned out to be a hoax designed to fool board members, especially newcomers. It was copied and became an Internet meme. In some cases, this type of troll has been used as a scam, most notably on Facebook, where fake Facebook Gold Account upgrade ads have proliferated in order to link users to dubious websites and other content.

The case of &quot;Zeran v. America Online, Inc.&quot; resulted primarily from trolling. Six days after the Oklahoma City bombing, anonymous users posted advertisements for shirts celebrating the bombing on AOL message boards, claiming that the shirts could be obtained by contacting Mr. Kenneth Zeran. The posts listed Zeran&#x27;s address and home phone number. Zeran was subsequently harassed.

Anti-scientology protests by Anonymous, commonly known as Project Chanology, are sometimes labeled as &quot;trolling&quot; by media such as &quot;Wired&quot;, and the participants sometimes explicitly self-identify as &quot;trolls&quot;.

Neo-Nazi website &quot;The Daily Stormer&quot; orchestrates what it calls a &quot;Troll Army&quot;, and has encouraged trolling of Jewish MP Luciana Berger and Muslim activist Mariam Veiszadeh.

Ken McCarthy, going by the online pseudonym &quot;Ken M&quot;, is considered one of the greatest internet trolls of all time. Ken M is known for trolling forums and comment sections by playing a &quot;well-meaning moron&quot; online. McCarthy compared his trolling to a comedy routine, where strangers who responded to his comments became unwitting &quot;straight men&quot;. Ken M would reply with increasingly absurd statements until his ruse was discovered.

In 2020, the official Discord server and Twitch channel for the U.S. Army Esports team became a target of trolling, as people sent anti-U.S. Army messages, memes, and references to war crimes committed by the United States to both. When the team started banning users from their Twitch channel for trolling, they were accused of violating the First Amendment to the United States Constitution by the ACLU and Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University. The team has since denied these allegations.

In 2021, the &quot;Salon&quot; columnist Amanda Marcotte, author of &quot;Troll Nation: How the Right Became Trump-Worshipping Monsters Set on Rat-F*cking Liberals, America, and Truth Itself&quot; (2018), described the American far-right exclusively male organization Proud Boys, the conservative pundit Tucker Carlson, and podcast host Joe Rogan as political commentators who have mastered &quot;the art of trolling as a far-right recruitment strategy&quot; by preying upon the American male insecurities, mediocrity, and fragility. In particular, regarding their respective discriminatory comments about transgender people, she remarks &quot;how crucial gender anxiety is to far-right recruitment&quot;.

Elon Musk calls himself Chief Troll, has trolled world leaders, and saluted the crowd in what &quot;The Atlantic&quot; described as a deliberately offensive and provocative way at Donald Trump&#x27;s second inauguration.

On November 22, 2024, a Twitter account impersonating online streamer, Cheesur, posted inflammatory statements toward the Mexican Jalisco New Generation cartel and its leader El Mencho. Users on the internet first believed it was the content creator as a result of missing person posters circulating around online of the streamer. The account was later debunked as not being Cheesur. He would later go live on Kick to confirm he was not missing, hurt, and was well alive.

== See also ==


== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Walter, T.; Hourizi, R.; Moncur, W.; Pitsillides (2012). &quot;Does the Internet Change How We Die And Mourn?&quot; — An overview Online.

== External links ==

=== Trolling advocacy and safety ===
* The Trolling Academy – trolling advice, comment, and training
* Get Safe Online – free expert advice on online safety

=== Background and definitions ===
* NetLingo definition

=== Academic and debate ===
* Searching for Safety Online: Managing &quot;Trolling&quot; in a Feminist Forum 
* How to Respond to Internet Rage
* Malwebolence – The World of Web Trolling; &quot;New York Times Magazine&quot;, By Mattathias Schwartz; 3 August 2008.
* Internet Trolls Are Narcissists, Psychopaths, and Sadists. Jennifer Golbeck for &quot;Psychology Today&quot;. 18 September 2014.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="3" end="8" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11281" start="12" end="17" title="Troll (slang)" label="troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="106" end="118" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="122" end="131" title="newsgroup" label="newsgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="135" end="140" title="internet forum" label="forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="144" end="153" title="chat room" label="chat room"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="158" end="175" title="Multiplayer video game" label="online video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q666985" start="334" end="343" title="insincerity" label="insincere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383053" start="345" end="355" title="digression" label="digressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072314" start="362" end="371" title="off-topic" label="off-topic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="433" end="440" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q905726" start="457" end="469" title="Psychological manipulation" label="manipulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q240126" start="513" end="518" title="bullying" label="bully"/>
<link wikidata="Q392752" start="524" end="535" title="agent provocateur" label="provocateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q494348" start="1043" end="1060" title="online harassment" label="online harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095955" start="1068" end="1084" title="The Courier-Mail" label="The Courier-Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="1101" end="1115" title="The Today Show" label="The Today Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527998" start="1185" end="1207" title="Online memorial" label="Internet tribute sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="1352" end="1355" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q276180" start="1381" end="1393" title="The Newsroom (U.S. TV series)" label="The Newsroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="1597" end="1607" title="Subjectivity" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240539" start="1821" end="1831" title="harassment" label="harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="1976" end="1984" title="activism" label="activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12339810" start="1997" end="2006" title="Trollface" label="Trollface"/>
<link wikidata="Q212980" start="2264" end="2276" title="psychologist" label="psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285927" start="2299" end="2324" title="Sadistic personality disorder" label="psychopathological sadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266051" start="2326" end="2336" title="dark triad" label="dark triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266051" start="2342" end="2353" title="dark tetrad" label="dark tetrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18773" start="2354" end="2372" title="Psychological trait" label="personality traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435143" start="2491" end="2504" title="Farhad Manjoo" label="Farhad Manjoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="3460" end="3463" title="Bulletin board system" label="BBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="3468" end="3474" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="3632" end="3641" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12581" start="3653" end="3658" title="troll" label="troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707571" start="3673" end="3678" title="giant (mythology)" label="giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="3682" end="3687" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039796" start="3719" end="3740" title="Scandinavian folklore" label="Scandinavian folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337813" start="4038" end="4046" title="Trolling (fishing)" label="trolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455089" start="4070" end="4087" title="Fishing techniques" label="fishing technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q105729329" start="4163" end="4171" title="trawling" label="trawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q188508" start="4363" end="4367" title="Mikoyan" label="MiGs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4399" end="4406" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="4417" end="4424" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="4665" end="4690" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="4805" end="4811" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q186174" start="5180" end="5200" title="List of common misconceptions" label="common misconception"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5206" end="5227" title="Glass#Reputed flow" label="glass flows over time"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="5712" end="5720" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287154" start="5729" end="5739" title="Snopes.com" label="Snopes.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="5976" end="5985" title="newsgroup" label="newsgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="6301" end="6309" title="webcomic" label="webcomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740071" start="6316" end="6330" title="Kevin and Kell" label="Kevin and Kell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="6517" end="6524" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q173318" start="6681" end="6686" title="pupil" label="pupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q842083" start="7127" end="7141" title="Human male genitalia" label="male genitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="7265" end="7271" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="7294" end="7303" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="7308" end="7322" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="7572" end="7578" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="7895" end="7904" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210053" start="7922" end="7927" title="Jötunn" label="thurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12581" start="7948" end="7953" title="troll" label="troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="8088" end="8096" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q83058" start="8309" end="8317" title="spam (electronic)" label="spamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="8323" end="8329" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="8658" end="8668" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q750553" start="8691" end="8700" title="Brazilian Portuguese" label="Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8710" end="8715" title=":pt:Troll" label="troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974746" start="8749" end="8771" title="spelling pronunciation" label="spelling pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161273" start="9069" end="9078" title="anglicism" label="anglicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="9083" end="9088" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9100" end="9128" title=":pt:Complexo do pombo enxadrista" label="complexo do pombo enxadrista"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="9342" end="9347" title="adage" label="adage"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768304" start="9392" end="9398" title="List of placeholder names" label="fulano"/>
<link wikidata="Q302057" start="9412" end="9420" title="John Doe" label="John Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="9445" end="9450" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="9458" end="9464" title="pigeon" label="pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="9560" end="9564" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9594" end="9600" title=":wikt:เกรียน" label="เกรียน"/>
<link wikidata="Q689721" start="9664" end="9691" title="Royal Institute of Thailand" label="Royal Institute of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q277503" start="10060" end="10067" title="Flaming (Internet)" label="flaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183262" start="10707" end="10722" title="deindividuation" label="deindividuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353532" start="10753" end="10813" title="Online disinhibition effect" label="the anonymity of online postings would lead to disinhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="10971" end="10986" title="social identity" label="social identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q980046" start="11714" end="11728" title="Steven Johnson (author)" label="Steven Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166040" start="11795" end="11808" title="Judith Donath" label="Judith Donath"/>
<link wikidata="Q210980" start="11896" end="11913" title="virtual community" label="virtual community"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="11928" end="11934" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170028" start="11975" end="11993" title="identity deception" label="identity deception"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305631" start="12050" end="12069" title="epistemic community" label="epistemic community"/>
<link wikidata="Q112520567" start="12072" end="12088" title="Whitney Phillips (author)" label="Whitney Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134" start="12412" end="12416" title="lulz" label="lulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647949" start="13382" end="13395" title="Susan Herring" label="Susan Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q494348" start="13952" end="13965" title="Cyberbullying" label="Cyberbullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="14128" end="14135" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="14137" end="14145" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528871" start="14151" end="14158" title="Gizmodo" label="Gizmodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q752177" start="15318" end="15330" title="astroturfing" label="astroturfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q798599" start="15528" end="15538" title="Sockpuppet (Internet)" label="sockpuppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525365" start="15592" end="15601" title="Gary King (political scientist)" label="Gary King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073921" start="15646" end="15659" title="50 Cent Party" label="50 Cent Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q970443" start="15944" end="15956" title="Global Times" label="Global Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q836854" start="15973" end="15983" title="Internet censorship in China" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="16032" end="16036" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953349" start="16086" end="16100" title="hybrid warfare" label="hybrid warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="16116" end="16135" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483473" start="16714" end="16751" title="military history of the United States" label="military history of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q13579947" start="17193" end="17207" title="misinformation" label="misinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q843894" start="17449" end="17466" title="critical thinking" label="critical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q19606413" start="17769" end="17791" title="anti-Western sentiment" label="anti-Western sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373791" start="17855" end="17875" title="emotional attachment" label="emotional attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17373979" start="17949" end="18003" title="international sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="international sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="18767" end="18785" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="18827" end="18839" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="18863" end="18870" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262052" start="18924" end="18939" title="Jamal Khashoggi" label="Jamal Khashoggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="19047" end="19055" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896201" start="19574" end="19585" title="Ben Radford" label="Ben Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="19616" end="19621" title="clown" label="clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q170028" start="20076" end="20085" title="Deception" label="trickster"/>
<link wikidata="Q207434" start="20182" end="20208" title="human–computer interaction" label="human–computer interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905785" start="20213" end="20228" title="cyberpsychology" label="cyberpsychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="20362" end="20375" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q191797" start="20400" end="20420" title="Aggression" label="aggressive behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374996" start="20422" end="20437" title="katagelasticism" label="katagelasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="20439" end="20450" title="Black comedy" label="black humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266051" start="20460" end="20471" title="Dark tetrad" label="Dark tetrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211650" start="20510" end="20516" title="Sadomasochism" label="sadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18773" start="20518" end="20523" title="Trait theory" label="trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="20524" end="20535" title="psychopathy" label="psychopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q69976101" start="20541" end="20557" title="Machiavellianism (psychology)" label="Machiavellianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266051" start="20563" end="20573" title="dark triad" label="dark triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="20610" end="20614" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780945" start="20619" end="20638" title="Suffering" label="emotional suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256388" start="20702" end="20724" title="Psychological research" label="Psychological research"/>
<link wikidata="Q271716" start="20754" end="20776" title="personality psychology" label="personality psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905785" start="20781" end="20796" title="cyberpsychology" label="cyberpsychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q734611" start="20844" end="20865" title="anti-social behaviour" label="anti-social behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285927" start="20896" end="20925" title="sadistic personality disorder" label="sadistic personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8441" start="20960" end="20963" title="men" label="men"/>
<link wikidata="Q467" start="20979" end="20984" title="women" label="women"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="21116" end="21134" title="gender stereotypes" label="gender stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076509" start="21204" end="21225" title="Masculinity" label="are encouraged in men"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="21625" end="21639" title="Psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170912" start="21644" end="21653" title="Sexology" label="sexologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q308859" start="21712" end="21721" title="anonymity" label="anonymity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824073" start="21815" end="21821" title="Media (communication)" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12558574" start="22079" end="22092" title="perspective (cognitive)" label="point of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008637" start="22403" end="22420" title="In-group favoritism" label="share their goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q831648" start="22482" end="22510" title="fear, uncertainty, and doubt" label="fear, uncertainty, and doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q60297962" start="22555" end="22570" title="Call-out culture" label="outrage culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074872" start="22599" end="22627" title="Social stigma of obesity" label="wishes to shame obese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063677" start="22873" end="22885" title="Charles Bass" label="Charles Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="22887" end="22888" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="22889" end="22893" title="New Hampshire" label="N.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="22976" end="22984" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q959262" start="22985" end="22995" title="Paul Hodes" label="Paul Hodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="23016" end="23029" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="23462" end="23473" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="23509" end="23528" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767635" start="23614" end="23632" title="Mark Foley scandal" label="Mark Foley scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25649" start="23685" end="23697" title="Saul Alinsky" label="Saul Alinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739683" start="23814" end="23822" title="The Hill (newspaper)" label="The Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259349" start="23857" end="23873" title="Markos Moulitsas" label="Markos Moulitsas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272560" start="23900" end="23909" title="Daily Kos" label="Daily Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512302" start="24174" end="24179" title="TOTSE" label="TOTSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="24299" end="24313" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q238330" start="24356" end="24361" title="4chan" label="4chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159540" start="24369" end="24391" title="Encyclopedia Dramatica" label="Encyclopedia Dramatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q61693297" start="25088" end="25100" title="Ligue du LOL" label="Ligue du LOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240539" start="25361" end="25385" title="psychological harassment" label="psychological harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344980" start="25606" end="25620" title="Stephen Conroy" label="Stephen Conroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819581" start="26048" end="26063" title="The Daily Telegraph (Sydney)" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085913" start="26213" end="26229" title="Charlotte Dawson" label="Charlotte Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434280" start="26231" end="26243" title="Robbie Farah" label="Robbie Farah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931048" start="26245" end="26259" title="Laura Dundovic" label="Laura Dundovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297571" start="26265" end="26275" title="Ray Hadley" label="Ray Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="26393" end="26415" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="26506" end="26515" title="Hindi cinema" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9535" start="26607" end="26621" title="Shah Rukh Khan" label="Shah Rukh Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="26840" end="26851" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q258820" start="27003" end="27015" title="Rishi Kapoor" label="Rishi Kapoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047214" start="27118" end="27129" title="Yakub Memon" label="Yakub Memon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9543" start="27256" end="27267" title="Salman Khan" label="Salman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="27610" end="27616" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="27649" end="27658" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743461" start="28367" end="28400" title="Malicious Communications Act 1988" label="Malicious Communications Act 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154156" start="28431" end="28454" title="Communications Act 2003" label="Communications Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q337453" start="28587" end="28601" title="Chris Grayling" label="Chris Grayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q30339317" start="29492" end="29503" title="Murder of April Jones" label="April Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="29714" end="29719" title="Today (American TV program)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="30110" end="30118" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q17484330" start="30364" end="30403" title="Nikki Catsouras photographs controversy" label="Nikki Catsouras photographs controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244328" start="30507" end="30513" title="Jenkem" label="Jenkem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512302" start="30573" end="30578" title="TOTSE" label="TOTSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="30668" end="30684" title="Fox News Channel" label="Fox News Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244328" start="30790" end="30796" title="Jenkem" label="Jenkem"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="30923" end="30926" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="30927" end="30944" title="television series" label="television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q276180" start="30951" end="30963" title="The Newsroom (U.S. TV series)" label="The Newsroom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30985" end="30996" title="The Newsroom (U.S. TV series)#Main cast" label="Neal Sampat"/>
<link wikidata="Q238330" start="31062" end="31067" title="4chan" label="4chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="31644" end="31662" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q38051551" start="31934" end="31949" title="2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="2020 Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="31973" end="31987" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018238" start="32177" end="32187" title="Bernie Bro" label="Bernie Bro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023912" start="32351" end="32355" title="CNBC" label="CNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="32799" end="32816" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76032700" start="32824" end="32845" title="Michael Bloomberg 2020 presidential campaign" label="presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="32857" end="32871" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. president"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="32872" end="32884" title="Donald J. Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="33034" end="33048" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q238330" start="33123" end="33128" title="4chan" label="4chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="33403" end="33416" title="Internet meme" label="Internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069370" start="33647" end="33676" title="Zeran v. America Online, Inc." label="Zeran v. America Online, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="33736" end="33757" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="Oklahoma City bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433868" start="34026" end="34042" title="Scientology controversies" label="Anti-scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10920" start="34055" end="34064" title="Anonymous (group)" label="Anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002928" start="34084" end="34101" title="Project Chanology" label="Project Chanology"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="34172" end="34177" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="34265" end="34273" title="Neo-Nazism" label="Neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867869" start="34288" end="34305" title="The Daily Stormer" label="The Daily Stormer"/>
<link wikidata="Q263299" start="34406" end="34420" title="Luciana Berger" label="Luciana Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083392" start="34441" end="34457" title="Mariam Veiszadeh" label="Mariam Veiszadeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907849" start="34943" end="34950" title="Discord (software)" label="Discord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555537" start="34962" end="34968" title="Twitch (service)" label="Twitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775982" start="34985" end="35002" title="U.S. Army Esports" label="U.S. Army Esports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184996" start="35102" end="35143" title="United States war crimes" label="war crimes committed by the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="35264" end="35313" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="35321" end="35325" title="ACLU" label="ACLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="35366" end="35385" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="35452" end="35457" title="Salon.com" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280496" start="35652" end="35670" title="Radical right (United States)" label="American far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096457" start="35701" end="35711" title="Proud Boys" label="Proud Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="35717" end="35729" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q743162" start="35737" end="35751" title="Tucker Carlson" label="Tucker Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718421" start="35770" end="35779" title="Joe Rogan" label="Joe Rogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59677" start="36009" end="36057" title="Transphobia" label="discriminatory comments about transgender people"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="36140" end="36149" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q131918205" start="36208" end="36225" title="Elon Musk salute controversy" label="saluted the crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="36240" end="36252" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q126616223" start="36320" end="36359" title="Second inauguration of Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump&amp;#x27;s second inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="36484" end="36491" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126837" start="36492" end="36514" title="Jalisco New Generation" label="Jalisco New Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260006" start="36515" end="36521" title="drug cartel" label="cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28858771" start="36537" end="36546" title="El Mencho" label="El Mencho"/>
<link wikidata="Q117084855" start="36772" end="36776" title="Kick (service)" label="Kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429153" start="37596" end="37612" title="Jennifer Golbeck" label="Jennifer Golbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256412" start="37623" end="37639" title="Psychology Today" label="Psychology Today"/>
</links>
</doc>
