<doc id="10929" wikidata="Q127771" url="?curid=10929" title="Fighter aircraft">
<text>Fighter aircraft (early on also &quot;pursuit aircraft&quot;) are military aircraft designed primarily for air-to-air combat. In military conflict, the role of fighter aircraft is to establish air superiority of the battlespace. Domination of the airspace above a battlefield permits bombers and attack aircraft to engage in tactical and strategic bombing of enemy targets, and helps prevent the enemy from doing the same.

The key performance features of a fighter include not only its firepower but also its high speed and maneuverability relative to the target aircraft. The success or failure of a combatant&#x27;s efforts to gain air superiority hinges on several factors including the skill of its pilots, the tactical soundness of its doctrine for deploying its fighters, and the numbers and performance of those fighters.

Many modern fighter aircraft also have secondary capabilities such as ground attack and some types, such as fighter-bombers, are designed from the outset for dual roles. Other fighter designs are highly specialized while still filling the main air superiority role, and these include the interceptor and, historically, the heavy fighter and night fighter.

== History ==

Since World War I, achieving and maintaining air superiority has been considered essential for victory in conventional warfare.

Fighters continued to be developed throughout World War I, to deny enemy aircraft and dirigibles the ability to gather information by reconnaissance over the battlefield. Early fighters were very small and lightly armed by later standards, and most were biplanes built with a wooden frame covered with fabric, and a maximum airspeed of about . A successful German biplane, the Albatross, however, was built with a plywood shell, rather than fabric, which created a stronger, faster airplane. As control of the airspace over armies became increasingly important, all of the major powers developed fighters to support their military operations. Between the wars, wood was largely replaced in part or whole by metal tubing, and finally aluminum stressed skin structures (monocoque) began to predominate.

By World War II, most fighters were all-metal monoplanes armed with batteries of machine guns or cannons and some were capable of speeds approaching . Most fighters up to this point had one engine, but a number of twin-engine fighters were built; however they were found to be outmatched against single-engine fighters and were relegated to other tasks, such as night fighters equipped with radar sets.

By the end of the war, turbojet engines were replacing piston engines as the means of propulsion, further increasing aircraft speed. Since the weight of the turbojet engine was far less than a piston engine, having two engines was no longer a handicap and one or two were used, depending on requirements. This in turn required the development of ejection seats so the pilot could escape, and G-suits to counter the much greater forces being applied to the pilot during maneuvers.

In the 1950s, radar was fitted to day fighters, since due to ever increasing air-to-air weapon ranges, pilots could no longer see far enough ahead to prepare for the opposition. Subsequently, radar capabilities grew enormously and are now the primary method of target acquisition. Wings were made thinner and swept back to reduce transonic drag, which required new manufacturing methods to obtain sufficient strength. Skins were no longer sheet metal riveted to a structure, but milled from large slabs of alloy. The sound barrier was broken, and after a few false starts due to required changes in controls, speeds quickly reached Mach 2, past which aircraft cannot maneuver sufficiently to avoid attack.

Air-to-air missiles largely replaced guns and rockets in the early 1960s since both were believed unusable at the speeds being attained, however the Vietnam War showed that guns still had a role to play, and most fighters built since then are fitted with cannon (typically between in caliber) in addition to missiles. Most modern combat aircraft can carry at least a pair of air-to-air missiles.

In the 1970s, turbofans replaced turbojets, improving fuel economy enough that the last piston engine support aircraft could be replaced with jets, making multi-role combat aircraft possible. Honeycomb structures began to replace milled structures, and the first composite components began to appear on components subjected to little stress.

With the steady improvements in computers, defensive systems have become increasingly efficient. To counter this, stealth technologies have been pursued by the United States, Russia, India and China. The first step was to find ways to reduce the aircraft&#x27;s reflectivity to radar waves by burying the engines, eliminating sharp corners and diverting any reflections away from the radar sets of opposing forces. Various materials were found to absorb the energy from radar waves, and were incorporated into special finishes that have since found widespread application. Composite structures have become widespread, including major structural components, and have helped to counterbalance the steady increases in aircraft weight—most modern fighters are larger and heavier than World War II medium bombers.

Because of the importance of air superiority, since the early days of aerial combat armed forces have constantly competed to develop technologically superior fighters and to deploy these fighters in greater numbers, and fielding a viable fighter fleet consumes a substantial proportion of the defense budgets of modern armed forces.

The global combat aircraft market was worth $45.75 billion in 2017 and is projected by Frost &amp; Sullivan at $47.2 billion in 2026: 35% modernization programs and 65% aircraft purchases, dominated by the Lockheed Martin F-35 with 3,000 deliveries over 20 years.

== Classification ==
A fighter aircraft is primarily designed for air-to-air combat. A given type may be designed for specific combat conditions, and in some cases for additional roles such as air-to-ground fighting. Historically the British Royal Flying Corps and Royal Air Force referred to them as &quot;scouts&quot; until the early 1920s, while the U.S. Army called them &quot;pursuit&quot; aircraft until the late 1940s (using the designation P, as in Curtiss P-40 Warhawk, Republic P-47 Thunderbolt and Bell P-63 Kingcobra). The UK changed to calling them fighters in the 1920s, while the US Army did so in the 1940s. A short-range fighter designed to defend against incoming enemy aircraft is known as an interceptor.

Recognized classes of fighter include:

* Air superiority fighter
* Fighter-bomber
* Heavy fighter
* Interceptor
* Light fighter
* All-weather fighter (including the night fighter)
* Reconnaissance fighter
* Strategic fighter (including the escort fighter and strike fighter)

Of these, the Fighter-bomber, reconnaissance fighter and strike fighter classes are dual-role, possessing qualities of the fighter alongside some other battlefield role. Some fighter designs may be developed in variants performing other roles entirely, such as ground attack or unarmed reconnaissance. This may be for political or national security reasons, for advertising purposes, or other reasons.

The Sopwith Camel and other &quot;fighting scouts&quot; of World War I performed a great deal of ground-attack work. In World War II, the USAAF and RAF often favored fighters over dedicated light bombers or dive bombers, and types such as the Republic P-47 Thunderbolt and Hawker Hurricane that were no longer competitive as aerial combat fighters were relegated to ground attack. Several aircraft, such as the F-111 and F-117, have received fighter designations though they had no fighter capability due to political or other reasons. The F-111B variant was originally intended for a fighter role with the U.S. Navy, but it was canceled. This blurring follows the use of fighters from their earliest days for &quot;attack&quot; or &quot;strike&quot; operations against ground targets by means of strafing or dropping small bombs and incendiaries. Versatile multi role fighter-bombers such as the McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet are a less expensive option than having a range of specialized aircraft types.

Some of the most expensive fighters such as the US Grumman F-14 Tomcat, McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle, Lockheed Martin F-22 Raptor and Russian Sukhoi Su-27 were employed as all-weather interceptors as well as air superiority fighter aircraft, while commonly developing air-to-ground roles late in their careers. An interceptor is generally an aircraft intended to target (or intercept) bombers and so often trades maneuverability for climb rate.

As a part of military nomenclature, a letter is often assigned to various types of aircraft to indicate their use, along with a number to indicate the specific aircraft. The letters used to designate a fighter differ in various countries. In the English-speaking world, &quot;F&quot; is often now used to indicate a fighter (e.g. Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II or Supermarine Spitfire F.22), though &quot;P&quot; used to be used in the US for pursuit (e.g. Curtiss P-40 Warhawk), a translation of the French &quot;C&quot; (Dewoitine D.520 C.1) for &quot;Chasseur&quot; while in Russia &quot;I&quot; was used for &quot;Istrebitel&quot;, or exterminator (Polikarpov I-16).

=== Air superiority fighter ===
As fighter types have proliferated, the air superiority fighter emerged as a specific role at the pinnacle of speed, maneuverability, and air-to-air weapon systems – able to hold its own against all other fighters and establish its dominance in the skies above the battlefield.

===Interceptor===
The interceptor is a fighter designed specifically to intercept and engage approaching enemy aircraft. There are two general classes of interceptor: relatively lightweight aircraft in the point-defence role, built for fast reaction, high performance and with a short range, and heavier aircraft with more comprehensive avionics and designed to fly at night or in all weathers and to operate over longer ranges. Originating during World War I, by 1929 this class of fighters had become known as the interceptor.

=== Night and all-weather fighters ===
The equipment necessary for daytime flight is inadequate when flying at night or in poor visibility. The night fighter was developed during World War I with additional equipment to aid the pilot in flying straight, navigating and finding the target. From modified variants of the Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2c in 1915, the night fighter has evolved into the highly capable all-weather fighter.

===Strategic fighters===
The strategic fighter is a fast, heavily armed and long-range type, able to act as an escort fighter protecting bombers, to carry out offensive sorties of its own as a penetration fighter and maintain standing patrols at significant distance from its home base.

Bombers are vulnerable due to their low speed, large size and poor maneuvrability. The escort fighter was developed during World War II to come between the bombers and enemy attackers as a protective shield. The primary requirement was for long range, with several heavy fighters given the role. However they too proved unwieldy and vulnerable, so as the war progressed techniques such as drop tanks were developed to extend the range of more nimble conventional fighters.

The penetration fighter is typically also fitted for the ground-attack role, and so is able to defend itself while conducting attack sorties.
== Piston engine fighters ==

=== 1914–1918: World War I ===


The word &quot;fighter&quot; was first used to describe a two-seat aircraft carrying a machine gun (mounted on a pedestal) and its operator as well as the pilot. Although the term was coined in the United Kingdom, the first examples were the French Voisin pushers beginning in 1910, and a Voisin III would be the first to shoot down another aircraft, on 5 October 1914.

However at the outbreak of World War I, front-line aircraft were mostly unarmed and used almost exclusively for reconnaissance. On 15 August 1914, Miodrag Tomić encountered an enemy airplane while on a reconnaissance flight over Austria-Hungary which fired at his aircraft with a revolver, so Tomić fired back. It was believed to be the first exchange of fire between aircraft. Within weeks, all Serbian and Austro-Hungarian aircraft were armed.

Another type of military aircraft formed the basis for an effective &quot;fighter&quot; in the modern sense of the word. It was based on small fast aircraft developed before the war for air racing such with the Gordon Bennett Cup and Schneider Trophy. The military scout airplane was not expected to carry serious armament, but rather to rely on speed to &quot;scout&quot; a location, and return quickly to report, making it a flying horse. British scout aircraft, in this sense, included the Sopwith Tabloid and Bristol Scout. The French and the Germans didn&#x27;t have an equivalent as they used two seaters for reconnaissance, such as the Morane-Saulnier L, but would later modify pre-war racing aircraft into armed single seaters. It was quickly found that these were of little use since the pilot couldn&#x27;t record what he saw while also flying, while military leaders usually ignored what the pilots reported.

Attempts were made with handheld weapons such as pistols and rifles and even light machine guns, but these were ineffective and cumbersome. The next advance came with the fixed forward-firing machine gun, so that the pilot pointed the entire aircraft at the target and fired the gun, instead of relying on a second gunner. Roland Garros bolted metal deflector plates to the propeller so that it would not shoot itself out of the sky and a number of Morane-Saulnier Ns were modified. The technique proved effective, however the deflected bullets were still highly dangerous.

Soon after the commencement of the war, pilots armed themselves with pistols, carbines, grenades, and an assortment of improvised weapons. Many of these proved ineffective as the pilot had to fly his airplane while attempting to aim a handheld weapon and make a difficult deflection shot. The first step in finding a real solution was to mount the weapon on the aircraft, but the propeller remained a problem since the best direction to shoot is straight ahead. Numerous solutions were tried. A second crew member behind the pilot could aim and fire a swivel-mounted machine gun at enemy airplanes; however, this limited the area of coverage chiefly to the rear hemisphere, and effective coordination of the pilot&#x27;s maneuvering with the gunner&#x27;s aiming was difficult. This option was chiefly employed as a defensive measure on two-seater reconnaissance aircraft from 1915 on. Both the SPAD S.A and the Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.9 added a second crewman ahead of the engine in a pod but this was both hazardous to the second crewman and limited performance. The Sopwith L.R.T.Tr. similarly added a pod on the top wing with no better luck.

An alternative was to build a &quot;pusher&quot; scout such as the Airco DH.2, with the propeller mounted behind the pilot. The main drawback was that the high drag of a pusher type&#x27;s tail structure made it slower than a similar &quot;tractor&quot; aircraft.
A better solution for a single seat scout was to mount the machine gun (rifles and pistols having been dispensed with) to fire forwards but outside the propeller arc. Wing guns were tried but the unreliable weapons available required frequent clearing of jammed rounds and misfires and remained impractical until after the war. Mounting the machine gun over the top wing worked well and was used long after the ideal solution was found. The Nieuport 11 of 1916 used this system with considerable success, however, this placement made aiming and reloading difficult but would continue to be used throughout the war as the weapons used were lighter and had a higher rate of fire than synchronized weapons. The British Foster mounting and several French mountings were specifically designed for this kind of application, fitted with either the Hotchkiss or Lewis Machine gun, which due to their design were unsuitable for synchronizing. The need to arm a tractor scout with a forward-firing gun whose bullets passed through the propeller arc was evident even before the outbreak of war and inventors in both France and Germany devised mechanisms that could time the firing of the individual rounds to avoid hitting the propeller blades. Franz Schneider, a Swiss engineer, had patented such a device in Germany in 1913, but his original work was not followed up. French aircraft designer Raymond Saulnier patented a practical device in April 1914, but trials were unsuccessful because of the propensity of the machine gun employed to hang fire due to unreliable ammunition. In December 1914, French aviator Roland Garros asked Saulnier to install his synchronization gear on Garros&#x27; Morane-Saulnier Type L parasol monoplane. Unfortunately the gas-operated Hotchkiss machine gun he was provided had an erratic rate of fire and it was impossible to synchronize it with the propeller. As an interim measure, the propeller blades were fitted with metal wedges to protect them from ricochets. Garros&#x27; modified monoplane first flew in March 1915 and he began combat operations soon after. Garros scored three victories in three weeks before he himself was downed on 18 April and his airplane, along with its synchronization gear and propeller was captured by the Germans. Meanwhile, the synchronization gear (called the &quot;Stangensteuerung&quot; in German, for &quot;pushrod control system&quot;) devised by the engineers of Anthony Fokker&#x27;s firm was the first system to enter service. It would usher in what the British called the &quot;Fokker scourge&quot; and a period of air superiority for the German forces, making the Fokker &quot;Eindecker&quot; monoplane a feared name over the Western Front, despite its being an adaptation of an obsolete pre-war French Morane-Saulnier racing airplane, with poor flight characteristics and a by now mediocre performance. The first &quot;Eindecker&quot; victory came on 1 July 1915, when &quot;Leutnant&quot; Kurt Wintgens, of Feldflieger Abteilung 6 on the Western Front, downed a Morane-Saulnier Type L. His was one of five Fokker M.5K/MG prototypes for the &quot;Eindecker&quot;, and was armed with a synchronized aviation version of the Parabellum MG14 machine gun. The success of the &quot;Eindecker&quot; kicked off a competitive cycle of improvement among the combatants, both sides striving to build ever more capable single-seat fighters. The Albatros D.I and Sopwith Pup of 1916 set the classic pattern followed by fighters for about twenty years. Most were biplanes and only rarely monoplanes or triplanes. The strong box structure of the biplane provided a rigid wing that allowed the accurate control essential for dogfighting. They had a single operator, who flew the aircraft and also controlled its armament. They were armed with one or two Maxim or Vickers machine guns, which were easier to synchronize than other types, firing through the propeller arc. Gun breeches were in front of the pilot, with obvious implications in case of accidents, but jams could be cleared in flight, while aiming was simplified.
The use of metal aircraft structures was pioneered before World War I by Breguet but would find its biggest proponent in Anthony Fokker, who used chrome-molybdenum steel tubing for the fuselage structure of all his fighter designs, while the innovative German engineer Hugo Junkers developed two all-metal, single-seat fighter monoplane designs with cantilever wings: the strictly experimental Junkers J 2 private-venture aircraft, made with steel, and some forty examples of the Junkers D.I, made with corrugated duralumin, all based on his experience in creating the pioneering Junkers J 1 all-metal airframe technology demonstration aircraft of late 1915. While Fokker would pursue steel tube fuselages with wooden wings until the late 1930s, and Junkers would focus on corrugated sheet metal, Dornier was the first to build a fighter (the Dornier-Zeppelin D.I) made with pre-stressed sheet aluminum and having cantilevered wings, a form that would replace all others in the 1930s. As collective combat experience grew, the more successful pilots such as Oswald Boelcke, Max Immelmann, and Edward Mannock developed innovative tactical formations and maneuvers to enhance their air units&#x27; combat effectiveness.

Allied and – before 1918 – German pilots of World War I were not equipped with parachutes, so in-flight fires or structural failures were often fatal. Parachutes were well-developed by 1918 having previously been used by balloonists, and were adopted by the German flying services during the course of that year. The well-known Manfred von Richthofen, the &quot;Red Baron&quot;, was wearing one when he was killed, but the allied command continued to oppose their use on various grounds.

In April 1917, during a brief period of German aerial supremacy a British pilot&#x27;s average life expectancy was calculated to average 93 flying hours, or about three weeks of active service. More than 50,000 airmen from both sides died during the war.

=== 1919–1938: Inter-war period ===
Fighter development stagnated between the wars, especially in the United States and the United Kingdom, where budgets were small. In France, Italy and Russia, where large budgets continued to allow major development, both monoplanes and all metal structures were common. By the end of the 1920s, however, those countries overspent themselves and were overtaken in the 1930s by those powers that hadn&#x27;t been spending heavily, namely the British, the Americans, the Spanish (in the Spanish civil war) and the Germans.

Given limited budgets, air forces were conservative in aircraft design, and biplanes remained popular with pilots for their agility, and remained in service long after they ceased to be competitive. Designs such as the Gloster Gladiator, Fiat CR.42 Falco, and Polikarpov I-15 were common even in the late 1930s, and many were still in service as late as 1942. Up until the mid-1930s, the majority of fighters in the US, the UK, Italy and Russia remained fabric-covered biplanes.

Fighter armament eventually began to be mounted inside the wings, outside the arc of the propeller, though most designs retained two synchronized machine guns directly ahead of the pilot, where they were more accurate (that being the strongest part of the structure, reducing the vibration to which the guns were subjected). Shooting with this traditional arrangement was also easier because the guns shot directly ahead in the direction of the aircraft&#x27;s flight, up to the limit of the guns range; unlike wing-mounted guns which to be effective required to be harmonised, that is, preset to shoot at an angle by ground crews so that their bullets would converge on a target area a set distance ahead of the fighter. Rifle-caliber calibre guns remained the norm, with larger weapons either being too heavy and cumbersome or deemed unnecessary against such lightly built aircraft. It was not considered unreasonable to use World War I-style armament to counter enemy fighters as there was insufficient air-to-air combat during most of the period to disprove this notion.
The rotary engine, popular during World War I, quickly disappeared, its development having reached the point where rotational forces prevented more fuel and air from being delivered to the cylinders, which limited horsepower. They were replaced chiefly by the stationary radial engine though major advances led to inline engines gaining ground with several exceptional engines—including the V-12 Curtiss D-12. Aircraft engines increased in power several-fold over the period, going from a typical in the Fokker D.VII of 1918 to in the Curtiss P-36 of 1936. The debate between the sleek in-line engines versus the more reliable radial models continued, with naval air forces preferring the radial engines, and land-based forces often choosing inlines. Radial designs did not require a separate (and vulnerable) radiator, but had increased drag. Inline engines often had a better power-to-weight ratio.

Some air forces experimented with &quot;heavy fighters&quot; (called &quot;destroyers&quot; by the Germans). These were larger, usually twin-engined aircraft, sometimes adaptations of light or medium bomber types. Such designs typically had greater internal fuel capacity (thus longer range) and heavier armament than their single-engine counterparts. In combat, they proved vulnerable to more agile single-engine fighters.

The primary driver of fighter innovation, right up to the period of rapid re-armament in the late 1930s, were not military budgets, but civilian aircraft racing. Aircraft designed for these races introduced innovations like streamlining and more powerful engines that would find their way into the fighters of World War II. The most significant of these was the Schneider Trophy races, where competition grew so fierce, only national governments could afford to enter.

At the very end of the inter-war period in Europe came the Spanish Civil War. This was just the opportunity the German Luftwaffe, Italian Regia Aeronautica, and the Soviet Union&#x27;s Voenno-Vozdushnye Sily needed to test their latest aircraft. Each party sent numerous aircraft types to support their sides in the conflict. In the dogfights over Spain, the latest Messerschmitt Bf 109 fighters did well, as did the Soviet Polikarpov I-16. The later German design was earlier in its design cycle, and had more room for development and the lessons learned led to greatly improved models in World War II. The Russians failed to keep up and despite newer models coming into service, I-16s remaining the most common Soviet front-line fighter into 1942 despite being outclassed by the improved Bf 109s in World War II. For their part, the Italians developed several monoplanes such as the Fiat G.50 Freccia, but being short on funds, were forced to continue operating obsolete Fiat CR.42 Falco biplanes.

From the early 1930s the Japanese were at war against both the Chinese Nationalists and the Russians in China, and used the experience to improve both training and aircraft, replacing biplanes with modern cantilever monoplanes and creating a cadre of exceptional pilots. In the United Kingdom, at the behest of Neville Chamberlain (more famous for his &#x27;peace in our time&#x27; speech), the entire British aviation industry was retooled, allowing it to change quickly from fabric covered metal framed biplanes to cantilever stressed skin monoplanes in time for the war with Germany, a process that France attempted to emulate, but too late to counter the German invasion. The period of improving the same biplane design over and over was now coming to an end, and the Hawker Hurricane and Supermarine Spitfire started to supplant the Gloster Gladiator and Hawker Fury biplanes but many biplanes remained in front-line service well past the start of World War II. While not a combatant in Spain, they too absorbed many of the lessons in time to use them.

The Spanish Civil War also provided an opportunity for updating fighter tactics. One of the innovations was the development of the &quot;finger-four&quot; formation by the German pilot Werner Mölders. Each fighter squadron (German: &quot;Staffel&quot;) was divided into several flights (&quot;Schwärme&quot;) of four aircraft. Each &quot;Schwarm&quot; was divided into two &quot;Rotten&quot;, which was a pair of aircraft. Each &quot;Rotte&quot; was composed of a leader and a wingman. This flexible formation allowed the pilots to maintain greater situational awareness, and the two &quot;Rotten&quot; could split up at any time and attack on their own. The finger-four would be widely adopted as the fundamental tactical formation during World War Two, including by the British and later the Americans.

=== 1939–1945: World War II ===
World War II featured fighter combat on a larger scale than any other conflict to date. German Field Marshal Erwin Rommel noted the effect of airpower: &quot;Anyone who has to fight, even with the most modern weapons, against an enemy in complete command of the air, fights like a savage...&quot; Throughout the war, fighters performed their conventional role in establishing air superiority through combat with other fighters and through bomber interception, and also often performed roles such as tactical air support and reconnaissance.

Fighter design varied widely among combatants. The Japanese and Italians favored lightly armed and armored but highly maneuverable designs such as the Japanese Nakajima Ki-27, Nakajima Ki-43 and Mitsubishi A6M Zero and the Italian Fiat G.50 Freccia and Macchi MC.200. In contrast, designers in the United Kingdom, Germany, the Soviet Union, and the United States believed that the increased speed of fighter aircraft would create &quot;g&quot;-forces unbearable to pilots who attempted maneuvering dogfights typical of the First World War, and their fighters were instead optimized for speed and firepower. In practice, while light, highly maneuverable aircraft did possess some advantages in fighter-versus-fighter combat, those could usually be overcome by sound tactical doctrine, and the design approach of the Italians and Japanese made their fighters ill-suited as interceptors or attack aircraft.

==== European theater ====
During the invasion of Poland and the Battle of France, Luftwaffe fighters—primarily the Messerschmitt Bf 109—held air superiority, and the Luftwaffe played a major role in German victories in these campaigns. During the Battle of Britain, however, British Hurricanes and Spitfires proved roughly equal to Luftwaffe fighters. Additionally Britain&#x27;s radar-based Dowding system directing fighters onto German attacks and the advantages of fighting above Britain&#x27;s home territory allowed the RAF to deny Germany air superiority, saving the UK from possible German invasion and dealing the Axis a major defeat early in the Second World War. On the Eastern Front, Soviet fighter forces were overwhelmed during the opening phases of Operation Barbarossa. This was a result of the tactical surprise at the outset of the campaign, the leadership vacuum within the Soviet military left by the Great Purge, and the general inferiority of Soviet designs at the time, such as the obsolescent Polikarpov I-15 biplane and the I-16. More modern Soviet designs, including the Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-3, LaGG-3 and Yakolev Yak-1, had not yet arrived in numbers and in any case were still inferior to the Messerschmitt Bf 109. As a result, during the early months of these campaigns, Axis air forces destroyed large numbers of Red Air Force aircraft on the ground and in one-sided dogfights. In the later stages on the Eastern Front, Soviet training and leadership improved, as did their equipment. By 1942 Soviet designs such as the Yakovlev Yak-9 and Lavochkin La-5 had performance comparable to the German Bf 109 and Focke-Wulf Fw 190. Also, significant numbers of British, and later U.S., fighter aircraft were supplied to aid the Soviet war effort as part of Lend-Lease, with the Bell P-39 Airacobra proving particularly effective in the lower-altitude combat typical of the Eastern Front. The Soviets were also helped indirectly by the American and British bombing campaigns, which forced the Luftwaffe to shift many of its fighters away from the Eastern Front in defense against these raids. The Soviets increasingly were able to challenge the Luftwaffe, and while the Luftwaffe maintained a qualitative edge over the Red Air Force for much of the war, the increasing numbers and efficacy of the Soviet Air Force were critical to the Red Army&#x27;s efforts at turning back and eventually annihilating the Wehrmacht.

Meanwhile, air combat on the Western Front had a much different character. Much of this combat focused on the strategic bombing campaigns of the RAF and the USAAF against German industry intended to wear down the Luftwaffe. Axis fighter aircraft focused on defending against Allied bombers while Allied fighters&#x27; main role was as bomber escorts. The RAF raided German cities at night, and both sides developed radar-equipped night fighters for these battles. The Americans, in contrast, flew daylight bombing raids into Germany delivering the Combined Bomber Offensive. Unescorted Consolidated B-24 Liberators and Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress bombers, however, proved unable to fend off German interceptors (primarily Bf 109s and Fw 190s). With the later arrival of long range fighters, particularly the North American P-51 Mustang, American fighters were able to escort far into Germany on daylight raids and by ranging ahead attrited the Luftwaffe to establish control of the skies over Western Europe.

By the time of Operation Overlord in June 1944, the Allies had gained near complete air superiority over the Western Front. This cleared the way both for intensified strategic bombing of German cities and industries, and for the tactical bombing of battlefield targets. With the Luftwaffe largely cleared from the skies, Allied fighters increasingly served as ground attack aircraft.

Allied fighters, by gaining air superiority over the European battlefield, played a crucial role in the eventual defeat of the Axis, which &quot;Reichmarshal&quot; Hermann Göring, commander of the German Luftwaffe summed up when he said: &quot;When I saw Mustangs over Berlin, I knew the jig was up.&quot;

==== Pacific theater ====
Major air combat during the war in the Pacific began with the entry of the Western Allies following Japan&#x27;s attack against Pearl Harbor. The Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service primarily operated the Mitsubishi A6M Zero, and the Imperial Japanese Army Air Service flew the Nakajima Ki-27 and the Nakajima Ki-43, initially enjoying great success, as these fighters generally had better range, maneuverability, speed and climb rates than their Allied counterparts. Additionally, Japanese pilots were well trained and many were combat veterans from Japan&#x27;s campaigns in China. They quickly gained air superiority over the Allies, who at this stage of the war were often disorganized, under-trained and poorly equipped, and Japanese air power contributed significantly to their successes in the Philippines, Malaysia and Singapore, the Dutch East Indies and Burma.

By mid-1942, the Allies began to regroup and while some Allied aircraft such as the Brewster Buffalo and the P-39 Airacobra were hopelessly outclassed by fighters like Japan&#x27;s Mitsubishi A6M Zero, others such as the Army&#x27;s Curtiss P-40 Warhawk and the Navy&#x27;s Grumman F4F Wildcat possessed attributes such as superior firepower, ruggedness and dive speed, and the Allies soon developed tactics (such as the Thach Weave) to take advantage of these strengths. These changes soon paid dividends, as the Allied ability to deny Japan air superiority was critical to their victories at Coral Sea, Midway, Guadalcanal and New Guinea. In China, the Flying Tigers also used the same tactics with some success, although they were unable to stem the tide of Japanese advances there.
By 1943, the Allies began to gain the upper hand in the Pacific Campaign&#x27;s air campaigns. Several factors contributed to this shift. First, the Lockheed P-38 Lightning and second-generation Allied fighters such as the Grumman F6 Hellcat and later the Vought F4 Corsair, the Republic P-47 Thunderbolt and the North American P-51 Mustang, began arriving in numbers. These fighters outperformed Japanese fighters in all respects except maneuverability. Other problems with Japan&#x27;s fighter aircraft also became apparent as the war progressed, such as their lack of armor and light armament, which had been typical of all pre-war fighters worldwide, but the problem was particularly difficult to rectify on the Japanese designs. This made them inadequate as either bomber-interceptors or ground-attack aircraft, roles Allied fighters were still able to fill. Most importantly, Japan&#x27;s training program failed to provide enough well-trained pilots to replace losses. In contrast, the Allies improved both the quantity and quality of pilots graduating from their training programs. By mid-1944, Allied fighters had gained air superiority throughout the theater, which would not be contested again during the war. The extent of Allied quantitative and qualitative superiority by this point in the war was demonstrated during the Battle of the Philippine Sea, a lopsided Allied victory in which Japanese fliers were shot down in such numbers and with such ease that American fighter pilots likened it to a great &#x27;turkey shoot&#x27;. Late in the war, Japan began to produce new fighters such as the Nakajima Ki-84 and the Kawanishi N1K to replace the Zero, but only in small numbers, and by then Japan lacked the trained pilots or sufficient fuel to mount an effective challenge to Allied attacks. During the closing stages of the war, Japan&#x27;s fighter arm could not seriously challenge raids over Japan by American Boeing B-29 Superfortresses, and was largely reduced to Kamikaze attacks.

==== Technological innovations ====
Fighter technology advanced rapidly during the Second World War. Piston-engines, which powered the vast majority of World War II fighters, grew more powerful: at the beginning of the war fighters typically had engines producing between and , while by the end of the war many could produce over . For example, the Spitfire, one of the few fighters in continuous production throughout the war, was in 1939 powered by a Merlin II, while variants produced in 1945 were equipped with the Rolls-Royce Griffon 61. Nevertheless, these fighters could only achieve modest increases in top speed due to problems of compressibility created as aircraft and their propellers approached the sound barrier, and it was apparent that propeller-driven aircraft were approaching the limits of their performance. German jet and rocket-powered fighters entered combat in 1944, too late to impact the war&#x27;s outcome. The same year the Allies&#x27; only operational jet fighter, the Gloster Meteor, also entered service. World War II fighters also increasingly featured monocoque construction, which improved their aerodynamic efficiency while adding structural strength. Laminar flow wings, which improved high speed performance, also came into use on fighters such as the P-51 Mustang, while the Messerschmitt Me 262 and the Messerschmitt Me 163 featured swept wings that dramatically reduced drag at high subsonic speeds. Armament also advanced during the war. The rifle-caliber machine guns that were common on prewar fighters could not easily down the more rugged warplanes of the era. Air forces began to replace or supplement them with cannons, which fired explosive shells that could blast a hole in an enemy aircraft – rather than relying on kinetic energy from a solid bullet striking a critical component of the aircraft, such as a fuel line or control cable, or the pilot. Cannons could bring down even heavy bombers with just a few hits, but their slower rate of fire made it difficult to hit fast-moving fighters in a dogfight. Eventually, most fighters mounted cannons, sometimes in combination with machine guns. The British epitomized this shift. Their standard early war fighters mounted eight caliber machine guns, but by mid-war they often featured a combination of machine guns and cannons, and late in the war often only cannons. The Americans, in contrast, had problems producing a cannon design, so instead placed multiple  heavy machine guns on their fighters. Fighters were also increasingly fitted with bomb racks and air-to-surface ordnance such as bombs or rockets beneath their wings, and pressed into close air support roles as fighter-bombers. Although they carried less ordnance than light and medium bombers, and generally had a shorter range, they were cheaper to produce and maintain and their maneuverability made it easier for them to hit moving targets such as motorized vehicles. Moreover, if they encountered enemy fighters, their ordnance (which reduced lift and increased drag and therefore decreased performance) could be jettisoned and they could engage enemy fighters, which eliminated the need for fighter escorts that bombers required.

Heavily armed fighters such as Germany&#x27;s Focke-Wulf Fw 190, Britain&#x27;s Hawker Typhoon and Hawker Tempest, and America&#x27;s Curtiss P-40, F4U Corsair, P-47 Thunderbolt and P-38 Lightning all excelled as fighter-bombers, and since the Second World War ground attack has become an important secondary capability of many fighters.
World War II also saw the first use of airborne radar on fighters. The primary purpose of these radars was to help night fighters locate enemy bombers and fighters. Because of the bulkiness of these radar sets, they could not be carried on conventional single-engined fighters and instead were typically retrofitted to larger heavy fighters or light bombers such as Germany&#x27;s Messerschmitt Bf 110 and Junkers Ju 88, Britain&#x27;s de Havilland Mosquito and Bristol Beaufighter, and America&#x27;s Douglas A-20, which then served as night fighters. The Northrop P-61 Black Widow, a purpose-built night fighter, was the only fighter of the war that incorporated radar into its original design. Britain and America cooperated closely in the development of airborne radar, and Germany&#x27;s radar technology generally lagged slightly behind Anglo-American efforts, while other combatants developed few radar-equipped fighters.

A concept originated from German engineer Bernhard J. Schrage in 1943 as a response to the increasing threat posed by Allied heavy bombers, particularly at night. The Schrage Musik system involved mounting upward-facing cannon turrets, typically twin 20mm or 30mm guns, in the belly of German night fighters such as the Messerschmitt Bf 110 and later versions of the Junkers Ju 88. These guns were angled upwards to target the vulnerable underside of enemy bombers.

=== 1946–present: Post–World War II period ===

Several prototype fighter programs begun early in 1945 continued on after the war and led to advanced piston-engine fighters that entered production and operational service in 1946. A typical example is the Lavochkin La-9 &#x27;Fritz&#x27;, which was an evolution of the successful wartime Lavochkin La-7 &#x27;Fin&#x27;. Working through a series of prototypes, the La-120, La-126 and La-130, the Lavochkin design bureau sought to replace the La-7&#x27;s wooden airframe with a metal one, as well as fit a laminar flow wing to improve maneuver performance, and increased armament. The La-9 entered service in August 1946 and was produced until 1948; it also served as the basis for the development of a long-range escort fighter, the La-11 &#x27;Fang&#x27;, of which nearly 1200 were produced 1947–51. Over the course of the Korean War, however, it became obvious that the day of the piston-engined fighter was coming to a close and that the future would lie with the jet fighter.

This period also witnessed experimentation with jet-assisted piston engine aircraft. La-9 derivatives included examples fitted with two underwing auxiliary pulsejet engines (the La-9RD) and a similarly mounted pair of auxiliary ramjet engines (the La-138); however, neither of these entered service. One that did enter service – with the U.S. Navy in March 1945 – was the Ryan FR-1 Fireball; production was halted with the war&#x27;s end on VJ-Day, with only 66 having been delivered, and the type was withdrawn from service in 1947. The USAAF had ordered its first 13 mixed turboprop-turbojet-powered pre-production prototypes of the Consolidated Vultee XP-81 fighter, but this program was also canceled by VJ Day, with 80% of the engineering work completed.

== Rocket-powered fighters ==
The first rocket-powered aircraft was the Lippisch Ente, which made a successful maiden flight in March 1928. The only pure rocket aircraft ever mass-produced was the Messerschmitt Me 163B &quot;Komet&quot; in 1944, one of several German World War II projects aimed at developing high speed, point-defense aircraft. Later variants of the Me 262 (C-1a and C-2b) were also fitted with &quot;mixed-power&quot; jet/rocket powerplants, while earlier models were fitted with rocket boosters, but were not mass-produced with these modifications.

The USSR experimented with a rocket-powered interceptor in the years immediately following World War II, the Mikoyan-Gurevich I-270. Only two were built.

In the 1950s, the British developed mixed-power jet designs employing both rocket and jet engines to cover the performance gap that existed in turbojet designs. The rocket was the main engine for delivering the speed and height required for high-speed interception of high-level bombers and the turbojet gave increased fuel economy in other parts of flight, most notably to ensure the aircraft was able to make a powered landing rather than risking an unpredictable gliding return.

The Saunders-Roe SR.53 was a successful design, and was planned for production when economics forced the British to curtail most aircraft programs in the late 1950s. Furthermore, rapid advancements in jet engine technology rendered mixed-power aircraft designs like Saunders-Roe&#x27;s SR.53 (and the following SR.177) obsolete. The American Republic XF-91 Thunderceptor –the first U.S. fighter to exceed Mach 1 in level flight– met a similar fate for the same reason, and no hybrid rocket-and-jet-engine fighter design has ever been placed into service.

The only operational implementation of mixed propulsion was Rocket-Assisted Take Off (RATO), a system rarely used in fighters, such as with the zero-length launch, RATO-based takeoff scheme from special launch platforms, tested out by both the United States and the Soviet Union, and made obsolete with advancements in surface-to-air missile technology.

== Jet-powered fighters ==

It has become common in the aviation community to classify jet fighters by &quot;generations&quot; for historical purposes. No official definitions of these generations exist; rather, they represent the notion of stages in the development of fighter-design approaches, performance capabilities, and technological evolution. Different authors have packed jet fighters into different generations. For example, Richard P. Hallion of the Secretary of the US Air Force&#x27;s Action Group classified the F-16 as a sixth-generation jet fighter.

The timeframes associated with each generation remain inexact and are only indicative of the period during which their design philosophies and technology employment enjoyed a prevailing influence on fighter design and development. These timeframes also encompass the peak period of service entry for such aircraft.

=== 1940s–1950s: First-generation ===
The first generation of jet fighters comprised the initial, subsonic jet-fighter designs introduced late in World War II (1939–1945) and in the early post-war period. They differed little from their piston-engined counterparts in appearance, and many employed unswept wings. Guns and cannon remained the principal armament. The need to obtain a decisive advantage in maximum speed pushed the development of turbojet-powered aircraft forward. Top speeds for fighters rose steadily throughout World War II as more powerful piston engines developed, and they approached transonic flight-speeds where the efficiency of propellers drops off, making further speed increases nearly impossible.

The first jets developed during World War II and saw combat in the last two years of the war. Messerschmitt developed the first operational jet fighter, the Me 262A, primarily serving with the Luftwaffe&#x27;s JG 7, the world&#x27;s first jet-fighter wing. It was considerably faster than contemporary piston-driven aircraft, and in the hands of a competent pilot, proved quite difficult for Allied pilots to defeat. The Luftwaffe never deployed the design in numbers sufficient to stop the Allied air campaign, and a combination of fuel shortages, pilot losses, and technical difficulties with the engines kept the number of sorties low. Nevertheless, the Me 262 indicated the obsolescence of piston-driven aircraft. Spurred by reports of the German jets, Britain&#x27;s Gloster Meteor entered production soon after, and the two entered service around the same time in 1944. Meteors commonly served to intercept the V-1 flying bomb, as they were faster than available piston-engined fighters at the low altitudes used by the flying bombs. Nearer the end of World War II, the first military jet-powered light-fighter design, the Luftwaffe intended the Heinkel He 162A &quot;Spatz&quot; (sparrow) to serve as a simple jet fighter for German home defense, with a few examples seeing squadron service with JG 1 by April 1945. By the end of the war almost all work on piston-powered fighters had ended. A few designs combining piston- and jet-engines for propulsion – such as the Ryan FR Fireball – saw brief use, but by the end of the 1940s virtually all new fighters were jet-powered.

Despite their advantages, the early jet-fighters were far from perfect. The operational lifespan of turbines were very short and engines were temperamental, while power could be adjusted only slowly and acceleration was poor (even if top speed was higher) compared to the final generation of piston fighters. Many squadrons of piston-engined fighters remained in service until the early to mid-1950s, even in the air forces of the major powers (though the types retained were the best of the World War II designs). Innovations including ejection seats, air brakes and all-moving tailplanes became widespread in this period.

The Americans began using jet fighters operationally after World War II, the wartime Bell P-59 having proven a failure. The Lockheed P-80 Shooting Star (soon re-designated F-80) was more prone to wave drag than the swept-wing Me 262, but had a cruise speed () as high as the maximum speed attainable by many piston-engined fighters. The British designed several new jets, including the distinctive single-engined twin boom de Havilland Vampire which Britain sold to the air forces of many nations.

The British transferred the technology of the Rolls-Royce Nene jet-engine to the Soviets, who soon put it to use in their advanced Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15 fighter, which used fully swept wings that allowed flying closer to the speed of sound than straight-winged designs such as the F-80. The MiG-15s&#x27; top speed of proved quite a shock to the American F-80 pilots who encountered them in the Korean War, along with their armament of two cannons and a single cannon. Nevertheless, in the first jet-versus-jet dogfight, which occurred during the Korean War on 8 November 1950, an F-80 shot down two North Korean MiG-15s.

The Americans responded by rushing their own swept-wing fighter – the North American F-86 Sabre – into battle against the MiGs, which had similar transsonic performance. The two aircraft had different strengths and weaknesses, but were similar enough that victory could go either way. While the Sabres focused primarily on downing MiGs and scored favorably against those flown by the poorly-trained North Koreans, the MiGs in turn decimated US bomber formations and forced the withdrawal of numerous American types from operational service.

The world&#x27;s navies also transitioned to jets during this period, despite the need for catapult-launching of the new aircraft. The U.S. Navy adopted the Grumman F9F Panther as their primary jet fighter in the Korean War period, and it was one of the first jet fighters to employ an afterburner. The de Havilland Sea Vampire became the Royal Navy&#x27;s first jet fighter. Radar was used on specialized night-fighters such as the Douglas F3D Skyknight, which also downed MiGs over Korea, and later fitted to the McDonnell F2H Banshee and swept-wing Vought F7U Cutlass and McDonnell F3H Demon as all-weather / night fighters. Early versions of Infra-red (IR) air-to-air missiles (AAMs) such as the AIM-9 Sidewinder and radar-guided missiles such as the AIM-7 Sparrow whose descendants remain in use , were first introduced on swept-wing subsonic Demon and Cutlass naval fighters.
=== 1950s–1960s: Second-generation ===

Technological breakthroughs, lessons learned from the aerial battles of the Korean War, and a focus on conducting operations in a nuclear warfare environment shaped the development of second-generation fighters. Technological advances in aerodynamics, propulsion and aerospace building-materials (primarily aluminum alloys) permitted designers to experiment with aeronautical innovations such as swept wings, delta wings, and area-ruled fuselages. Widespread use of afterburning turbojet engines made these the first production aircraft to break the sound barrier, and the ability to sustain supersonic speeds in level flight became a common capability amongst fighters of this generation.

Fighter designs also took advantage of new electronics technologies that made effective radars small enough to carry aboard smaller aircraft. Onboard radars permitted detection of enemy aircraft beyond visual range, thereby improving the handoff of targets by longer-ranged ground-based warning- and tracking-radars. Similarly, advances in guided-missile development allowed air-to-air missiles to begin supplementing the gun as the primary offensive weapon for the first time in fighter history. During this period, passive-homing infrared-guided (IR) missiles became commonplace, but early IR missile sensors had poor sensitivity and a very narrow field of view (typically no more than 30°), which limited their effective use to only close-range, tail-chase engagements. Radar-guided (RF) missiles were introduced as well, but early examples proved unreliable. These semi-active radar homing (SARH) missiles could track and intercept an enemy aircraft &quot;painted&quot; by the launching aircraft&#x27;s onboard radar. Medium- and long-range RF air-to-air missiles promised to open up a new dimension of &quot;beyond-visual-range&quot; (BVR) combat, and much effort concentrated on further development of this technology.

The prospect of a potential third world war featuring large mechanized armies and nuclear-weapon strikes led to a degree of specialization along two design approaches: interceptors, such as the English Electric Lightning and Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21F; and fighter-bombers, such as the Republic F-105 Thunderchief and the Sukhoi Su-7B. Dogfighting, &quot;per se&quot;, became de-emphasized in both cases. The interceptor was an outgrowth of the vision that guided missiles would completely replace guns and combat would take place at beyond-visual ranges. As a result, strategists designed interceptors with a large missile-payload and a powerful radar, sacrificing agility in favor of high speed, altitude ceiling and rate of climb. With a primary air-defense role, emphasis was placed on the ability to intercept strategic bombers flying at high altitudes. Specialized point-defense interceptors often had limited range and few, if any, ground-attack capabilities. Fighter-bombers could swing between air-superiority and ground-attack roles, and were often designed for a high-speed, low-altitude dash to deliver their ordnance. Television- and IR-guided air-to-surface missiles were introduced to augment traditional gravity bombs, and some were also equipped to deliver a nuclear bomb.
===1960s–1970s: Third-generation jet fighters===

The third generation witnessed continued maturation of second-generation innovations, but it is most marked by renewed emphases on maneuverability and on traditional ground-attack capabilities. Over the course of the 1960s, increasing combat experience with guided missiles demonstrated that combat would devolve into close-in dogfights. Analog avionics began to appear, replacing older &quot;steam-gauge&quot; cockpit instrumentation. Enhancements to the aerodynamic performance of third-generation fighters included flight control surfaces such as canards, powered slats, and blown flaps. A number of technologies would be tried for vertical/short takeoff and landing, but thrust vectoring would be successful on the Harrier.

Growth in air-combat capability focused on the introduction of improved air-to-air missiles, radar systems, and other avionics. While guns remained standard equipment (early models of F-4 being a notable exception), air-to-air missiles became the primary weapons for air-superiority fighters, which employed more sophisticated radars and medium-range RF AAMs to achieve greater &quot;stand-off&quot; ranges, however, kill probabilities proved unexpectedly low for RF missiles due to poor reliability and improved electronic countermeasures (ECM) for spoofing radar seekers. Infrared-homing AAMs saw their fields of view expand to 45°, which strengthened their tactical usability. Nevertheless, the low dogfight loss-exchange ratios experienced by American fighters in the skies over Vietnam led the U.S. Navy to establish its famous &quot;TOPGUN&quot; fighter-weapons school, which provided a graduate-level curriculum to train fleet fighter-pilots in advanced Air Combat Maneuvering (ACM) and Dissimilar air combat training (DACT) tactics and techniques.
This era also saw an expansion in ground-attack capabilities, principally in guided missiles, and witnessed the introduction of the first truly effective avionics for enhanced ground attack, including terrain-avoidance systems. Air-to-surface missiles (ASM) equipped with electro-optical (E-O) contrast seekers – such as the initial model of the widely used AGM-65 Maverick – became standard weapons, and laser-guided bombs (LGBs) became widespread in an effort to improve precision-attack capabilities. Guidance for such precision-guided munitions (PGM) was provided by externally-mounted targeting pods, which were introduced in the mid-1960s.

The third generation also led to the development of new automatic-fire weapons, primarily chain-guns that use an electric motor to drive the mechanism of a cannon. This allowed a plane to carry a single multi-barrel weapon (such as the Vulcan), and provided greater accuracy and rates of fire. Powerplant reliability increased, and jet engines became &quot;smokeless&quot; to make it harder to sight aircraft at long distances.

Dedicated ground-attack aircraft (like the Grumman A-6 Intruder, SEPECAT Jaguar and LTV A-7 Corsair II) offered longer range, more sophisticated night-attack systems or lower cost than supersonic fighters. With variable-geometry wings, the supersonic F-111 introduced the Pratt &amp; Whitney TF30, the first turbofan equipped with afterburner. The ambitious project sought to create a versatile common fighter for many roles and services. It would serve well as an all-weather bomber, but lacked the performance to defeat other fighters. The McDonnell F-4 Phantom was designed to capitalize on radar and missile technology as an all-weather interceptor, but emerged as a versatile strike-bomber nimble enough to prevail in air combat, adopted by the U.S. Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps. Despite numerous shortcomings that would not be fully addressed until newer fighters, the Phantom claimed 280 aerial kills (more than any other U.S. fighter) over Vietnam. With range and payload capabilities that rivaled that of World War II bombers such as B-24 Liberator, the Phantom would become a highly successful multirole aircraft.
=== 1970s–2000s: Fourth-generation ===

Fourth-generation fighters continued the trend towards multirole configurations, and were equipped with increasingly sophisticated avionics- and weapon-systems. Fighter designs were significantly influenced by the Energy-Maneuverability (E-M) theory developed by Colonel John Boyd and mathematician Thomas Christie, based upon Boyd&#x27;s combat experience in the Korean War and as a fighter-tactics instructor during the 1960s. E-M theory emphasized the value of aircraft-specific energy maintenance as an advantage in fighter combat. Boyd perceived maneuverability as the primary means of getting &quot;inside&quot; an adversary&#x27;s decision-making cycle, a process Boyd called the &quot;OODA loop&quot; (for &quot;Observation-Orientation-Decision-Action&quot;). This approach emphasized aircraft designs capable of performing &quot;fast transients&quot; – quick changes in speed, altitude, and direction – as opposed to relying chiefly on high speed alone.

E-M characteristics were first applied to the McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle, but Boyd and his supporters believed these performance parameters called for a small, lightweight aircraft with a larger, higher-lift wing. The small size would minimize drag and increase the thrust-to-weight ratio, while the larger wing would minimize wing loading; while the reduced wing loading tends to lower top speed and can cut range, it increases payload capacity and the range reduction can be compensated for by increased fuel in the larger wing. The efforts of Boyd&#x27;s &quot;Fighter mafia&quot; would result in the General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon (now Lockheed Martin&#x27;s).

The F-16&#x27;s maneuverability was further enhanced by its slight aerodynamic instability. This technique, called &quot;relaxed static stability&quot; (RSS), was made possible by introduction of the &quot;fly-by-wire&quot; (FBW) flight-control system (FLCS), which in turn was enabled by advances in computers and in system-integration techniques. Analog avionics, required to enable FBW operations, became a fundamental requirement, but began to be replaced by digital flight-control systems in the latter half of the 1980s. Likewise, Full Authority Digital Engine Controls (FADEC) to electronically manage powerplant performance was introduced with the Pratt &amp; Whitney F100 turbofan. The F-16&#x27;s sole reliance on electronics and wires to relay flight commands, instead of the usual cables and mechanical linkage controls, earned it the sobriquet of &quot;the electric jet&quot;. Electronic FLCS and FADEC quickly became essential components of all subsequent fighter designs.

Other innovative technologies introduced in fourth-generation fighters included pulse-Doppler fire-control radars (providing a &quot;look-down/shoot-down&quot; capability), head-up displays (HUD), &quot;hands on throttle-and-stick&quot; (HOTAS) controls, and multi-function displays (MFD), all essential equipment . Aircraft designers began to incorporate composite materials in the form of bonded-aluminum honeycomb structural elements and graphite epoxy laminate skins to reduce weight. Infrared search-and-track (IRST) sensors became widespread for air-to-ground weapons delivery, and appeared for air-to-air combat as well. &quot;All-aspect&quot; IR AAM became standard air superiority weapons, which permitted engagement of enemy aircraft from any angle (although the field of view remained relatively limited). The first long-range active-radar-homing RF AAM entered service with the AIM-54 Phoenix, which solely equipped the Grumman F-14 Tomcat, one of the few variable-sweep-wing fighter designs to enter production. Even with the tremendous advancement of air-to-air missiles in this era, internal guns were standard equipment.

Another revolution came in the form of a stronger reliance on ease of maintenance, which led to standardization of parts, reductions in the numbers of access panels and lubrication points, and overall parts reduction in more complicated equipment like the engines. Some early jet fighters required 50 man-hours of work by a ground crew for every hour the aircraft was in the air; later models substantially reduced this to allow faster turn-around times and more sorties in a day. Some modern military aircraft only require 10-man-hours of work per hour of flight time, and others are even more efficient.

Aerodynamic innovations included variable-camber wings and exploitation of the vortex lift effect to achieve higher angles of attack through the addition of leading-edge extension devices such as strakes.

Unlike interceptors of the previous eras, most fourth-generation air-superiority fighters were designed to be agile dogfighters (although the Mikoyan MiG-31 and Panavia Tornado ADV are notable exceptions). The continually rising cost of fighters, however, continued to emphasize the value of multirole fighters. The need for both types of fighters led to the &quot;high/low mix&quot; concept, which envisioned a high-capability and high-cost core of dedicated air-superiority fighters (like the F-15 and Su-27) supplemented by a larger contingent of lower-cost multi-role fighters (such as the F-16 and MiG-29). 

Most fourth-generation fighters, such as the McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet, HAL Tejas, JF-17 and Dassault Mirage 2000, are true multirole warplanes, designed as such from the start. This was facilitated by multimode avionics that could switch seamlessly between air and ground modes. The earlier approaches of adding on strike capabilities or designing separate models specialized for different roles generally became &quot;passé&quot; (with the Panavia Tornado being an exception in this regard). Attack roles were generally assigned to dedicated ground-attack aircraft such as the Sukhoi Su-25 and the A-10 Thunderbolt II.

A typical US Air Force fighter wing of the period might contain a mix of one air superiority squadron (F-15C), one strike fighter squadron (F-15E), and two multirole fighter squadrons (F-16C). Perhaps the most novel technology introduced for combat aircraft was &quot;stealth&quot;, which involves the use of special &quot;low-observable&quot; (L-O) materials and design techniques to reduce the susceptibility of an aircraft to detection by the enemy&#x27;s sensor systems, particularly radars. The first stealth aircraft introduced were the Lockheed F-117 Nighthawk attack aircraft (introduced in 1983) and the Northrop Grumman B-2 Spirit bomber (first flew in 1989). Although no stealthy fighters per se appeared among the fourth generation, some radar-absorbent coatings and other L-O treatments developed for these programs are reported to have been subsequently applied to fourth-generation fighters.

==== 1990s–2000s: 4.5-generation ====
The end of the Cold War in 1992 led many governments to significantly decrease military spending as a &quot;peace dividend&quot;. Air force inventories were cut. Research and development programs working on &quot;fifth-generation&quot; fighters took serious hits. Many programs were canceled during the first half of the 1990s, and those that survived were &quot;stretched out&quot;. While the practice of slowing the pace of development reduces annual investment expenses, it comes at the penalty of increased overall program and unit costs over the long-term. In this instance, however, it also permitted designers to make use of the tremendous achievements being made in the fields of computers, avionics and other flight electronics, which had become possible largely due to the advances made in microchip and semiconductor technologies in the 1980s and 1990s. This opportunity enabled designers to develop fourth-generation designs – or redesigns – with significantly enhanced capabilities. These improved designs have become known as &quot;Generation 4.5&quot; fighters, recognizing their intermediate nature between the 4th and 5th generations, and their contribution in furthering development of individual fifth-generation technologies.

The primary characteristics of this sub-generation are the application of advanced digital avionics and aerospace materials, modest signature reduction (primarily RF &quot;stealth&quot;), and highly integrated systems and weapons. These fighters have been designed to operate in a &quot;network-centric&quot; battlefield environment and are principally multirole aircraft. Key weapons technologies introduced include beyond-visual-range (BVR) AAMs; Global Positioning System (GPS)–guided weapons, solid-state phased-array radars; helmet-mounted sights; and improved secure, jamming-resistant datalinks. Thrust vectoring to further improve transient maneuvering capabilities has also been adopted by many 4.5th generation fighters, and uprated powerplants have enabled some designs to achieve a degree of &quot;supercruise&quot; ability. Stealth characteristics are focused primarily on frontal-aspect radar cross section (RCS) signature-reduction techniques including radar-absorbent materials (RAM), L-O coatings and limited shaping techniques.

&quot;Half-generation&quot; designs are either based on existing airframes or are based on new airframes following similar design theory to previous iterations; however, these modifications have introduced the structural use of composite materials to reduce weight, greater fuel fractions to increase range, and signature reduction treatments to achieve lower RCS compared to their predecessors. Prime examples of such aircraft, which are based on new airframe designs making extensive use of carbon-fiber composites, include the Eurofighter Typhoon, Dassault Rafale, Saab JAS 39 Gripen, JF-17 Thunder, and HAL Tejas Mark 1A.

Apart from these fighter jets, most of the 4.5 generation aircraft are actually modified variants of existing airframes from the earlier fourth generation fighter jets. Such fighter jets are generally heavier and examples include the Boeing F/A-18E/F Super Hornet, which is an evolution of the F/A-18 Hornet, the F-15E Strike Eagle, which is a ground-attack/multi-role variant of the F-15 Eagle, the Su-30SM and Su-35S modified variants of the Sukhoi Su-27, and the MiG-35 upgraded version of the Mikoyan MiG-29. The Su-30SM/Su-35S and MiG-35 feature thrust vectoring engine nozzles to enhance maneuvering. The upgraded version of F-16 is also considered a member of the 4.5 generation aircraft.

Generation 4.5 fighters first entered service in the early 1990s, and most of them are still being produced and evolved. It is quite possible that they may continue in production alongside fifth-generation fighters due to the expense of developing the advanced level of stealth technology needed to achieve aircraft designs featuring very low observables (VLO), which is one of the defining features of fifth-generation fighters. Of the 4.5th generation designs, the Strike Eagle, Super Hornet, Typhoon, Gripen, and Rafale have been used in combat.

The U.S. government has defined 4.5 generation fighter aircraft as those that &quot;(1) have advanced capabilities, including— (A) AESA radar; (B) high capacity data-link; and (C) enhanced avionics; and (2) have the ability to deploy current and reasonably foreseeable advanced armaments.&quot;
=== 2000s–2020s: Fifth-generation ===

Currently the cutting edge of fighter design, fifth-generation fighters are characterized by being designed from the start to operate in a network-centric combat environment, and to feature extremely low, all-aspect, multi-spectral signatures employing advanced materials and shaping techniques. They have multifunction AESA radars with high-bandwidth, low-probability of intercept (LPI) data transmission capabilities. The infra-red search and track sensors incorporated for air-to-air combat as well as for air-to-ground weapons delivery in the 4.5th generation fighters are now fused in with other sensors for Situational Awareness IRST or SAIRST, which constantly tracks all targets of interest around the aircraft so the pilot need not guess when he glances. These sensors, along with advanced avionics, glass cockpits, helmet-mounted sights (not currently on F-22), and improved secure, jamming-resistant LPI datalinks are highly integrated to provide multi-platform, multi-sensor data fusion for vastly improved situational awareness while easing the pilot&#x27;s workload. Avionics suites rely on extensive use of very high-speed integrated circuit (VHSIC) technology, common modules, and high-speed data buses. Overall, the integration of all these elements is claimed to provide fifth-generation fighters with a &quot;first-look, first-shot, first-kill capability&quot;.

A key attribute of fifth-generation fighters is a small radar cross-section. Great care has been taken in designing its layout and internal structure to minimize RCS over a broad bandwidth of detection and tracking radar frequencies; furthermore, to maintain its VLO signature during combat operations, primary weapons are carried in internal weapon bays that are only briefly opened to permit weapon launch. Furthermore, stealth technology has advanced to the point where it can be employed without a tradeoff with aerodynamics performance, in contrast to previous stealth efforts. Some attention has also been paid to reducing IR signatures, especially on the F-22. Detailed information on these signature-reduction techniques is classified, but in general includes special shaping approaches, thermoset and thermoplastic materials, extensive structural use of advanced composites, conformal sensors, heat-resistant coatings, low-observable wire meshes to cover intake and cooling vents, heat ablating tiles on the exhaust troughs (seen on the Northrop YF-23), and coating internal and external metal areas with radar-absorbent materials and paint (RAM/RAP).

The AESA radar offers unique capabilities for fighters (and it is also quickly becoming essential for Generation 4.5 aircraft designs, as well as being retrofitted onto some fourth-generation aircraft). In addition to its high resistance to ECM and LPI features, it enables the fighter to function as a sort of &quot;mini-AWACS&quot;, providing high-gain electronic support measures (ESM) and electronic warfare (EW) jamming functions. Other technologies common to this latest generation of fighters includes integrated electronic warfare system (INEWS) technology, integrated communications, navigation, and identification (CNI) avionics technology, centralized &quot;vehicle health monitoring&quot; systems for ease of maintenance, fiber optics data transmission, stealth technology and even hovering capabilities. Maneuver performance remains important and is enhanced by thrust-vectoring, which also helps reduce takeoff and landing distances. Supercruise may or may not be featured; it permits flight at supersonic speeds without the use of the afterburner – a device that significantly increases IR signature when used in full military power.

Such aircraft are sophisticated and expensive. The fifth generation was ushered in by the Lockheed Martin/Boeing F-22 Raptor in late 2005. The U.S. Air Force originally planned to acquire 650 F-22s, but now only 187 will be built. As a result, its unit flyaway cost (FAC) is around US$150 million. To spread the development costs – and production base – more broadly, the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) program enrolls eight other countries as cost- and risk-sharing partners. Altogether, the nine partner nations anticipate procuring over 3,000 Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II fighters at an anticipated average FAC of $80–85 million. The F-35, however, is designed to be a family of three aircraft, a conventional take-off and landing (CTOL) fighter, a short take-off and vertical landing (STOVL) fighter, and a Catapult Assisted Take Off But Arrested Recovery (CATOBAR) fighter, each of which has a different unit price and slightly varying specifications in terms of fuel capacity (and therefore range), size and payload.

Other countries have initiated fifth-generation fighter development projects. In December 2010, it was discovered that China is developing the 5th generation fighter Chengdu J-20. The J-20 took its maiden flight in January 2011. The Shenyang J-35 took its maiden flight on 31 October 2012, and developed a carrier-based version based on Chinese aircraft carriers. United Aircraft Corporation with Russia&#x27;s Mikoyan LMFS and Sukhoi Su-75 Checkmate plan, Sukhoi Su-57 became the first fifth-generation fighter jets in service with the Russian Aerospace Forces on 2020, and launch missiles in the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2022. Japan is exploring its technical feasibility to produce fifth-generation fighters. India is developing the Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft (AMCA), a medium weight stealth fighter jet designated to enter into serial production by late 2030s. India also had initiated a joint fifth generation heavy fighter with Russia called the FGFA. May, the project is suspected to have not yielded desired progress or results for India and has been put on hold or dropped altogether. Other countries considering fielding an indigenous or semi-indigenous advanced fifth generation aircraft include South Korea, Sweden, Turkey and Pakistan.

=== 2020s–present: Sixth-generation ===
As of November 2018, France, Germany, China, Japan, Russia, Italy, the United Kingdom and the United States have announced the development of a sixth-generation aircraft program.

France and Germany will develop a joint sixth-generation fighter to replace their current fleet of Dassault Rafales, Eurofighter Typhoons, and Panavia Tornados by 2035. The overall development will be led by a collaboration of Dassault and Airbus, while the engines will reportedly be jointly developed by Safran and MTU Aero Engines. Thales and MBDA are also seeking a stake in the project. Spain officially joined the Franco-German project to develop a Next-Generation Fighter (NGF) that will form part of a broader Future Combat Air Systems (FCAS) with the signing of a letter of intent (LOI) on February 14, 2019.

Currently at the concept stage, the first sixth-generation jet fighter is expected to enter service in the United States Navy in 2025–30 period. The USAF seeks a new fighter for the 2030–50 period named the &quot;Next Generation Tactical Aircraft&quot; (&quot;Next Gen TACAIR&quot;). The US Navy looks to replace its F/A-18E/F Super Hornets beginning in 2025 with the Next Generation Air Dominance air superiority fighter.

The United Kingdom&#x27;s proposed stealth fighter is being developed along with Japan and Italy in &quot;Team Tempest&quot;, consisting of BAE Systems, Rolls-Royce, Leonardo S.p.A. and MBDA. The aircraft is intended to enter service in 2035.

Saudi Arabia is also looking to get involved in Team Tempest.
== Weapons ==
Fighters were typically armed with guns only for air to air combat up through the late 1950s, though unguided rockets for mostly air to ground use and limited air to air use were deployed in WWII. From the late 1950s forward guided missiles came into use for air to air combat. Throughout this history fighters which by surprise or maneuver attain a good firing position have achieved the kill about one third to one half the time, no matter what weapons were carried. The only major historic exception to this has been the low effectiveness shown by guided missiles in the first one to two decades of their existence.
From WWI to the present, fighter aircraft have featured machine guns and automatic cannons as weapons, and they are still considered as essential back-up weapons today. The power of air-to-air guns has increased greatly over time, and has kept them relevant in the guided missile era. In WWI two rifle (approximately 0.30) caliber machine guns was the typical armament, producing a weight of fire of about per second. In WWII rifle caliber machine guns also remained common, though usually in larger numbers or supplemented with much heavier 0.50 caliber machine guns or cannons. The standard WWII American fighter armament of six 0.50-cal (12.7mm) machine guns fired a bullet weight of approximately 3.7 kg/sec (8.1 lbs/sec), at a muzzle velocity of 856 m/s (2,810 ft/s). British and German aircraft tended to use a mix of machine guns and autocannon, the latter firing explosive projectiles. Later British fighters were exclusively cannon-armed, the US were not able to produce a reliable cannon in high numbers and most fighters remained equipped only with heavy machine guns despite the US Navy pressing for a change to 20 mm.

Post war 20–30 mm revolver cannon and rotary cannon were introduced. The modern M61 Vulcan 2ft rotary cannon that is standard on current American fighters fires a projectile weight of about 10 kg/s (22 lb/s), nearly three times that of six 0.50-cal machine guns, with higher velocity of 1,052 m/s (3450 ft/s) supporting a flatter trajectory, and with exploding projectiles. Modern fighter gun systems also feature ranging radar and lead computing electronic gun sights to ease the problem of aim point to compensate for projectile drop and time of flight (target lead) in the complex three dimensional maneuvering of air-to-air combat. However, getting in position to use the guns is still a challenge. The range of guns is longer than in the past but still quite limited compared to missiles, with modern gun systems having a maximum effective range of approximately 1,000 meters. High probability of kill also requires firing to usually occur from the rear hemisphere of the target. Despite these limits, when pilots are well trained in air-to-air gunnery and these conditions are satisfied, gun systems are tactically effective and highly cost efficient. The cost of a gun firing pass is far less than firing a missile, and the projectiles are not subject to the thermal and electronic countermeasures than can sometimes defeat missiles. When the enemy can be approached to within gun range, the lethality of guns is approximately a 25% to 50% chance of &quot;kill per firing pass&quot;.

The range limitations of guns, and the desire to overcome large variations in fighter pilot skill and thus achieve higher force effectiveness, led to the development of the guided air-to-air missile. There are two main variations, heat-seeking (infrared homing), and radar guided. Radar missiles are typically several times heavier and more expensive than heat-seekers, but with longer range, greater destructive power, and ability to track through clouds.
The highly successful AIM-9 Sidewinder heat-seeking (infrared homing) short-range missile was developed by the United States Navy in the 1950s. These small missiles are easily carried by lighter fighters, and provide effective ranges of approximately . Beginning with the AIM-9L in 1977, subsequent versions of Sidewinder have added all-aspect capability, the ability to use the lower heat of air to skin friction on the target aircraft to track from the front and sides. The latest (2003 service entry) AIM-9X also features &quot;off-boresight&quot; and &quot;lock on after launch&quot; capabilities, which allow the pilot to make a quick launch of a missile to track a target anywhere within the pilot&#x27;s vision. The AIM-9X development cost was U.S. $3 billion in mid to late 1990s dollars, and 2015 per unit procurement cost is $0.6 million each. The missile weighs 85.3 kg (188 lbs), and has a maximum range of 35 km (22 miles) at higher altitudes. Like most air-to-air missiles, lower altitude range can be as limited as only about one third of maximum due to higher drag and less ability to coast downward.

The effectiveness of infrared homing missiles was only 7% early in the Vietnam War, but improved to approximately 15%–40% over the course of the war. The AIM-4 Falcon used by the USAF had kill rates of approximately 7% and was considered a failure. The AIM-9B Sidewinder introduced later achieved 15% kill rates, and the further improved AIM-9D and J models reached 19%. The AIM-9G used in the last year of the Vietnam air war achieved 40%. Israel used almost totally guns in the 1967 Six-Day War, achieving 60 kills and 10 losses. However, Israel made much more use of steadily improving heat-seeking missiles in the 1973 Yom Kippur War. In this extensive conflict Israel scored 171 of 261 total kills with heat-seeking missiles (65.5%), 5 kills with radar guided missiles (1.9%), and 85 kills with guns (32.6%). The AIM-9L Sidewinder scored 19 kills out of 26 fired missiles (73%) in the 1982 Falklands War. But, in a conflict against opponents using thermal countermeasures, the United States only scored 11 kills out of 48 fired (Pk = 23%) with the follow-on AIM-9M in the 1991 Gulf War.

Radar guided missiles fall into two main missile guidance types. In the historically more common semi-active radar homing case the missile homes in on radar signals transmitted from launching aircraft and reflected from the target. This has the disadvantage that the firing aircraft must maintain radar lock on the target and is thus less free to maneuver and more vulnerable to attack. A widely deployed missile of this type was the AIM-7 Sparrow, which entered service in 1954 and was produced in improving versions until 1997. In more advanced active radar homing the missile is guided to the vicinity of the target by internal data on its projected position, and then &quot;goes active&quot; with an internally carried small radar system to conduct terminal guidance to the target. This eliminates the requirement for the firing aircraft to maintain radar lock, and thus greatly reduces risk. A prominent example is the AIM-120 AMRAAM, which was first fielded in 1991 as the AIM-7 replacement, and which has no firm retirement date . The current AIM-120D version has a maximum high altitude range of greater than , and cost approximately $2.4 million each (2016). As is typical with most other missiles, range at lower altitude may be as little as one third that of high altitude.

In the Vietnam air war radar missile kill reliability was approximately 10% at shorter ranges, and even worse at longer ranges due to reduced radar return and greater time for the target aircraft to detect the incoming missile and take evasive action. At one point in the Vietnam war, the U.S. Navy fired 50 AIM-7 Sparrow radar guided missiles in a row without a hit. Between 1958 and 1982 in five wars there were 2,014 combined heat-seeking and radar guided missile firings by fighter pilots engaged in air-to-air combat, achieving 528 kills, of which 76 were radar missile kills, for a combined effectiveness of 26%. However, only 4 of the 76 radar missile kills were in the beyond-visual-range mode intended to be the strength of radar guided missiles. The United States invested over $10 billion in air-to-air radar missile technology from the 1950s to the early 1970s. Amortized over actual kills achieved by the U.S. and its allies, each radar guided missile kill thus cost over $130 million. The defeated enemy aircraft were for the most part older MiG-17s, −19s, and −21s, with new cost of $0.3 million to $3 million each. Thus, the radar missile investment over that period far exceeded the value of enemy aircraft destroyed, and furthermore had very little of the intended BVR effectiveness.

However, continuing heavy development investment and rapidly advancing electronic technology led to significant improvement in radar missile reliabilities from the late 1970s onward. Radar guided missiles achieved 75% Pk (9 kills out of 12 shots) in operations in the Gulf War in 1991. The percentage of kills achieved by radar guided missiles also surpassed 50% of total kills for the first time by 1991. Since 1991, 20 of 61 kills worldwide have been beyond-visual-range using radar missiles. Discounting an accidental friendly fire kill, in operational use the AIM-120D (the current main American radar guided missile) has achieved 9 kills out of 16 shots for a 56% Pk. Six of these kills were BVR, out of 13 shots, for a 46% BVR Pk. Though all these kills were against less capable opponents who were not equipped with operating radar, electronic countermeasures, or a comparable weapon themselves, the BVR Pk was a significant improvement from earlier eras. However, a current concern is electronic countermeasures to radar missiles, which are thought to be reducing the effectiveness of the AIM-120D. Some experts believe that the European Meteor missile, the Russian R-37M, and the Chinese PL-15 are more resistant to countermeasures and more effective than the AIM-120D.

Now that higher reliabilities have been achieved, both types of missiles allow the fighter pilot to often avoid the risk of the short-range dogfight, where only the more experienced and skilled fighter pilots tend to prevail, and where even the finest fighter pilot can simply get unlucky. Taking maximum advantage of complicated missile parameters in both attack and defense against competent opponents does take considerable experience and skill, but against surprised opponents lacking comparable capability and countermeasures, air-to-air missile warfare is relatively simple. By partially automating air-to-air combat and reducing reliance on gun kills mostly achieved by only a small expert fraction of fighter pilots, air-to-air missiles now serve as highly effective force multipliers.

==See also==
* List of fighter aircraft
* List of United States fighter aircraft
* Warbird

==Notes==
==References==

===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* *
*
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
*
*

==External links==

*Fighter generations comparison chart on theaviationist.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="0" end="16" title="Fighter aircraft" label="Fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q216916" start="66" end="83" title="military aircraft" label="military aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002168" start="107" end="124" title="air-to-air combat" label="air-to-air combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="193" end="208" title="air supremacy" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002407" start="216" end="227" title="battlespace" label="battlespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="284" end="291" title="bombers" label="bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="296" end="311" title="attack aircraft" label="attack aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422289" start="325" end="333" title="tactical bombing" label="tactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="338" end="355" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409574" start="487" end="496" title="firepower" label="firepower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="525" end="540" title="maneuverability" label="maneuverability"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="901" end="914" title="ground-attack aircraft" label="ground attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="939" end="953" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="1119" end="1130" title="interceptor aircraft" label="interceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961442" start="1154" end="1167" title="heavy fighter" label="heavy fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="1172" end="1185" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q429245" start="1309" end="1329" title="conventional warfare" label="conventional warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="1418" end="1428" title="airship" label="dirigibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="1466" end="1480" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="1586" end="1593" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2137" end="2149" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="2180" end="2189" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="2215" end="2226" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="2231" end="2238" title="Autocannon" label="cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="2561" end="2569" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q574785" start="2930" end="2936" title="G-suit" label="G-suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="3033" end="3038" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685884" start="3280" end="3298" title="target acquisition" label="target acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q243249" start="3726" end="3744" title="Air-to-air missile" label="Air-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3875" end="3886" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506142" start="5697" end="5717" title="Frost &amp;amp; Sullivan" label="Frost &amp;amp; Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="5816" end="5836" title="Lockheed Martin F-35" label="Lockheed Martin F-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002168" start="5941" end="5958" title="air-to-air combat" label="air-to-air combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="6117" end="6135" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="6140" end="6155" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953022" start="6182" end="6188" title="Scout (aircraft)" label="scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="6228" end="6237" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="6332" end="6352" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk" label="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207089" start="6354" end="6379" title="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt" label="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q815732" start="6384" end="6403" title="Bell P-63 Kingcobra" label="Bell P-63 Kingcobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="6587" end="6598" title="Interceptor aircraft" label="interceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518049" start="6643" end="6666" title="Air superiority fighter" label="Air superiority fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="6669" end="6683" title="Fighter-bomber" label="Fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961442" start="6686" end="6699" title="Heavy fighter" label="Heavy fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="6702" end="6713" title="Interceptor aircraft" label="Interceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546174" start="6716" end="6729" title="Light fighter" label="Light fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="6732" end="6751" title="All-weather fighter" label="All-weather fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="6767" end="6780" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="6784" end="6806" title="Reconnaissance fighter" label="Reconnaissance fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q85803677" start="6809" end="6826" title="Strategic fighter" label="Strategic fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961428" start="6842" end="6856" title="escort fighter" label="escort fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623805" start="6861" end="6875" title="strike fighter" label="strike fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="6892" end="6906" title="Fighter-bomber" label="Fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="6908" end="6930" title="reconnaissance fighter" label="reconnaissance fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623805" start="6935" end="6949" title="strike fighter" label="strike fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="7139" end="7152" title="Ground-attack aircraft" label="ground attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="7164" end="7178" title="Reconnaissance aircraft" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q607651" start="7285" end="7298" title="Sopwith Camel" label="Sopwith Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="7419" end="7424" title="USAAF" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="7429" end="7432" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q678321" start="7488" end="7500" title="dive bombers" label="dive bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207089" start="7524" end="7549" title="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt" label="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="7554" end="7570" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="7888" end="7897" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430863" start="8078" end="8086" title="strafing" label="strafing"/>
<link wikidata="Q46397" start="8178" end="8209" title="McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet" label="McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34945" start="8341" end="8360" title="Grumman F-14 Tomcat" label="Grumman F-14 Tomcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="8362" end="8390" title="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle" label="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133324" start="8392" end="8419" title="Lockheed Martin F-22 Raptor" label="Lockheed Martin F-22 Raptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173680" start="8432" end="8444" title="Sukhoi Su-27" label="Sukhoi Su-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="8474" end="8486" title="Interceptor aircraft" label="interceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518049" start="8498" end="8521" title="air superiority fighter" label="air superiority fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="9066" end="9099" title="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II" label="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="9103" end="9128" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire F.22"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="9196" end="9216" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk" label="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q831251" start="9262" end="9281" title="Dewoitine D.520" label="Dewoitine D.520 C.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q641977" start="9392" end="9407" title="Polikarpov I-16" label="Polikarpov I-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546174" start="9900" end="9911" title="Light fighter" label="lightweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q905424" start="10143" end="10149" title="Range (aeronautics)" label="ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189769" start="10571" end="10600" title="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2c" label="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2c"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961428" start="10797" end="10811" title="escort fighter" label="escort fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="10823" end="10830" title="Bomber aircraft" label="bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125561" start="10879" end="10898" title="penetration fighter" label="penetration fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="10974" end="10981" title="Bomber aircraft" label="Bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961442" start="11239" end="11252" title="heavy fighter" label="heavy fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q336368" start="11363" end="11372" title="drop tank" label="drop tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125561" start="11452" end="11471" title="penetration fighter" label="penetration fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="11505" end="11518" title="Ground-attack aircraft" label="ground-attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="11808" end="11813" title="Aviator" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130446" start="11942" end="11952" title="Voisin III" label="Voisin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12051" end="12062" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="12136" end="12150" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755523" start="12171" end="12184" title="Miodrag Tomić" label="Miodrag Tomić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875777" start="12657" end="12667" title="air racing" label="air racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q959841" start="12705" end="12721" title="Schneider Trophy" label="Schneider Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953022" start="12736" end="12741" title="Scout (aircraft)" label="scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118167" start="12964" end="12979" title="Sopwith Tabloid" label="Sopwith Tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q917975" start="12984" end="12997" title="Bristol Scout" label="Bristol Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q585825" start="13114" end="13131" title="Morane-Saulnier L" label="Morane-Saulnier L"/>
<link wikidata="Q207709" start="13715" end="13728" title="Roland Garros (aviator)" label="Roland Garros"/>
<link wikidata="Q595356" start="13841" end="13858" title="Morane-Saulnier N" label="Morane-Saulnier N"/>
<link wikidata="Q183302" start="14045" end="14053" title="carbines" label="carbines"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="14055" end="14062" title="grenade" label="grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q662339" start="14862" end="14870" title="SPAD S.A" label="SPAD S.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800119" start="14879" end="14907" title="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.9" label="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898611" start="15039" end="15056" title="Sopwith L.R.T.Tr." label="Sopwith L.R.T.Tr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2700567" start="15147" end="15165" title="Pusher configuration" label="&amp;quot;pusher&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q408469" start="15184" end="15194" title="Airco DH.2" label="Airco DH.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="15277" end="15281" title="Drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831650" start="15351" end="15370" title="Tractor configuration" label="&amp;quot;tractor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310124" start="15636" end="15662" title="Firearm malfunction" label="jammed rounds and misfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q646817" start="15822" end="15833" title="Nieuport 11" label="Nieuport 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473805" start="16097" end="16112" title="Foster mounting" label="Foster mounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376129" start="16222" end="16231" title="Hotchkiss M1909 Benét–Mercié machine gun" label="Hotchkiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q373396" start="16235" end="16252" title="Lewis Gun" label="Lewis Machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953022" start="16333" end="16346" title="tractor scout" label="tractor scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365588" start="16513" end="16523" title="Synchronization gear" label="mechanisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492951" start="16615" end="16630" title="Franz Schneider (engineer)" label="Franz Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421140" start="16765" end="16781" title="Raymond Saulnier (aircraft manufacturer)" label="Raymond Saulnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188466" start="16911" end="16920" title="hang fire" label="hang fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207709" start="16984" end="16997" title="Roland Garros (aviator)" label="Roland Garros"/>
<link wikidata="Q585825" start="17065" end="17087" title="Morane-Saulnier Type L" label="Morane-Saulnier Type L"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="17088" end="17105" title="parasol monoplane" label="parasol monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055967" start="17138" end="17147" title="Hotchkiss M1914 machine gun" label="Hotchkiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q323227" start="17359" end="17367" title="ricochet" label="ricochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q76703" start="17809" end="17823" title="Anthony Fokker" label="Anthony Fokker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969935" start="17927" end="17941" title="Fokker scourge" label="Fokker scourge"/>
<link wikidata="Q819484" start="18014" end="18042" title="Fokker Eindecker" label="Fokker &amp;quot;Eindecker&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="18076" end="18089" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891895" start="18153" end="18168" title="Morane-Saulnier" label="Morane-Saulnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q75225" start="18341" end="18354" title="Kurt Wintgens" label="Kurt Wintgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441647" start="18359" end="18380" title="Feldflieger Abteilung" label="Feldflieger Abteilung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747034" start="18458" end="18468" title="Fokker M.5" label="Fokker M.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q742824" start="18573" end="18588" title="Parabellum MG14" label="Parabellum MG14"/>
<link wikidata="Q114039" start="18784" end="18796" title="Albatros D.I" label="Albatros D.I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323937" start="18801" end="18812" title="Sopwith Pup" label="Sopwith Pup"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="18900" end="18907" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q118240" start="18939" end="18947" title="triplane" label="triplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q830494" start="19060" end="19071" title="dogfighting" label="dogfighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q282352" start="19189" end="19194" title="Maxim gun" label="Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220673" start="19198" end="19205" title="Vickers" label="Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q60363" start="19729" end="19741" title="Hugo Junkers" label="Hugo Junkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="19810" end="19820" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q510669" start="19854" end="19865" title="Junkers J 2" label="Junkers J 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q672123" start="19940" end="19951" title="Junkers D.I" label="Junkers D.I"/>
<link wikidata="Q243558" start="19974" end="19983" title="duralumin" label="duralumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315769" start="20040" end="20051" title="Junkers J 1" label="Junkers J 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024203" start="20303" end="20323" title="Dornier-Zeppelin D.I" label="Dornier-Zeppelin D.I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57716" start="20518" end="20532" title="Oswald Boelcke" label="Oswald Boelcke"/>
<link wikidata="Q57937" start="20534" end="20547" title="Max Immelmann" label="Max Immelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q954532" start="20553" end="20567" title="Edward Mannock" label="Edward Mannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="20758" end="20767" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701" start="21007" end="21029" title="Manfred von Richthofen" label="Manfred von Richthofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q850179" start="22201" end="22218" title="Gloster Gladiator" label="Gloster Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q141640" start="22220" end="22236" title="Fiat CR.42 Falco" label="Fiat CR.42 Falco"/>
<link wikidata="Q696089" start="22242" end="22257" title="Polikarpov I-15" label="Polikarpov I-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259152" start="23028" end="23038" title="Gun harmonisation" label="harmonised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043622" start="23541" end="23554" title="rotary engine" label="rotary engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q214098" start="23808" end="23821" title="radial engine" label="radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q496735" start="23933" end="23945" title="Curtiss D-12" label="Curtiss D-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="23947" end="23962" title="Aircraft engine" label="Aircraft engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165158" start="24041" end="24053" title="Fokker D.VII" label="Fokker D.VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q933767" start="24072" end="24084" title="Curtiss P-36" label="Curtiss P-36"/>
<link wikidata="Q946676" start="24123" end="24138" title="Straight engine" label="in-line engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642768" start="24415" end="24436" title="power-to-weight ratio" label="power-to-weight ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961442" start="24479" end="24492" title="heavy fighter" label="heavy fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623609" start="24623" end="24628" title="light bomber" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q10796151" start="24632" end="24645" title="medium bomber" label="medium bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q959841" start="25226" end="25242" title="Schneider Trophy" label="Schneider Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="25393" end="25410" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="25453" end="25462" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517242" start="25472" end="25489" title="Regia Aeronautica" label="Regia Aeronautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="25519" end="25541" title="Soviet Air Forces" label="Voenno-Vozdushnye Sily"/>
<link wikidata="Q830494" start="25667" end="25675" title="dogfight" label="dogfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="25700" end="25720" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q641977" start="25758" end="25773" title="Polikarpov I-16" label="Polikarpov I-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273" start="26219" end="26236" title="Fiat G.50 Freccia" label="Fiat G.50 Freccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q141640" start="26307" end="26323" title="Fiat CR.42 Falco" label="Fiat CR.42 Falco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="26646" end="26665" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="27107" end="27123" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="27128" end="27148" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q850179" start="27173" end="27190" title="Gloster Gladiator" label="Gloster Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q577389" start="27195" end="27206" title="Hawker Fury" label="Hawker Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077448" start="27531" end="27542" title="finger-four" label="finger-four"/>
<link wikidata="Q58641" start="27579" end="27593" title="Werner Mölders" label="Werner Mölders"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="27608" end="27616" title="squadron (aviation)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="28341" end="28353" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="28608" end="28623" title="Air supremacy" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="28731" end="28751" title="ground-attack aircraft" label="tactical air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="28756" end="28770" title="reconnaissance aircraft" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q700685" start="28933" end="28947" title="Nakajima Ki-27" label="Nakajima Ki-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q700703" start="28949" end="28963" title="Nakajima Ki-43" label="Nakajima Ki-43"/>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="28968" end="28987" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero" label="Mitsubishi A6M Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273" start="29004" end="29021" title="Fiat G.50 Freccia" label="Fiat G.50 Freccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043" start="29026" end="29039" title="Macchi MC.200" label="Macchi MC.200"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="29203" end="29223" title="g-force" label="&amp;quot;g&amp;quot;-forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="29716" end="29734" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="29743" end="29759" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="29794" end="29814" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="29926" end="29943" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="29962" end="29972" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="29977" end="29986" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Spitfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253051" start="30071" end="30085" title="Dowding system" label="Dowding system"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="30359" end="30372" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="30374" end="30395" title="Soviet Air Force" label="Soviet fighter forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="30442" end="30462" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="30599" end="30610" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q696089" start="30695" end="30710" title="Polikarpov I-15" label="Polikarpov I-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="30711" end="30718" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q641977" start="30727" end="30731" title="Polikarpov I-16" label="I-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q271446" start="30775" end="30797" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-3" label="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q753644" start="30799" end="30805" title="Lavochkin-Gorbunov-Gudkov LaGG-3" label="LaGG-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q505673" start="30810" end="30823" title="Yakovlev Yak-1" label="Yakolev Yak-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="30899" end="30919" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="30978" end="30982" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q562475" start="31228" end="31242" title="Yakovlev Yak-9" label="Yakovlev Yak-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q846989" start="31247" end="31261" title="Lavochkin La-5" label="Lavochkin La-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q34775" start="31314" end="31331" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="31458" end="31468" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q385778" start="31479" end="31498" title="Bell P-39 Airacobra" label="Bell P-39 Airacobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="32107" end="32116" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="32148" end="32161" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="32229" end="32246" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="32264" end="32267" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="32276" end="32281" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704274" start="32376" end="32408" title="Defence of the Reich" label="defending against Allied bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="32549" end="32562" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639992" start="32667" end="32692" title="Combined Bomber Offensive" label="Combined Bomber Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q220759" start="32705" end="32732" title="Consolidated B-24 Liberator" label="Consolidated B-24 Liberator"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="32738" end="32765" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="32927" end="32954" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="North American P-51 Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="33050" end="33058" title="Attrition warfare" label="attrited"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="33144" end="33162" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422289" start="33358" end="33374" title="tactical bombing" label="tactical bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="33678" end="33692" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="33718" end="33727" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="33769" end="33777" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920892" start="33875" end="33893" title="Pacific Ocean theater of World War II" label="war in the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="33960" end="33987" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack against Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568476" start="33993" end="34027" title="Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service" label="Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="34051" end="34070" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero" label="Mitsubishi A6M Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q702107" start="34080" end="34114" title="Imperial Japanese Army Air Service" label="Imperial Japanese Army Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q700685" start="34124" end="34138" title="Nakajima Ki-27" label="Nakajima Ki-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q700703" start="34147" end="34161" title="Nakajima Ki-43" label="Nakajima Ki-43"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="34397" end="34428" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Japan&amp;#x27;s campaigns in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q696462" start="34643" end="34658" title="Philippines campaign (1941–1942)" label="the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="34660" end="34682" title="Malayan Campaign" label="Malaysia and Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q698226" start="34684" end="34705" title="Dutch East Indies campaign" label="the Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q728688" start="34710" end="34715" title="Burma Campaign 1942–1943" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q722674" start="34802" end="34818" title="Brewster Buffalo" label="Brewster Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q385778" start="34827" end="34841" title="Bell P-39 Airacobra" label="P-39 Airacobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="34899" end="34918" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero" label="Mitsubishi A6M Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="34951" end="34971" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk" label="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q334612" start="34992" end="35011" title="Grumman F4F Wildcat" label="Grumman F4F Wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119070" start="35139" end="35150" title="Thach Weave" label="Thach Weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="35312" end="35321" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="35323" end="35329" title="Battle of Midway" label="Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q217145" start="35331" end="35342" title="Guadalcanal Campaign" label="Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276692" start="35347" end="35357" title="New Guinea campaign" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q467249" start="35373" end="35386" title="Flying Tigers" label="Flying Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q172913" start="35653" end="35676" title="Lockheed P-38 Lightning" label="Lockheed P-38 Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q465903" start="35727" end="35745" title="Grumman F6F Hellcat" label="Grumman F6 Hellcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q465806" start="35760" end="35777" title="Vought F4U Corsair" label="Vought F4 Corsair"/>
<link wikidata="Q207089" start="35783" end="35808" title="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt" label="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="35817" end="35844" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="North American P-51 Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q504347" start="36840" end="36868" title="Battle of the Philippine Sea" label="Battle of the Philippine Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q618694" start="36985" end="36998" title="fighter pilot" label="fighter pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q700719" start="37113" end="37127" title="Nakajima Ki-84" label="Nakajima Ki-84"/>
<link wikidata="Q843413" start="37136" end="37149" title="Kawanishi N1K" label="Kawanishi N1K"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="37434" end="37459" title="Boeing B-29 Superfortress" label="Boeing B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="37490" end="37498" title="Kamikaze" label="Kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q630010" start="37610" end="37623" title="Reciprocating engine" label="Piston-engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="37858" end="37866" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412885" start="37962" end="37971" title="Rolls-Royce Merlin" label="Merlin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018597" start="37979" end="37987" title="Supermarine Spitfire (late Merlin powered variants)" label="variants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164325" start="38028" end="38050" title="Rolls-Royce Griffon" label="Rolls-Royce Griffon 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067817" start="38149" end="38164" title="compressibility" label="compressibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031651" start="38221" end="38234" title="sound barrier" label="sound barrier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38344" end="38347" title="Fighter aircraft#Jet-powered fighters" label="jet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38352" end="38358" title="#Rocket-powered fighters" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q140318" start="38508" end="38522" title="Gloster Meteor" label="Gloster Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="38595" end="38604" title="monocoque" label="monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q189452" start="38697" end="38709" title="Laminar flow" label="Laminar flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="38823" end="38843" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Messerschmitt Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q155360" start="38852" end="38872" title="Messerschmitt Me 163" label="Messerschmitt Me 163"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="38882" end="38892" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975302" start="38920" end="38924" title="Wave drag" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="38950" end="38958" title="Armament" label="Armament"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="39276" end="39290" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534114" start="39440" end="39452" title="heavy bomber" label="heavy bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q259255" start="39737" end="39744" title=".303 British" label="caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620698" start="39828" end="39835" title="Hispano-Suiza HS.404" label="cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q218932" start="39972" end="39972" title="M2 Browning" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1195448" start="39973" end="39990" title="heavy machine gun" label="heavy machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862189" start="40070" end="40093" title="Air-to-ground weaponry" label="air-to-surface ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="40157" end="40174" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="40184" end="40198" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623609" start="40242" end="40247" title="light bomber" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q10796151" start="40252" end="40258" title="medium bomber" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="40521" end="40525" title="Lift (force)" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="40540" end="40544" title="Drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q34775" start="40756" end="40773" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q662123" start="40790" end="40804" title="Hawker Typhoon" label="Hawker Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q723612" start="40809" end="40823" title="Hawker Tempest" label="Hawker Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="40844" end="40856" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk" label="Curtiss P-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="41096" end="41101" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="41163" end="41176" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961442" start="41374" end="41387" title="heavy fighter" label="heavy fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623609" start="41392" end="41404" title="light bomber" label="light bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q155642" start="41429" end="41449" title="Messerschmitt Bf 110" label="Messerschmitt Bf 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q155661" start="41454" end="41467" title="Junkers Ju 88" label="Junkers Ju 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q221344" start="41484" end="41505" title="de Havilland Mosquito" label="de Havilland Mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q831463" start="41510" end="41529" title="Bristol Beaufighter" label="Bristol Beaufighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q939344" start="41550" end="41562" title="Douglas A-20 Havoc" label="Douglas A-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q913657" start="41605" end="41630" title="Northrop P-61 Black Widow" label="Northrop P-61 Black Widow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42020" end="42039" title="Bernhard J. Schrage" label="Bernhard J. Schrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q698392" start="42145" end="42158" title="Schräge Musik" label="Schrage Musik"/>
<link wikidata="Q155642" start="42312" end="42318" title="Messerschmitt Bf 110" label="Bf 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q155661" start="42353" end="42358" title="Junkers Ju 88" label="Ju 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809102" start="42700" end="42714" title="Lavochkin La-9" label="Lavochkin La-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q148846" start="42783" end="42797" title="Lavochkin La-7" label="Lavochkin La-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q949211" start="42890" end="42899" title="Lavochkin" label="Lavochkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189452" start="42999" end="43011" title="laminar flow" label="laminar flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538894" start="43227" end="43232" title="Lavochkin La-11" label="La-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q671090" start="43631" end="43647" title="Pulse jet engine" label="pulsejet engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q60602" start="43703" end="43717" title="ramjet" label="ramjet engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629446" start="43847" end="43865" title="Ryan FR-1 Fireball" label="Ryan FR-1 Fireball"/>
<link wikidata="Q618979" start="43916" end="43922" title="Victory over Japan Day" label="VJ-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129337" start="44110" end="44135" title="Consolidated Vultee XP-81" label="Consolidated Vultee XP-81"/>
<link wikidata="Q849237" start="44276" end="44299" title="rocket-powered aircraft" label="rocket-powered aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q381538" start="44308" end="44321" title="Lippisch Ente" label="Lippisch Ente"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="44411" end="44424" title="Mass production" label="mass-produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q155360" start="44433" end="44453" title="Messerschmitt Me 163" label="Messerschmitt Me 163"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="44504" end="44516" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495634" start="44915" end="44937" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich I-270" label="Mikoyan-Gurevich I-270"/>
<link wikidata="Q624161" start="45427" end="45434" title="gliding" label="gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469439" start="45448" end="45466" title="Saunders-Roe SR.53" label="Saunders-Roe SR.53"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380646" start="45755" end="45761" title="Saunders-Roe SR.177" label="SR.177"/>
<link wikidata="Q60572" start="45786" end="45814" title="Republic XF-91 Thunderceptor" label="Republic XF-91 Thunderceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="45849" end="45855" title="Mach number" label="Mach 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676551" start="46060" end="46084" title="JATO" label="Rocket-Assisted Take Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267471" start="46144" end="46162" title="zero-length launch" label="zero-length launch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083136" start="46203" end="46218" title="launch platform" label="launch platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="46319" end="46341" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="46834" end="46846" title="US Air Force" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="47537" end="47550" title="swept wing" label="unswept wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q154470" start="48059" end="48072" title="Messerschmitt" label="Messerschmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="48122" end="48128" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669514" start="48175" end="48179" title="JG 7" label="JG 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q140318" start="48737" end="48751" title="Gloster Meteor" label="Gloster Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="48882" end="48897" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49056" end="49081" title="Light fighter#Early light jet fighters" label="jet-powered light-fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q156878" start="49117" end="49131" title="Heinkel He 162" label="Heinkel He 162"/>
<link wikidata="Q498860" start="49268" end="49272" title="Jagdgeschwader 1 (World War II)" label="JG 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49276" end="49286" title="Jagdgeschwader 1 (World War II)#1945" label="April 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629446" start="49441" end="49457" title="Ryan FR Fireball" label="Ryan FR Fireball"/>
<link wikidata="Q623544" start="50086" end="50100" title="ejection seats" label="ejection seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004684" start="50102" end="50112" title="Air brake (aircraft)" label="air brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116750" start="50117" end="50138" title="stabilator" label="all-moving tailplanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q278162" start="50259" end="50268" title="Bell P-59" label="Bell P-59"/>
<link wikidata="Q751759" start="50298" end="50325" title="Lockheed P-80 Shooting Star" label="Lockheed P-80 Shooting Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q255216" start="50587" end="50596" title="twin boom" label="twin boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q179835" start="50597" end="50617" title="de Havilland Vampire" label="de Havilland Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q639668" start="50719" end="50735" title="Rolls-Royce Nene" label="Rolls-Royce Nene"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="50804" end="50827" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15" label="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="50854" end="50864" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="51070" end="51080" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153826" start="51368" end="51393" title="North American F-86 Sabre" label="North American F-86 Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579556" start="51444" end="51454" title="Transonic speed" label="transsonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="51931" end="51949" title="Aircraft catapult" label="catapult-launching"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="51975" end="51984" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q390816" start="51997" end="52016" title="Grumman F9F Panther" label="Grumman F9F Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="52126" end="52137" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="Q179835" start="52143" end="52167" title="de Havilland Vampire" label="de Havilland Sea Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252280" start="52273" end="52294" title="Douglas F3D Skyknight" label="Douglas F3D Skyknight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253036" start="52355" end="52376" title="McDonnell F2H Banshee" label="McDonnell F2H Banshee"/>
<link wikidata="Q580542" start="52392" end="52410" title="Vought F7U Cutlass" label="Vought F7U Cutlass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423312" start="52415" end="52434" title="McDonnell F3H Demon" label="McDonnell F3H Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="52486" end="52495" title="Infra-red" label="Infra-red"/>
<link wikidata="Q243249" start="52501" end="52519" title="air-to-air missile" label="air-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q235396" start="52540" end="52556" title="AIM-9 Sidewinder" label="AIM-9 Sidewinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q293810" start="52595" end="52608" title="AIM-7 Sparrow" label="AIM-7 Sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="52838" end="52848" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="52892" end="52907" title="nuclear warfare" label="nuclear warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="53000" end="53012" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="53014" end="53024" title="Aircraft engine" label="propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q447725" start="53069" end="53083" title="aluminium alloy" label="aluminum alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="53125" end="53137" title="aeronautics" label="aeronautical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="53158" end="53168" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q850097" start="53171" end="53181" title="delta wing" label="delta wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187390" start="53188" end="53198" title="area rule" label="area-ruled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366032" start="53985" end="54014" title="Infrared homing" label="infrared-guided (IR) missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076893" start="54103" end="54116" title="field of view" label="field of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q17123251" start="54202" end="54223" title="tail-chase engagement" label="tail-chase engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187984" start="54322" end="54346" title="semi-active radar homing" label="semi-active radar homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q853311" start="54560" end="54591" title="Beyond Visual Range missile" label="&amp;quot;beyond-visual-range&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q363" start="54707" end="54722" title="third world war" label="third world war"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="54847" end="54859" title="Interceptor aircraft" label="interceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q19381" start="54873" end="54899" title="English Electric Lightning" label="English Electric Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q150609" start="54904" end="54927" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21" label="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="54934" end="54948" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q724763" start="54963" end="54990" title="Republic F-105 Thunderchief" label="Republic F-105 Thunderchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q170199" start="54999" end="55011" title="Sukhoi Su-7B" label="Sukhoi Su-7B"/>
<link wikidata="Q830494" start="55013" end="55021" title="Dogfight" label="Dogfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141401" start="55396" end="55409" title="rate of climb" label="rate of climb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454201" start="55897" end="55909" title="gravity bomb" label="gravity bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="55953" end="55965" title="Nuclear weapon" label="nuclear bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q221329" start="56362" end="56370" title="avionics" label="avionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705284" start="56535" end="56558" title="flight control surfaces" label="flight control surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q826939" start="56567" end="56574" title="Canard (aeronautics)" label="canards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534008" start="56584" end="56589" title="Leading edge slats" label="slats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928621" start="56595" end="56605" title="blown flap" label="blown flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193453" start="56652" end="56686" title="V/STOL" label="vertical/short takeoff and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q743135" start="56692" end="56708" title="thrust vectoring" label="thrust vectoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q725313" start="56736" end="56743" title="Hawker Siddeley Harrier" label="Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q849203" start="57259" end="57285" title="electronic countermeasures" label="electronic countermeasures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683725" start="57457" end="57477" title="loss exchange ratio" label="loss-exchange ratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187624" start="57579" end="57597" title="United States Navy Fighter Weapons School" label="&amp;quot;TOPGUN&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282777" start="57740" end="57770" title="Dissimilar air combat training" label="Dissimilar air combat training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265545" start="58003" end="58028" title="Terrain-following radar" label="terrain-avoidance systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049158" start="58030" end="58052" title="Air-to-surface missile" label="Air-to-surface missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q292553" start="58160" end="58175" title="AGM-65 Maverick" label="AGM-65 Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="58207" end="58224" title="laser-guided bomb" label="laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q32050" start="58324" end="58349" title="precision-guided munition" label="precision-guided munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q836383" start="58392" end="58406" title="targeting pods" label="targeting pods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059048" start="58539" end="58549" title="Chain gun" label="chain-guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q725972" start="58685" end="58691" title="M61 Vulcan" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q332809" start="58921" end="58941" title="A-6 Intruder" label="Grumman A-6 Intruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q223237" start="58943" end="58957" title="SEPECAT Jaguar" label="SEPECAT Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q248224" start="58962" end="58980" title="A-7 Corsair II" label="LTV A-7 Corsair II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992500" start="59089" end="59106" title="variable-geometry" label="variable-geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q270990" start="59129" end="59134" title="General Dynamics F-111" label="F-111"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574100" start="59150" end="59174" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney TF30" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney TF30"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="59420" end="59441" title="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II" label="McDonnell F-4 Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="59507" end="59530" title="night fighter" label="all-weather interceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="59653" end="59665" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q220759" start="59925" end="59939" title="B-24 Liberator" label="B-24 Liberator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377230" start="60260" end="60295" title="Energy-Maneuverability theory" label="Energy-Maneuverability (E-M) theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080407" start="60317" end="60326" title="John Boyd (military strategist)" label="John Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698567" start="60510" end="60534" title="aircraft-specific energy" label="aircraft-specific energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007835" start="60739" end="60748" title="OODA loop" label="OODA loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="61056" end="61084" title="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle" label="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="61208" end="61219" title="Lift (force)" label="higher-lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="61256" end="61260" title="Drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q904824" start="61278" end="61300" title="thrust-to-weight ratio" label="thrust-to-weight ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q887216" start="61339" end="61351" title="wing loading" label="wing loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050040" start="61576" end="61589" title="Fighter mafia" label="Fighter mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="61616" end="61653" title="General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon" label="General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="61659" end="61674" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056861" start="61806" end="61830" title="relaxed static stability" label="relaxed static stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481471" start="61915" end="61936" title="Aircraft flight control systems" label="flight-control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q599977" start="62222" end="62260" title="FADEC" label="Full Authority Digital Engine Controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154115" start="62341" end="62365" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney F100" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney F100"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="62532" end="62541" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029151" start="62753" end="62766" title="Pulse-Doppler radar" label="pulse-Doppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028695" start="62767" end="62785" title="fire-control radar" label="fire-control radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413386" start="62806" end="62826" title="look-down/shoot-down" label="look-down/shoot-down"/>
<link wikidata="Q518461" start="62846" end="62861" title="head-up display" label="head-up display"/>
<link wikidata="Q633320" start="62870" end="62909" title="HOTAS" label="&amp;quot;hands on throttle-and-stick&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728534" start="62932" end="62954" title="multi-function display" label="multi-function display"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="63029" end="63047" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934298" start="63064" end="63089" title="Composite honeycomb" label="bonded-aluminum honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="63114" end="63128" title="Carbon fiber reinforced plastic" label="graphite epoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q384943" start="63129" end="63137" title="laminate" label="laminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319665" start="63162" end="63187" title="Infra-red search and track" label="Infrared search-and-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133809" start="63511" end="63530" title="Active radar homing" label="active-radar-homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q293772" start="63563" end="63577" title="AIM-54 Phoenix" label="AIM-54 Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q34945" start="63605" end="63624" title="F-14 Tomcat" label="Grumman F-14 Tomcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141362" start="64112" end="64120" title="man-hour" label="man-hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021159" start="64451" end="64466" title="Camber (aerodynamics)" label="variable-camber"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017635" start="64497" end="64515" title="Vortex lift" label="vortex lift effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q370906" start="64534" end="64550" title="Angle of attack" label="angles of attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783416" start="64575" end="64597" title="Leading edge extension" label="leading-edge extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858187" start="64614" end="64621" title="Strake (aviation)" label="strakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150050" start="64766" end="64780" title="Mikoyan MiG-31" label="Mikoyan MiG-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="64785" end="64804" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Panavia Tornado ADV"/>
<link wikidata="Q173680" start="65128" end="65133" title="Su-27" label="Su-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q850403" start="65185" end="65203" title="multi-role fighter" label="multi-role fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q130681" start="65227" end="65233" title="MiG-29" label="MiG-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q46397" start="65283" end="65314" title="McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet" label="McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q175940" start="65316" end="65325" title="HAL Tejas" label="HAL Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q744253" start="65327" end="65332" title="JF-17" label="JF-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q200038" start="65337" end="65357" title="Dassault Mirage 2000" label="Dassault Mirage 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="65686" end="65701" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Panavia Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="65788" end="65810" title="ground-attack aircraft" label="ground-attack aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q192137" start="65823" end="65835" title="Sukhoi Su-25" label="Sukhoi Su-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q192443" start="65844" end="65863" title="Fairchild-Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II" label="A-10 Thunderbolt II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="65876" end="65888" title="US Air Force" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q45364" start="65897" end="65901" title="Wing (military aviation unit)" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="65959" end="65967" title="squadron (aviation)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q339042" start="66134" end="66141" title="Stealth technology" label="stealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q753283" start="66372" end="66388" title="stealth aircraft" label="stealth aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q184491" start="66409" end="66433" title="Lockheed F-117 Nighthawk" label="Lockheed F-117 Nighthawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q180285" start="66479" end="66506" title="Northrop Grumman B-2 Spirit" label="Northrop Grumman B-2 Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="66827" end="66835" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456716" start="66920" end="66934" title="peace dividend" label="peace dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="67612" end="67621" title="Integrated circuit" label="microchip"/>
<link wikidata="Q175805" start="67626" end="67639" title="Semiconductor device" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140666" start="68346" end="68361" title="Network-centric warfare" label="network-centric"/>
<link wikidata="Q853311" start="68476" end="68495" title="Beyond Visual Range missile" label="beyond-visual-range"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="68508" end="68533" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="68556" end="68567" title="Solid state (electronics)" label="solid-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q727898" start="68568" end="68580" title="Phased array" label="phased-array"/>
<link wikidata="Q939130" start="68589" end="68610" title="Helmet mounted display" label="helmet-mounted sights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172466" start="68651" end="68660" title="Data link" label="datalinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068387" start="68869" end="68880" title="supercruise" label="supercruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q560430" start="68960" end="68979" title="radar cross section" label="radar cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657921" start="69027" end="69052" title="Radar absorbent material" label="radar-absorbent materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="69599" end="69622" title="Carbon fiber" label="carbon-fiber composites"/>
<link wikidata="Q151384" start="69636" end="69655" title="Eurofighter Typhoon" label="Eurofighter Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190973" start="69657" end="69672" title="Dassault Rafale" label="Dassault Rafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q150088" start="69674" end="69692" title="Saab JAS 39 Gripen" label="Saab JAS 39 Gripen"/>
<link wikidata="Q744253" start="69694" end="69707" title="JF-17 Thunder" label="JF-17 Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q175940" start="69713" end="69730" title="HAL Tejas" label="HAL Tejas Mark 1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q223318" start="69967" end="69996" title="Boeing F/A-18E/F Super Hornet" label="Boeing F/A-18E/F Super Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q46397" start="70027" end="70040" title="F/A-18 Hornet" label="F/A-18 Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q844500" start="70046" end="70064" title="F-15E Strike Eagle" label="F-15E Strike Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="70117" end="70127" title="F-15 Eagle" label="F-15 Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q204331" start="70133" end="70140" title="Sukhoi Su-30" label="Su-30SM"/>
<link wikidata="Q245275" start="70145" end="70151" title="Sukhoi Su-35" label="Su-35S"/>
<link wikidata="Q173680" start="70177" end="70189" title="Sukhoi Su-27" label="Sukhoi Su-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q220529" start="70199" end="70205" title="Mikoyan MiG-35" label="MiG-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q130681" start="70230" end="70244" title="Mikoyan MiG-29" label="Mikoyan MiG-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q743135" start="70284" end="70300" title="thrust vectoring" label="thrust vectoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q164400" start="71634" end="71638" title="Active electronically scanned array" label="AESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="71651" end="71665" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="high-bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319665" start="71738" end="71764" title="infra-red search and track" label="infra-red search and track"/>
<link wikidata="Q221329" start="72113" end="72121" title="avionics" label="avionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15038173" start="72123" end="72136" title="glass cockpit" label="glass cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q456962" start="72301" end="72312" title="data fusion" label="data fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q478123" start="72333" end="72354" title="situational awareness" label="situational awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143384" start="72436" end="72470" title="VHSIC" label="very high-speed integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="72522" end="72532" title="Bus (computing)" label="data buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q560430" start="72752" end="72771" title="radar cross-section" label="radar cross-section"/>
<link wikidata="Q868477" start="73492" end="73501" title="Thermosetting plastic" label="thermoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q380677" start="73506" end="73519" title="Thermoplastics" label="thermoplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q753527" start="73742" end="73756" title="Northrop YF-23" label="Northrop YF-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657921" start="73810" end="73845" title="Radar absorbent material" label="radar-absorbent materials and paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q161341" start="74180" end="74185" title="Airborne early warning and control" label="AWACS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327258" start="74213" end="74240" title="Electronic warfare support measures" label="electronic support measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q272826" start="74251" end="74269" title="electronic warfare" label="electronic warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="74592" end="74622" title="Fiber-optic communication" label="fiber optics data transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q339042" start="74624" end="74642" title="stealth technology" label="stealth technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q133324" start="75098" end="75132" title="F-22 Raptor" label="Lockheed Martin/Boeing F-22 Raptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463273" start="75261" end="75273" title="flyaway cost" label="flyaway cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q202568" start="75380" end="75400" title="Joint Strike Fighter" label="Joint Strike Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="75550" end="75583" title="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II" label="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II"/>
<link wikidata="Q856797" start="75709" end="75742" title="CTOL" label="conventional take-off and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q427062" start="75761" end="75796" title="STOVL" label="short take-off and vertical landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q856042" start="75820" end="75868" title="CATOBAR" label="Catapult Assisted Take Off But Arrested Recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641034" start="76023" end="76030" title="Payload (air and space craft)" label="payload"/>
<link wikidata="Q560319" start="76199" end="76211" title="Chengdu J-20" label="Chengdu J-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q762551" start="76266" end="76279" title="Shenyang J-35" label="Shenyang J-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136226" start="76397" end="76424" title="United Aircraft Corporation" label="United Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124591" start="76444" end="76456" title="Mikoyan LMFS" label="Mikoyan LMFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q107594447" start="76461" end="76483" title="Sukhoi Su-75 Checkmate" label="Sukhoi Su-75 Checkmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q194455" start="76490" end="76502" title="Sukhoi Su-57" label="Sukhoi Su-57"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="76631" end="76650" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451017" start="76767" end="76798" title="Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft" label="Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q31840575" start="77540" end="77570" title="New Generation Fighter" label="joint sixth-generation fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q190973" start="77605" end="77620" title="Dassault Rafale" label="Dassault Rafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q151384" start="77623" end="77642" title="Eurofighter Typhoon" label="Eurofighter Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="77649" end="77664" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Panavia Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q460487" start="77733" end="77741" title="Dassault Aviation" label="Dassault"/>
<link wikidata="Q15529123" start="77746" end="77752" title="Airbus Defence and Space" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886126" start="77812" end="77818" title="Safran" label="Safran"/>
<link wikidata="Q128929" start="77823" end="77839" title="MTU Aero Engines" label="MTU Aero Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161666" start="77841" end="77847" title="Thales Group" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475070" start="77852" end="77856" title="MBDA" label="MBDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636675" start="78167" end="78195" title="sixth-generation jet fighter" label="sixth-generation jet fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="78232" end="78250" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223318" start="78442" end="78464" title="F/A-18E/F Super Hornet" label="F/A-18E/F Super Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q107087764" start="78493" end="78522" title="Next Generation Air Dominance" label="Next Generation Air Dominance"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="78689" end="78700" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q243278" start="78702" end="78713" title="Rolls-Royce Holdings" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q910379" start="78715" end="78730" title="Leonardo S.p.A." label="Leonardo S.p.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1475070" start="78735" end="78739" title="MBDA" label="MBDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="79561" end="79578" title="autocannons" label="automatic cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q971822" start="80638" end="80653" title="revolver cannon" label="revolver cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966482" start="80658" end="80671" title="rotary cannon" label="rotary cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q725972" start="80700" end="80710" title="M61 Vulcan" label="M61 Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q243249" start="82292" end="82310" title="air-to-air missile" label="air-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q235396" start="82591" end="82607" title="AIM-9 Sidewinder" label="AIM-9 Sidewinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="82680" end="82698" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728345" start="82902" end="82912" title="all-aspect" label="all-aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366032" start="83708" end="83723" title="infrared homing" label="infrared homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q293765" start="83841" end="83853" title="AIM-4 Falcon" label="AIM-4 Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="84172" end="84183" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="84310" end="84324" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="84582" end="84595" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="84764" end="84777" title="Gulf War" label="1991 Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335090" start="84821" end="84837" title="missile guidance" label="missile guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187984" start="84877" end="84901" title="semi-active radar homing" label="semi-active radar homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q293810" start="85214" end="85227" title="AIM-7 Sparrow" label="AIM-7 Sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133809" start="85327" end="85346" title="active radar homing" label="active radar homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q293743" start="85704" end="85718" title="AIM-120 AMRAAM" label="AIM-120 AMRAAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q293810" start="86374" end="86387" title="AIM-7 Sparrow" label="AIM-7 Sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147665" start="88515" end="88529" title="Meteor (missile)" label="Meteor missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668553" start="88543" end="88548" title="R-37 (missile)" label="R-37M"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752665" start="88566" end="88571" title="PL-15" label="PL-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190721" start="89459" end="89483" title="List of fighter aircraft" label="List of fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q123488492" start="89486" end="89524" title="List of United States fighter aircraft" label="List of United States fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q352409" start="89527" end="89534" title="Warbird" label="Warbird"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10930" wikidata="Q2356" url="?curid=10930" title="February 25">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*138 – Roman emperor Hadrian adopts Antoninus Pius as his son, effectively making him his successor.
* 628 – Khosrow II, the last great Shah of the Sasanian Empire (Iran), is overthrown by his son Kavadh II.
*1336 – Four thousand defenders of Pilenai commit mass suicide rather than be taken captive by the Teutonic Knights.

===1601–1900===
*1705 – George Frideric Handel&#x27;s opera &quot;Nero&quot; premiered in Hamburg.
*1836 – Samuel Colt is granted a United States patent for his revolver firearm.
*1843 – Lord George Paulet occupies the Kingdom of Hawaii in the name of Great Britain in the Paulet affair.
*1870 – Hiram Rhodes Revels, a Republican from Mississippi, is sworn into the United States Senate, becoming the first African American ever to sit in Congress.
*1875 – Guangxu Emperor of Qing dynasty China begins his reign, under Empress Dowager Cixi&#x27;s regency.

===1901–present===
*1912 – Marie-Adélaïde, the eldest of six daughters of Guillaume IV, becomes the first reigning Grand Duchess of Luxembourg.
*1916 – World War I: In the Battle of Verdun, a German unit captures Fort Douaumont, keystone of the French defences, without a fight.
*1918 – World War I: German forces capture Tallinn to virtually complete the occupation of Estonia.
*1921 – Georgian capital Tbilisi falls to the invading Russian forces after heavy fighting and the Russians declare the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic.
*1932 – Adolf Hitler, having been stateless for seven years, obtains German citizenship when he is appointed a Brunswick state official by Dietrich Klagges, a fellow Nazi. As a result, Hitler is able to run for Reichspräsident in the 1932 election.
*1933 – Launch of the at Newport News, Virginia. It is the first purpose-built aircraft carrier to be commissioned by the US Navy.
*1939 – As part of British air raid precautions, the first of 2.5 million Anderson shelters is constructed in a garden in Islington, north London.
*1941 – The outlawed Communist Party of the Netherlands organises a general strike in German-occupied Amsterdam to protest against Nazi persecution of Dutch Jews.
*1947 – The formal abolition of Prussia is proclaimed by the Allied Control Council, the Prussian government having already been abolished by the &quot;Preußenschlag&quot; of 1932.
* 1947 – Soviet NKVD forces in Hungary abduct Béla Kovács—secretary-general of the majority Independent Smallholders&#x27; Party—and deport him to the USSR in defiance of Parliament. His arrest is an important turning point in the Communist takeover of Hungary.
*1948 – In a coup d&#x27;état led by Klement Gottwald, the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia takes control of government in Prague to end the Third Czechoslovak Republic.
*1951 – The first Pan American Games are officially opened in Buenos Aires by Argentine President Juan Perón.
*1956 – In his speech &quot;On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences&quot;, Nikita Khrushchev, leader of the Soviet Union, denounces Stalin.
*1980 – The government of Suriname is overthrown by a military coup led by Dési Bouterse.
*1986 – People Power Revolution: President of the Philippines Ferdinand Marcos flees the nation after 20 years of rule; Corazon Aquino becomes the Philippines&#x27; first female president.
*1991 – Disbandment of the Warsaw Pact at a meeting of its members in Budapest.
*1994 – American-Israeli extremist Baruch Goldstein commits a mass shooting at the Cave of the Patriarchs mausoleum, leaving 29 dead and over 100 injured before he was disarmed and beaten to death by survivors.
*1999 – Alitalia Flight 1553 crashes at Genoa Cristoforo Colombo Airport in Genoa, Italy, killing four.
*2009 – Soldiers of the Bangladesh Rifles mutiny at their headquarters in Pilkhana, Dhaka, Bangladesh, resulting in 74 deaths, including 57 army officials.
*2009 – Turkish Airlines Flight 1951 crashed during landing at the Amsterdam Schiphol Airport, Netherlands, primarily due to a faulty radio altimeter, resulting in the death of nine passengers and crew including all three pilots.
*2015 – At least 310 people are killed in avalanches in northeastern Afghanistan.
*2016 – Three people are killed and fourteen others injured in a series of shootings in the small Kansas cities of Newton and Hesston.

==Births==

===Pre-1600===
*1259 – Infanta Branca of Portugal, daughter of King Afonso III of Portugal and Urraca of Castile (d. 1321)
*1337 – Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg (d. 1383)
*1475 – Edward Plantagenet, 17th Earl of Warwick, last male member of the House of York (d. 1499)
*1540 – Henry Howard, 1st Earl of Northampton, English aristocrat and courtier (d. 1614)
*1543 – Sharaf Khan Bidlisi, Emir of Bitlis (d. 1603)
*1591 – Friedrich Spee, German poet and author (d. 1635)

===1601–1900===
*1643 – Ahmed II, Ottoman sultan (d. 1695) 
*1663 – Peter Anthony Motteux, French-English author, playwright and translator (d. 1718)
*1670 – Maria Margarethe Kirch, German astronomer and mathematician (d. 1720)
*1682 – Giovanni Battista Morgagni, Italian anatomist and pathologist (d. 1771)
*1707 – Carlo Goldoni, Italian playwright and composer (d. 1793)
*1714 – René Nicolas Charles Augustin de Maupeou, French lawyer and politician, Lord Chancellor of France (d. 1792)
*1728 – John Wood, the Younger, English architect, designed the Royal Crescent (d. 1782)
*1752 – John Graves Simcoe, English-Canadian general and politician, 1st Lieutenant Governor of Upper Canada (d. 1806)
*1755 – François René Mallarmé, French lawyer and politician (d. 1835)
*1778 – José de San Martín, Argentinian general and politician, 1st President of Peru (d. 1850)
*1806 – Emma Catherine Embury, American author and poet (d. 1863)
*1809 – John Hart, English-Australian politician, 10th Premier of South Australia (d. 1873)
*1812 – Carl Christian Hall, Danish lawyer and politician, 6th Prime Minister of Denmark (d. 1888)
*1816 – Giovanni Morelli, Italian historian and critic (d. 1891)
*1833 – John St. John, American lawyer and politician, 8th Governor of Kansas (d. 1916)
*1841 – Pierre-Auguste Renoir, French painter and sculptor (d. 1919)
*1842 – Karl May, German author, poet, and playwright (d. 1912)
*1845 – George Reid, Scottish-Australian lawyer and politician, 4th Prime Minister of Australia (d. 1918)
*1855 – Cesário Verde, Portuguese poet and author (d. 1886)
*1856 – Karl Gotthard Lamprecht, German historian and academic (d. 1915)
* 1856 – Mathias Zdarsky, Czech-Austrian skier, painter, and sculptor (d. 1940)
*1857 – Robert Bond, Canadian politician; first Prime Minister of Newfoundland (d. 1927)
*1860 – William Ashley, English historian and academic (d. 1927)
*1865 – Andranik, Armenian general (d. 1927)
*1866 – Benedetto Croce, Italian philosopher and politician (d. 1952)
*1869 – Phoebus Levene, Russian-American biochemist and physician (d. 1940)
*1871 – Lesya Ukrainka, Ukrainian poet and playwright (d.1913)
*1873 – Enrico Caruso, Italian-American tenor; the most popular operatic tenor of the early 20th century and the first great recording star. (d. 1921)
*1877 – Erich von Hornbostel, Austrian musicologist and scholar (d. 1935)
*1881 – William Z. Foster, American union leader and politician (d. 1961)
* 1881 – Alexei Rykov, Russian politician, Premier of Russia (d. 1938)
*1883 – Princess Alice, Countess of Athlone (d. 1981)
*1885 – Princess Alice of Battenberg, mother of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh (d. 1969)
*1888 – John Foster Dulles, American soldier, lawyer, and politician, 52nd United States Secretary of State (d. 1959)
*1890 – Myra Hess, English pianist and educator (d. 1965)
*1894 – Meher Baba, Indian spiritual master (d. 1969)
*1896 – Ida Noddack, German chemist and physicist (d. 1978)
*1898 – William Astbury, physicist and molecular biologist (d. 1961)

===1901–present===
*1901 – Vince Gair, Australian politician, 27th Premier of Queensland (d. 1980)
* 1901 – Zeppo Marx, American comedian and theatrical agent (d. 1979)
*1903 – King Clancy, Canadian ice hockey player, referee, and coach (d. 1986)
*1905 – Perry Miller, American historian, author, and academic (d. 1963)
*1906 – Mary Coyle Chase, American journalist and playwright (d. 1981)
*1907 – Sabahattin Ali, Turkish journalist, author, and poet (d. 1948)
*1908 – Mary Locke Petermann, American cellular biochemist (d. 1975)
* 1908 – Frank G. Slaughter, American physician and author (d. 2001)
*1910 – Millicent Fenwick, American journalist and politician (d. 1992)
*1913 – Jim Backus, American actor and screenwriter (d. 1989)
* 1913 – Gert Fröbe, German actor (d. 1988)
*1915 – S. Rajaratnam, Singaporean politician, 1st Senior Minister of Singapore (d. 2006)
*1917 – Anthony Burgess, English author, playwright, and critic (d. 1993)
*1918 – Bobby Riggs, American tennis player (d. 1995)
*1919 – Monte Irvin, American baseball player and executive (d. 2016)
*1920 – Philip Habib, American academic and diplomat, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (d. 1992)
*1921 – Pierre Laporte, Canadian journalist, lawyer, and politician, Deputy Premier of Quebec (d. 1970)
* 1921 – Andy Pafko, American baseball player and manager (d. 2013)
*1922 – Molly Reilly, Canadian aviator (d. 1980)
*1924 – Hugh Huxley, English-American biologist and academic (d. 2013)
*1925 – Lisa Kirk, American actress and singer (d. 1990)
* 1925 – Shehu Shagari, Nigerian politician, 6th President of Nigeria (d. 2018)
*1926 – Masatoshi Gündüz Ikeda, Japanese-Turkish mathematician and academic (d. 2003)
*1927 – Ralph Stanley, American singer and banjo player (d. 2016)
*1928 – Paul Elvstrøm, Danish yachtsman (d. 2016)
* 1928 – Larry Gelbart, American author and screenwriter (d. 2009)
* 1928 – A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr., American civil rights advocate, historian, and judge (d. 1998)
* 1928 – Richard G. Stern, American author and academic (d. 2013)
*1930 – Wendy Beckett, British nun and art critic (d. 2018)
*1932 – Tony Brooks, English racing driver (d. 2022)
* 1932 – Faron Young, American country music singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1996) 
*1934 – Tony Lema, American golfer (d. 1966)
*1935 – Tony Campolo, American sociologist and pastor (d. 2024)
*1935 – Oktay Sinanoglu, Turkish physical chemist and molecular biophysicist (d. 2015) 
*1937 – Tom Courtenay, English actor
* 1937 – Bob Schieffer, American political author, journalist and TV interviewer
*1938 – Diane Baker, American actress and producer
* 1938 – Herb Elliott, Australian athlete
* 1938 – Farokh Engineer, Indian cricketer
*1940 – Ron Santo, American baseball player and sportscaster (d. 2010)
*1941 – David Puttnam, English film producer and academic
*1942 – Karen Grassle, American actress
*1943 – George Harrison, English singer-songwriter, guitarist and film producer (d. 2001)
*1944 – François Cevert, French racing driver (d. 1973)
*1946 – Jean Todt, French racing driver and team manager
*1947 – Lee Evans, American sprinter and athletics coach (d. 2021)
*1949 – Ric Flair, American professional wrestler
* 1949 – Amin Maalouf, Lebanese-French journalist and author
*1950 – Francisco Fernández Ochoa, Spanish skier (d. 2006)
* 1950 – Neil Jordan, Irish film director, screenwriter and author
* 1950 – Néstor Kirchner, Argentine politician; 51st President of Argentina (d. 2010)
*1951 – Don Quarrie, Jamaican sprinter and coach
*1952 – Joey Dunlop, Northern Irish motorcyclist (d. 2000)
*1953 – José María Aznar, Spanish politician; Prime Minister of Spain, 1996–2004
* 1953 – John Doe, American musician, singer-songwriter, actor, and poet
*1957 – Raymond McCreesh, Irish Republican, hunger striker (d. 1981)
*1957 – Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Singaporean economist and politician; 5th Senior Minister and 9th President of Singapore
*1958 – Kurt Rambis, Greek-American basketball player, coach, and executive
*1962 – Birgit Fischer, German kayaker
*1963 – Paul O&#x27;Neill, American baseball player and sportscaster
*1965 – Carrot Top, American comedian
* 1965 – Veronica Webb, American model, actress, and writer
*1966 – Alexis Denisof, American actor
* 1966 – Téa Leoni, American actress
*1967 – Ed Balls, English politician; Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer
*1968 – Lesley Boone, American actress and producer
* 1968 – Oumou Sangaré, Malian musician
*1971 – Sean Astin, American actor, director and producer
* 1971 – Daniel Powter, Canadian singer-songwriter and musician
*1973 – Anson Mount, American actor
*1974 – Dominic Raab, English politician; First Secretary of State and Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
*1975 – Chelsea Handler, American comedian, actress, author, and television host
*1976 – Rashida Jones, American actress and writer
* 1976 – Samaki Walker, American basketball player
*1979 – Napoleon Harris, American football player and politician
*1980 – Kash Patel, American lawyer, former federal prosecutor and official
*1981 – Park Ji-sung, South Korean footballer
*1982 – Maria Kanellis, American professional wrestler, actress, and model
* 1982 – Flavia Pennetta, Italian tennis player
* 1982 – Anton Volchenkov, Russian ice hockey player
*1985 – Joakim Noah, French-American basketball player
*1986 – Justin Berfield, American actor, writer, and producer
* 1986 – Jameela Jamil, English actress and presenter
* 1986 – James Phelps, English actor
* 1986 – Oliver Phelps, English actor
*1987 – Justin Abdelkader, American ice hockey player
*1988 – Tom Marshall, English photo colouriser and artist
* 1988 – Gerald McCoy, American football player
*1989 – Jimmer Fredette, American basketball player
* 1989 – Kana Hanazawa, Japanese voice actress and singer
* 1989 – E&#x27;Twaun Moore, American basketball player
*1990 – Félix Peña, Dominican baseball player
*1992 – Joakim Nordström, Swedish ice hockey player
* 1992 – Jorge Soler, Cuban baseball player
*1993 – Erick Fedde, American baseball player
* 1993 – Lukáš Sedlák, Czech ice hockey player
*1994 – Fred VanVleet, American basketball player
*1995 – Mario Hezonja, Croatian basketball player
* 1995 – Viktoriya Tomova, Bulgarian tennis player
*1997 – Isabelle Fuhrman, American actress
* 1997 – Thon Maker, South Sudanese-Australian basketball player
*1999 – Gianluigi Donnarumma, Italian footballer
* 1999 – Rocky, South Korean singer, dancer and songwriter
*2000 – Bo Nix, American football player
*2001 – Vernon Carey Jr., American basketball player
*2003 – Brandin Podziemski, American basketball player
*2005 – Noah Jupe, English actor
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 806 – Tarasios, patriarch of Constantinople
* 891 – Fujiwara no Mototsune, Japanese regent (b. 836)
* 1099 – Anselm of Ribemont, Frankish nobleman and participant of the First Crusade
*1522 – William Lily, English scholar and educator (b. 1468)
*1536 – Berchtold Haller, German-Swiss theologian and reformer (b. 1492)
*1547 – Vittoria Colonna, marchioness of Pescara (b. 1490)

===1601–1900===
*1601 – Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, English general and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (b. 1566)
*1634 – Albrecht von Wallenstein, Austrian general and politician (b. 1583)
*1636 – Santorio Santorio, Italian biologist (b. 1561)
*1655 – Daniël Heinsius, Flemish poet and scholar (b. 1580)
*1682 – Alessandro Stradella, Italian composer (b. 1639)
*1710 – Daniel Greysolon, Sieur du Lhut, French soldier and explorer (b. 1639)
*1713 – Frederick I of Prussia (b. 1657)
*1723 – Christopher Wren, English architect, designed St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral (b. 1632)
*1756 – Eliza Haywood, English actress and poet (b. 1693)
*1796 – Samuel Seabury, American bishop (b. 1729)
*1805 – Thomas Pownall, English politician, Governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay (b. 1722)
*1819 – Francisco Manoel de Nascimento, Portuguese-French poet and educator (b. 1734)
*1822 – William Pinkney, American politician and diplomat, 7th United States Attorney General (b. 1764)
*1841 – Philip P. Barbour, American lawyer, judge, and politician, 12th Speaker of the United States House of Representatives (b. 1783)
*1850 – Daoguang Emperor of China (b. 1782)
*1852 – Thomas Moore, Irish poet and lyricist (b. 1779)
*1865 – Otto Ludwig, German author, playwright, and critic (b. 1813)
*1870 – Henrik Hertz, Danish poet and playwright (b. 1797)
*1877 – Jung Bahadur Rana, Nepalese ruler (b. 1816)
*1878 – Townsend Harris, American merchant, politician, and diplomat, United States Ambassador to Japan (b. 1804)
*1899 – Paul Reuter, German-English journalist and businessman, founded Reuters (b. 1816)

===1901–present===
*1906 – Anton Arensky, Russian pianist and composer (b. 1861)
*1910 – Worthington Whittredge, American painter and educator (b. 1820)
*1911 – Friedrich Spielhagen, German author, theorist, and translator (b. 1829)
*1912 – William IV, Grand Duke of Luxembourg (b. 1852)
*1914 – John Tenniel, English illustrator (b. 1820)
*1915 – Charles Edwin Bessey, American botanist, author, and academic (b. 1845)
*1920 – Marcel-Auguste Dieulafoy, French archaeologist and engineer (b. 1844)
*1928 – William O&#x27;Brien, Irish journalist and politician (b. 1852)
*1934 – Elizabeth Gertrude Britton, American botanist and academic (b. 1857)
* 1934 – John McGraw, American baseball player and manager (b. 1873)
*1945 – Mário de Andrade, Brazilian author, poet, and photographer (b. 1893)
*1950 – George Minot, American physician and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1885)
*1953 – Sergei Winogradsky, Ukrainian-Russian microbiologist and ecologist (b. 1856)
*1954 – Joseph Beech, American Methodist missionary and educator (b. 1867)
*1957 – Mark Aldanov, Russian author and critic (b. 1888)
* 1957 – Bugs Moran, American mob boss (b. 1893)
*1963 – Melville J. Herskovits, American anthropologist and academic (b. 1895)
*1964 – Alexander Archipenko, Ukrainian sculptor and illustrator (b. 1887)
* 1964 – Grace Metalious, American author (b. 1924)
*1970 – Mark Rothko, Latvian-American painter and academic (b. 1903)
*1971 – Theodor Svedberg, Swedish chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1884)
*1972 – Gottfried Fuchs, German-Canadian Olympic soccer player (b. 1889)
*1975 – Elijah Muhammad, American religious leader (b. 1897)
*1978 – Daniel James, Jr., American general and pilot (b. 1920)
*1980 – Robert Hayden, American poet and academic (b. 1913)
*1983 – Tennessee Williams, American playwright, and poet (b. 1911)
*1996 – Haing S. Ngor, Cambodian-American physician and author (b. 1940)
*1997 – Andrei Sinyavsky, Russian journalist and publisher (b. 1925)
*1998 – W. O. Mitchell, Canadian author and playwright (b. 1914)
*1999 – Glenn T. Seaborg, American chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1912)
*2001 – A. R. Ammons, American poet and critic (b. 1926)
* 2001 – Don Bradman, Australian international cricketer; holder of world record batting average (b. 1908)
*2005 – Peter Benenson, English lawyer, founded Amnesty International (b. 1921)
*2008 – Hans Raj Khanna, Indian judge and advocate; upholder of civil liberties (b. 1912) 
*2010 – Ihsan Dogramaci, Turkish pediatrician and academic (b. 1915)
*2012 – Louisiana Red, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1932)
*2015 – Harve Bennett, American screenwriter and producer (b. 1930)
*2015 – Ariel Camacho, Mexican musician and singer-songwriter; (b. 1992)
*2015 – Eugenie Clark, American biologist and academic; noted ichthyologist (b. 1922)
*2017 – Bill Paxton, American actor and filmmaker (b. 1955)
*2020 – Dmitry Yazov, last Marshal of the Soviet Union (b. 1924)
*2022 – Farrah Forke, American actress (b. 1968)
* 2022 – Shirley Hughes, English author and illustrator (b. 1927)
*2023 – Gordon Pinsent, Canadian actor, director and screenwriter (b. 1930)
*2025 – Henry Kelly, Irish radio and television broadcaster, actor and journalist (b. 1947)
*2025 – Roberto Orci, Mexican-American screenwriter and producer (b. 1973)

==Holidays and observances==
*Christian feast days:
**Æthelberht of Kent
**Blessed Ciriaco María Sancha y Hervás
**Gerland of Agrigento
**John Roberts, writer and missionary (Anglican Communion)
**Hamburg &quot;Matthiae-mahl&quot;, feast of Hanseatic League cities on the mediaeval first day of spring
**Blessed Maria Adeodata Pisani
**Blessed Robert of Arbrissel, founder of Fontevraud Abbey
**Saint Walpurga (she was canonised on 1 May c. 870 and Walpurgis Night is celebrated 30 April)
**February 25 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*&quot;Kitano Baika-sai&quot; or &quot;Plum Blossom Festival&quot; (Kitano Tenman-gu Shrine, Kyoto, Japan)
*Memorial Day for the Victims of the Communist Dictatorships (Hungary)
*National Day (Kuwait)
*People Power Day (Philippines)
*Revolution Day in Suriname
*Soviet Occupation Day (Georgia)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30652" start="27" end="30" title="AD 138" label="138"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="33" end="46" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="47" end="54" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="62" end="76" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592" start="129" end="132" title="628" label="628"/>
<link wikidata="Q212732" start="135" end="145" title="Khosrow II" label="Khosrow II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="174" end="189" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q315873" start="223" end="232" title="Kavadh II" label="Kavadh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028" start="235" end="239" title="1336" label="1336"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194564" start="269" end="276" title="Pilenai" label="Pilenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q142824" start="284" end="296" title="mass suicide" label="mass suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="333" end="349" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830" start="369" end="373" title="1705" label="1705"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="376" end="398" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="418" end="422" title="Handel&amp;#x27;s lost Hamburg operas#Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="442" end="449" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601" start="452" end="456" title="1836" label="1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q183246" start="459" end="470" title="Samuel Colt" label="Samuel Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="498" end="504" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="513" end="521" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629" start="532" end="536" title="1843" label="1843"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063481" start="539" end="557" title="Lord George Paulet" label="Lord George Paulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="571" end="588" title="Kingdom of Hawaii" label="Kingdom of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154829" start="625" end="638" title="Paulet affair" label="Paulet affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741" start="641" end="645" title="1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q719200" start="648" end="667" title="Hiram Rhodes Revels" label="Hiram Rhodes Revels"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="671" end="681" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="687" end="698" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="718" end="738" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="759" end="775" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="791" end="799" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764" start="802" end="806" title="1875" label="1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q299710" start="809" end="824" title="Guangxu Emperor" label="Guangxu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="828" end="840" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="871" end="891" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Empress Dowager Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="929" end="933" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q159075" start="936" end="950" title="Marie-Adélaïde, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg" label="Marie-Adélaïde"/>
<link wikidata="Q158235" start="983" end="995" title="Guillaume IV, Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="Guillaume IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276071" start="1024" end="1037" title="Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="Grand Duchess"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="1041" end="1051" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="1054" end="1058" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1061" end="1072" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130847" start="1081" end="1097" title="Battle of Verdun" label="Battle of Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q186536" start="1122" end="1136" title="Fort Douaumont" label="Fort Douaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="1189" end="1193" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="1231" end="1238" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918340" start="1265" end="1286" title="German occupation of Estonia during World War I" label="occupation of Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="1289" end="1293" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q245160" start="1296" end="1304" title="Democratic Republic of Georgia" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="1313" end="1320" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q60963" start="1334" end="1357" title="Red Army invasion of Georgia" label="invading Russian forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q130229" start="1408" end="1442" title="Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="1445" end="1449" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1452" end="1464" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q223050" start="1478" end="1487" title="Statelessness" label="stateless"/>
<link wikidata="Q648297" start="1555" end="1564" title="Free State of Brunswick" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q96970" start="1583" end="1599" title="Dietrich Klagges" label="Dietrich Klagges"/>
<link wikidata="Q157740" start="1655" end="1670" title="President of Germany (1919–1945)" label="Reichspräsident"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="1694" end="1698" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="1718" end="1740" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="1772" end="1788" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1815" end="1822" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="1825" end="1829" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q448717" start="1843" end="1871" title="Air Raid Precautions" label="British air raid precautions"/>
<link wikidata="Q389959" start="1898" end="1915" title="Air raid shelter" label="Anderson shelters"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="1946" end="1955" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="1972" end="1976" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q385543" start="1992" end="2026" title="Communist Party of the Netherlands" label="Communist Party of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q586082" start="2039" end="2053" title="February strike" label="general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2073" end="2082" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099287" start="2122" end="2132" title="History of the Jews in the Netherlands" label="Dutch Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="2135" end="2139" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783342" start="2153" end="2173" title="abolition of Prussia" label="abolition of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="2195" end="2217" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q451046" start="2286" end="2299" title="Preußenschlag" label="Preußenschlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="2331" end="2335" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q940741" start="2346" end="2353" title="Second Hungarian Republic" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q766435" start="2361" end="2372" title="Béla Kovács (politician, 1908)" label="Béla Kovács"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006287" start="2407" end="2443" title="Independent Smallholders&amp;#x27; Party" label="Independent Smallholders&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q925418" start="2546" end="2555" title="Hungarian Communist Party" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="2578" end="2582" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137957" start="2590" end="2606" title="1948 Czechoslovak coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q296054" start="2614" end="2630" title="Klement Gottwald" label="Klement Gottwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="2636" end="2669" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="2701" end="2707" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454585" start="2719" end="2746" title="Third Czechoslovak Republic" label="Third Czechoslovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="2749" end="2753" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q230186" start="2766" end="2784" title="Pan American Games" label="Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="2810" end="2822" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="2846" end="2856" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="2859" end="2863" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165372" start="2886" end="2933" title="On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences" label="On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="2941" end="2958" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2974" end="2986" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="2998" end="3004" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="3007" end="3011" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="3032" end="3040" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q967981" start="3044" end="3073" title="1980 Surinamese coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="overthrown by a military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q57667" start="3081" end="3094" title="Dési Bouterse" label="Dési Bouterse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="3097" end="3101" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274389" start="3104" end="3127" title="People Power Revolution" label="People Power Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="3158" end="3174" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480" start="3216" end="3230" title="Corazon Aquino" label="Corazon Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3243" end="3254" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="3286" end="3290" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="3312" end="3323" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="3355" end="3363" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="3366" end="3370" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q380435" start="3400" end="3416" title="Baruch Goldstein" label="Baruch Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783157" start="3425" end="3440" title="Cave of the Patriarchs massacre" label="a mass shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q204200" start="3448" end="3470" title="Cave of the Patriarchs" label="Cave of the Patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="3577" end="3581" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q90500093" start="3584" end="3604" title="Minerva Airlines Flight 1553" label="Alitalia Flight 1553"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431383" start="3616" end="3648" title="Genoa Cristoforo Colombo Airport" label="Genoa Cristoforo Colombo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="3652" end="3657" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="3681" end="3685" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244404" start="3704" end="3721" title="Border Guard Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385882" start="3722" end="3728" title="Bangladesh Rifles revolt" label="mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194075" start="3754" end="3762" title="Pilkhana, Bangladesh" label="Pilkhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="3764" end="3769" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q862548" start="3844" end="3872" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 1951" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q9694" start="3903" end="3929" title="Amsterdam Airport Schiphol" label="Amsterdam Schiphol Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104030" start="3970" end="3985" title="Radar altimeter" label="radio altimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="4067" end="4071" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q19361002" start="4108" end="4118" title="2015 Afghanistan avalanches" label="avalanches"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="4135" end="4146" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="4149" end="4153" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q23012840" start="4211" end="4281" title="Hesston shootings" label="a series of shootings in the small Kansas cities of Newton and Hesston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="4312" end="4316" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755558" start="4319" end="4345" title="Blanche of Portugal (1259–1321)" label="Infanta Branca of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q295850" start="4364" end="4386" title="Afonso III of Portugal" label="Afonso III of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128701" start="4391" end="4408" title="Urraca of Castile" label="Urraca of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039" start="4420" end="4424" title="1337" label="1337"/>
<link wikidata="Q658785" start="4427" end="4459" title="Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg" label="Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608" start="4471" end="4475" title="1475" label="1475"/>
<link wikidata="Q725833" start="4478" end="4518" title="Edward Plantagenet, 17th Earl of Warwick" label="Edward Plantagenet, 17th Earl of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482" start="4569" end="4573" title="1540" label="1540"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697631" start="4576" end="4613" title="Henry Howard, 1st Earl of Northampton" label="Henry Howard, 1st Earl of Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523" start="4658" end="4662" title="1543" label="1543"/>
<link wikidata="Q388979" start="4665" end="4684" title="Sharaf Khan Bidlisi" label="Sharaf Khan Bidlisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766" start="4712" end="4716" title="1591" label="1591"/>
<link wikidata="Q77283" start="4719" end="4733" title="Friedrich Spee" label="Friedrich Spee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917" start="4786" end="4790" title="1643" label="1643"/>
<link wikidata="Q199660" start="4793" end="4801" title="Ahmed II" label="Ahmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577" start="4830" end="4834" title="1663" label="1663"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382857" start="4837" end="4858" title="Peter Anthony Motteux" label="Peter Anthony Motteux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606" start="4920" end="4924" title="1670" label="1670"/>
<link wikidata="Q77511" start="4927" end="4949" title="Maria Margarethe Kirch" label="Maria Margarethe Kirch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648" start="4998" end="5002" title="1682" label="1682"/>
<link wikidata="Q511841" start="5005" end="5031" title="Giovanni Battista Morgagni" label="Giovanni Battista Morgagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841" start="5078" end="5082" title="1707" label="1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q165534" start="5085" end="5098" title="Carlo Goldoni" label="Carlo Goldoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878" start="5143" end="5147" title="1714" label="1714"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266161" start="5150" end="5190" title="René Nicolas Charles Augustin de Maupeou" label="René Nicolas Charles Augustin de Maupeou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402428" start="5222" end="5247" title="Lord Chancellor of France" label="Lord Chancellor of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947" start="5259" end="5263" title="1728" label="1728"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534547" start="5266" end="5288" title="John Wood, the Younger" label="John Wood, the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289728" start="5322" end="5336" title="Royal Crescent" label="Royal Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618" start="5348" end="5352" title="1752" label="1752"/>
<link wikidata="Q561352" start="5355" end="5373" title="John Graves Simcoe" label="John Graves Simcoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519762" start="5420" end="5455" title="Lieutenant Governor of Upper Canada" label="Lieutenant Governor of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627" start="5467" end="5471" title="1755" label="1755"/>
<link wikidata="Q285791" start="5474" end="5496" title="François René Mallarmé" label="François René Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713" start="5538" end="5542" title="1778" label="1778"/>
<link wikidata="Q134160" start="5545" end="5563" title="José de San Martín" label="José de San Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708511" start="5605" end="5622" title="President of Peru" label="President of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903" start="5634" end="5638" title="1806" label="1806"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372755" start="5641" end="5662" title="Emma Catherine Embury" label="Emma Catherine Embury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919" start="5700" end="5704" title="1809" label="1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935730" start="5707" end="5716" title="John Hart (South Australian colonist)" label="John Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q676357" start="5754" end="5780" title="Premier of South Australia" label="Premier of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933" start="5792" end="5796" title="1812" label="1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q725118" start="5799" end="5818" title="Carl Christian Hall" label="Carl Christian Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010329" start="5854" end="5879" title="List of Prime Ministers of Denmark" label="Prime Minister of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953" start="5891" end="5895" title="1816" label="1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q923703" start="5898" end="5914" title="Giovanni Morelli" label="Giovanni Morelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587" start="5956" end="5960" title="1833" label="1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q432228" start="5963" end="5976" title="John St. John (Governor of Kansas)" label="John St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q878628" start="6014" end="6032" title="Governor of Kansas" label="Governor of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622" start="6044" end="6048" title="1841" label="1841"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="6051" end="6072" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Pierre-Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625" start="6113" end="6117" title="1842" label="1842"/>
<link wikidata="Q22714" start="6120" end="6128" title="Karl May" label="Karl May"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636" start="6177" end="6181" title="1845" label="1845"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="6184" end="6195" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="6244" end="6271" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673" start="6283" end="6287" title="1855" label="1855"/>
<link wikidata="Q982948" start="6290" end="6303" title="Cesário Verde" label="Cesário Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676" start="6343" end="6347" title="1856" label="1856"/>
<link wikidata="Q63369" start="6350" end="6373" title="Karl Gotthard Lamprecht" label="Karl Gotthard Lamprecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q668440" start="6424" end="6439" title="Mathias Zdarsky" label="Mathias Zdarsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680" start="6496" end="6500" title="1857" label="1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q176075" start="6503" end="6514" title="Robert Bond" label="Robert Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q771758" start="6543" end="6573" title="Prime Minister of Newfoundland" label="Prime Minister of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="6585" end="6589" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533412" start="6592" end="6606" title="William Ashley (economic historian)" label="William Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="6650" end="6654" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q278864" start="6657" end="6665" title="Andranik" label="Andranik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712" start="6695" end="6699" title="1866" label="1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q192348" start="6702" end="6717" title="Benedetto Croce" label="Benedetto Croce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720" start="6765" end="6769" title="1869" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q902182" start="6772" end="6786" title="Phoebus Levene" label="Phoebus Levene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746" start="6841" end="6845" title="1871" label="1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q298033" start="6848" end="6862" title="Lesya Ukrainka" label="Lesya Ukrainka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="6904" end="6908" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q170726" start="6911" end="6924" title="Enrico Caruso" label="Enrico Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="7055" end="7059" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q78975" start="7062" end="7082" title="Erich von Hornbostel" label="Erich von Hornbostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808" start="7129" end="7133" title="1881" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382452" start="7136" end="7153" title="William Z. Foster" label="William Z. Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q294339" start="7211" end="7223" title="Alexei Rykov" label="Alexei Rykov"/>
<link wikidata="Q13502826" start="7245" end="7262" title="List of heads of government of Russia" label="Premier of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="7274" end="7278" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q235521" start="7281" end="7316" title="Princess Alice, Countess of Athlone" label="Princess Alice, Countess of Athlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="7328" end="7332" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q116062" start="7335" end="7363" title="Princess Alice of Battenberg" label="Princess Alice of Battenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="7375" end="7407" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="7419" end="7423" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="7426" end="7444" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="7493" end="7525" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832" start="7537" end="7541" title="1890" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q269848" start="7544" end="7553" title="Myra Hess" label="Myra Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="7595" end="7599" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q312701" start="7602" end="7612" title="Meher Baba" label="Meher Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="7649" end="7653" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q77529" start="7656" end="7667" title="Ida Noddack" label="Ida Noddack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="7709" end="7713" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q562321" start="7716" end="7731" title="William Astbury" label="William Astbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035" start="7798" end="7802" title="1901" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931495" start="7805" end="7815" title="Vince Gair" label="Vince Gair"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526082" start="7845" end="7866" title="Premier of Queensland" label="Premier of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q149997" start="7886" end="7896" title="Zeppo Marx" label="Zeppo Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="7948" end="7952" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q324625" start="7955" end="7966" title="King Clancy" label="King Clancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="8026" end="8030" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219277" start="8033" end="8045" title="Perry Miller" label="Perry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="8099" end="8103" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906238" start="8106" end="8122" title="Mary Chase (playwright)" label="Mary Coyle Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="8170" end="8174" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q982838" start="8177" end="8191" title="Sabahattin Ali" label="Sabahattin Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="8241" end="8245" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q44693230" start="8248" end="8268" title="Mary Locke Petermann" label="Mary Locke Petermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q934642" start="8318" end="8336" title="Frank G. Slaughter" label="Frank G. Slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="8379" end="8383" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q529663" start="8386" end="8403" title="Millicent Fenwick" label="Millicent Fenwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="8451" end="8455" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236412" start="8458" end="8468" title="Jim Backus" label="Jim Backus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76943" start="8521" end="8531" title="Gert Fröbe" label="Gert Fröbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="8557" end="8561" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q337799" start="8564" end="8577" title="S. Rajaratnam" label="S. Rajaratnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983917" start="8607" end="8635" title="Senior Minister of Singapore" label="Senior Minister of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="8647" end="8651" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q217619" start="8654" end="8669" title="Anthony Burgess" label="Anthony Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="8721" end="8725" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q54539" start="8728" end="8739" title="Bobby Riggs" label="Bobby Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="8775" end="8779" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356515" start="8782" end="8793" title="Monte Irvin" label="Monte Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="8845" end="8849" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q972052" start="8852" end="8864" title="Philip Habib" label="Philip Habib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477295" start="8898" end="8961" title="Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs" label="Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="8973" end="8977" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382471" start="8980" end="8994" title="Pierre Laporte" label="Pierre Laporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q56028053" start="9041" end="9065" title="Deputy Premier of Quebec" label="Deputy Premier of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761124" start="9085" end="9095" title="Andy Pafko" label="Andy Pafko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="9145" end="9149" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q43948073" start="9152" end="9164" title="Molly Reilly" label="Molly Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="9194" end="9198" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387590" start="9201" end="9212" title="Hugh Huxley" label="Hugh Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="9265" end="9269" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558155" start="9272" end="9281" title="Lisa Kirk" label="Lisa Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q380668" start="9330" end="9343" title="Shehu Shagari" label="Shehu Shagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="9370" end="9390" title="President of Nigeria" label="President of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="9402" end="9406" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371828" start="9409" end="9431" title="Masatoshi Gündüz Ikeda" label="Masatoshi Gündüz Ikeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="9488" end="9492" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302436" start="9495" end="9508" title="Ralph Stanley" label="Ralph Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="9554" end="9558" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q50893" start="9561" end="9574" title="Paul Elvstrøm" label="Paul Elvstrøm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806065" start="9612" end="9625" title="Larry Gelbart" label="Larry Gelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648101" start="9679" end="9704" title="A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr." label="A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3702414" start="9778" end="9794" title="Richard G. Stern" label="Richard G. Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="9836" end="9840" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q465292" start="9843" end="9856" title="Wendy Beckett" label="Wendy Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="9896" end="9900" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q171481" start="9903" end="9914" title="Tony Brooks (racing driver)" label="Tony Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q741540" start="9957" end="9968" title="Faron Young" label="Faron Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="10037" end="10041" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q436340" start="10044" end="10053" title="Tony Lema" label="Tony Lema"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="10082" end="10086" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337567" start="10089" end="10101" title="Tony Campolo" label="Tony Campolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064310" start="10153" end="10168" title="Oktay Sinanoglu" label="Oktay Sinanoglu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="10234" end="10238" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q329798" start="10241" end="10254" title="Tom Courtenay" label="Tom Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q439261" start="10279" end="10292" title="Bob Schieffer" label="Bob Schieffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="10352" end="10356" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q266313" start="10359" end="10370" title="Diane Baker" label="Diane Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q472503" start="10411" end="10423" title="Herb Elliott" label="Herb Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521503" start="10453" end="10468" title="Farokh Engineer" label="Farokh Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="10488" end="10492" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q934446" start="10495" end="10504" title="Ron Santo" label="Ron Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="10559" end="10563" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q335507" start="10566" end="10579" title="David Puttnam" label="David Puttnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="10617" end="10621" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q262482" start="10624" end="10637" title="Karen Grassle" label="Karen Grassle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="10657" end="10661" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="10664" end="10679" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="10747" end="10751" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q172773" start="10754" end="10769" title="François Cevert" label="François Cevert"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="10803" end="10807" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q171998" start="10810" end="10819" title="Jean Todt" label="Jean Todt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="10860" end="10864" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q354301" start="10867" end="10876" title="Lee Evans (sprinter)" label="Lee Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="10927" end="10931" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="10934" end="10943" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q115243" start="10985" end="10997" title="Amin Maalouf" label="Amin Maalouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="11038" end="11042" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q251466" start="11045" end="11070" title="Francisco Fernández Ochoa" label="Francisco Fernández Ochoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55428" start="11105" end="11116" title="Neil Jordan" label="Neil Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170899" start="11172" end="11187" title="Néstor Kirchner" label="Néstor Kirchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969145" start="11216" end="11238" title="President of Argentina" label="President of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="11250" end="11254" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q248120" start="11257" end="11268" title="Don Quarrie" label="Don Quarrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="11299" end="11303" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358228" start="11306" end="11317" title="Joey Dunlop" label="Joey Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="11358" end="11362" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637" start="11365" end="11381" title="José María Aznar" label="José María Aznar"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="11403" end="11426" title="Prime Minister of Spain" label="Prime Minister of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181360" start="11447" end="11455" title="John Doe (musician)" label="John Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="11512" end="11516" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q327786" start="11519" end="11535" title="Raymond McCreesh" label="Raymond McCreesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="11537" end="11553" title="Irish Republican" label="Irish Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="11581" end="11585" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q983752" start="11588" end="11610" title="Tharman Shanmugaratnam" label="Tharman Shanmugaratnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983917" start="11654" end="11669" title="Senior Minister of Singapore" label="Senior Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q39021" start="11678" end="11700" title="President of Singapore" label="President of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="11702" end="11706" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733498" start="11709" end="11720" title="Kurt Rambis" label="Kurt Rambis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="11778" end="11782" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151006" start="11785" end="11799" title="Birgit Fischer" label="Birgit Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="11817" end="11821" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q865424" start="11824" end="11841" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (baseball)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="11886" end="11890" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q559081" start="11893" end="11903" title="Carrot Top" label="Carrot Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q456712" start="11932" end="11945" title="Veronica Webb" label="Veronica Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="11984" end="11988" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q366322" start="11991" end="12005" title="Alexis Denisof" label="Alexis Denisof"/>
<link wikidata="Q202475" start="12031" end="12040" title="Téa Leoni" label="Téa Leoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="12060" end="12064" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q260464" start="12067" end="12075" title="Ed Balls" label="Ed Balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11013932" start="12097" end="12131" title="Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="12133" end="12137" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530459" start="12140" end="12152" title="Lesley Boone" label="Lesley Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q467094" start="12193" end="12206" title="Oumou Sangaré" label="Oumou Sangaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="12225" end="12229" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q189351" start="12232" end="12242" title="Sean Astin" label="Sean Astin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313698" start="12291" end="12304" title="Daniel Powter" label="Daniel Powter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="12347" end="12351" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q570006" start="12354" end="12365" title="Anson Mount" label="Anson Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="12383" end="12387" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q268584" start="12390" end="12402" title="Dominic Raab" label="Dominic Raab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068024" start="12424" end="12448" title="First Secretary of State" label="First Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="12453" end="12508" title="Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs" label="Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="12510" end="12514" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q262502" start="12517" end="12532" title="Chelsea Handler" label="Chelsea Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="12591" end="12595" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q540608" start="12598" end="12611" title="Rashida Jones" label="Rashida Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735592" start="12650" end="12663" title="Samaki Walker" label="Samaki Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="12693" end="12697" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870245" start="12700" end="12715" title="Napoleon Harris" label="Napoleon Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="12758" end="12762" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q104639732" start="12765" end="12775" title="Kash Patel" label="Kash Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="12834" end="12838" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q50603" start="12841" end="12853" title="Park Ji-sung" label="Park Ji-sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="12880" end="12884" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611054" start="12887" end="12901" title="Maria Kanellis" label="Maria Kanellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207528" start="12963" end="12978" title="Flavia Pennetta" label="Flavia Pennetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q587931" start="13011" end="13027" title="Anton Volchenkov" label="Anton Volchenkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="13056" end="13060" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q311735" start="13063" end="13074" title="Joakim Noah" label="Joakim Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="13111" end="13115" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q451108" start="13118" end="13133" title="Justin Berfield" label="Justin Berfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404977" start="13181" end="13194" title="Jameela Jamil" label="Jameela Jamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q343954" start="13235" end="13247" title="James and Oliver Phelps" label="James Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q343954" start="13272" end="13285" title="James and Oliver Phelps" label="Oliver Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="13302" end="13306" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381654" start="13309" end="13326" title="Justin Abdelkader" label="Justin Abdelkader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="13356" end="13360" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q66011207" start="13363" end="13375" title="Tom Marshall (artist)" label="Tom Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q742059" start="13422" end="13434" title="Gerald McCoy" label="Gerald McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="13462" end="13466" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q553318" start="13469" end="13484" title="Jimmer Fredette" label="Jimmer Fredette"/>
<link wikidata="Q49524" start="13522" end="13535" title="Kana Hanazawa" label="Kana Hanazawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735651" start="13580" end="13598" title="E&amp;#x27;Twaun Moore" label="E&amp;#x27;Twaun Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="13628" end="13632" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q26405538" start="13635" end="13645" title="Félix Peña" label="Félix Peña"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="13674" end="13678" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q962502" start="13681" end="13697" title="Joakim Nordström" label="Joakim Nordström"/>
<link wikidata="Q15115212" start="13734" end="13745" title="Jorge Soler" label="Jorge Soler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="13770" end="13774" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745280" start="13777" end="13788" title="Erick Fedde" label="Erick Fedde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12034390" start="13824" end="13836" title="Lukáš Sedlák" label="Lukáš Sedlák"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="13863" end="13867" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236628" start="13870" end="13883" title="Fred VanVleet" label="Fred VanVleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="13913" end="13917" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024753" start="13920" end="13933" title="Mario Hezonja" label="Mario Hezonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q10996110" start="13971" end="13987" title="Viktoriya Tomova" label="Viktoriya Tomova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="14014" end="14018" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q237053" start="14021" end="14037" title="Isabelle Fuhrman" label="Isabelle Fuhrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240120" start="14065" end="14075" title="Thon Maker" label="Thon Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="14122" end="14126" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q20830808" start="14129" end="14149" title="Gianluigi Donnarumma" label="Gianluigi Donnarumma"/>
<link wikidata="Q60991220" start="14179" end="14184" title="Rocky (singer)" label="Rocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="14230" end="14234" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q64010450" start="14237" end="14243" title="Bo Nix" label="Bo Nix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="14271" end="14275" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q47532134" start="14278" end="14294" title="Vernon Carey Jr." label="Vernon Carey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="14324" end="14328" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q116360316" start="14331" end="14349" title="Brandin Podziemski" label="Brandin Podziemski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="14379" end="14383" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q38410137" start="14386" end="14395" title="Noah Jupe" label="Noah Jupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30021" start="14439" end="14442" title="806" label="806"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255067" start="14445" end="14453" title="Patriarch Tarasios of Constantinople" label="Tarasios"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="14455" end="14482" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q30580" start="14485" end="14488" title="891" label="891"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397196" start="14491" end="14512" title="Fujiwara no Mototsune" label="Fujiwara no Mototsune"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="14523" end="14529" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19496" start="14541" end="14545" title="1099" label="1099"/>
<link wikidata="Q125960133" start="14548" end="14566" title="Anselm of Ribemont" label="Anselm of Ribemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="14609" end="14622" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6299" start="14624" end="14628" title="1522" label="1522"/>
<link wikidata="Q742481" start="14631" end="14643" title="William Lily (grammarian)" label="William Lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457" start="14685" end="14689" title="1536" label="1536"/>
<link wikidata="Q88381" start="14692" end="14708" title="Berchtold Haller" label="Berchtold Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547" start="14758" end="14762" title="1547" label="1547"/>
<link wikidata="Q255368" start="14765" end="14781" title="Vittoria Colonna" label="Vittoria Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725" start="14834" end="14838" title="1601" label="1601"/>
<link wikidata="Q437917" start="14841" end="14875" title="Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex" label="Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="14909" end="14935" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872" start="14947" end="14951" title="1634" label="1634"/>
<link wikidata="Q153545" start="14954" end="14978" title="Albrecht von Wallenstein" label="Albrecht von Wallenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885" start="15023" end="15027" title="1636" label="1636"/>
<link wikidata="Q361108" start="15030" end="15047" title="Santorio Santorio" label="Santorio Santorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975" start="15078" end="15082" title="1655" label="1655"/>
<link wikidata="Q918731" start="15085" end="15100" title="Daniël Heinsius" label="Daniël Heinsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648" start="15138" end="15142" title="1682" label="1682"/>
<link wikidata="Q314765" start="15145" end="15165" title="Alessandro Stradella" label="Alessandro Stradella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861" start="15195" end="15199" title="1710" label="1710"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014132" start="15202" end="15233" title="Daniel Greysolon, Sieur du Lhut" label="Daniel Greysolon, Sieur du Lhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873" start="15274" end="15278" title="1713" label="1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="15281" end="15303" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921" start="15315" end="15319" title="1723" label="1723"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="15322" end="15338" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="15368" end="15392" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632" start="15404" end="15408" title="1756" label="1756"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559438" start="15411" end="15424" title="Eliza Haywood" label="Eliza Haywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818" start="15462" end="15466" title="1796" label="1796"/>
<link wikidata="Q327006" start="15469" end="15483" title="Samuel Seabury (bishop)" label="Samuel Seabury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898" start="15512" end="15516" title="1805" label="1805"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066351" start="15519" end="15533" title="Thomas Pownall" label="Thomas Pownall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611738" start="15555" end="15600" title="Governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967" start="15612" end="15616" title="1819" label="1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738251" start="15619" end="15649" title="Francisco Manoel de Nascimento" label="Francisco Manoel de Nascimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983" start="15698" end="15702" title="1822" label="1822"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376159" start="15705" end="15720" title="William Pinkney" label="William Pinkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="15760" end="15790" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622" start="15802" end="15806" title="1841" label="1841"/>
<link wikidata="Q726427" start="15809" end="15826" title="Philip P. Barbour" label="Philip P. Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="15873" end="15926" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653" start="15938" end="15942" title="1850" label="1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q334351" start="15945" end="15961" title="Daoguang Emperor" label="Daoguang Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="15982" end="15986" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q315346" start="15989" end="16001" title="Thomas Moore" label="Thomas Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="16038" end="16042" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q77321" start="16045" end="16056" title="Otto Ludwig (writer)" label="Otto Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741" start="16107" end="16111" title="1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q728357" start="16114" end="16126" title="Henrik Hertz" label="Henrik Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="16166" end="16170" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355896" start="16173" end="16190" title="Jung Bahadur Rana" label="Jung Bahadur Rana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="16218" end="16222" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q610626" start="16225" end="16240" title="Townsend Harris" label="Townsend Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q120428579" start="16287" end="16320" title="United States Ambassador to Japan" label="United States Ambassador to Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="16332" end="16336" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q71014" start="16339" end="16350" title="Paul Reuter" label="Paul Reuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="16403" end="16410" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="16442" end="16446" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q313970" start="16449" end="16462" title="Anton Arensky" label="Anton Arensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="16504" end="16508" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370512" start="16511" end="16533" title="Worthington Whittredge" label="Worthington Whittredge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="16576" end="16580" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603" start="16583" end="16603" title="Friedrich Spielhagen" label="Friedrich Spielhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="16656" end="16660" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q158235" start="16663" end="16699" title="William IV, Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="William IV, Grand Duke of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="16711" end="16715" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q457881" start="16718" end="16730" title="John Tenniel" label="John Tenniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="16763" end="16767" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q652595" start="16770" end="16790" title="Charles Edwin Bessey" label="Charles Edwin Bessey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="16843" end="16847" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624559" start="16850" end="16874" title="Marcel-Auguste Dieulafoy" label="Marcel-Auguste Dieulafoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="16921" end="16925" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q246726" start="16928" end="16948" title="William O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="William O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="16993" end="16997" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567402" start="17000" end="17026" title="Elizabeth Gertrude Britton" label="Elizabeth Gertrude Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q712153" start="17078" end="17089" title="John McGraw" label="John McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="17139" end="17143" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q203623" start="17146" end="17162" title="Mário de Andrade" label="Mário de Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="17216" end="17220" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q245000" start="17223" end="17235" title="George Minot" label="George Minot"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="17270" end="17281" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="17302" end="17306" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q356526" start="17309" end="17327" title="Sergei Winogradsky" label="Sergei Winogradsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="17387" end="17391" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q113620386" start="17394" end="17406" title="Joseph Beech" label="Joseph Beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="17462" end="17466" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q932891" start="17469" end="17481" title="Mark Aldanov" label="Mark Aldanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q979329" start="17528" end="17538" title="Bugs Moran" label="Bugs Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="17569" end="17573" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q711288" start="17576" end="17598" title="Melville J. Herskovits" label="Melville J. Herskovits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="17648" end="17652" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q157578" start="17655" end="17675" title="Alexander Archipenko" label="Alexander Archipenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q456336" start="17731" end="17746" title="Grace Metalious" label="Grace Metalious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="17775" end="17779" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q160149" start="17782" end="17793" title="Mark Rothko" label="Mark Rothko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="17844" end="17848" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q186391" start="17851" end="17867" title="Theodor Svedberg" label="Theodor Svedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="17899" end="17910" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="17931" end="17935" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q215055" start="17938" end="17953" title="Gottfried Fuchs" label="Gottfried Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="18004" end="18008" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q345182" start="18011" end="18026" title="Elijah Muhammad" label="Elijah Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="18065" end="18069" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217662" start="18072" end="18089" title="Daniel James, Jr." label="Daniel James, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="18129" end="18133" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q931747" start="18136" end="18149" title="Robert Hayden" label="Robert Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="18189" end="18193" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="18196" end="18214" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="18257" end="18261" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q312364" start="18264" end="18277" title="Haing S. Ngor" label="Haing S. Ngor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="18330" end="18334" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q468267" start="18337" end="18353" title="Andrei Sinyavsky" label="Andrei Sinyavsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="18399" end="18403" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945857" start="18406" end="18420" title="W. O. Mitchell" label="W. O. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="18464" end="18468" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973" start="18471" end="18487" title="Glenn T. Seaborg" label="Glenn T. Seaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="18520" end="18531" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="18552" end="18556" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q279077" start="18559" end="18571" title="A. R. Ammons" label="A. R. Ammons"/>
<link wikidata="Q313591" start="18617" end="18628" title="Don Bradman" label="Don Bradman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="18716" end="18720" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q271049" start="18723" end="18737" title="Peter Benenson" label="Peter Benenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="18763" end="18784" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="18796" end="18800" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650645" start="18803" end="18818" title="Hans Raj Khanna" label="Hans Raj Khanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="18887" end="18891" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q343516" start="18894" end="18909" title="Ihsan Dogramaci" label="Ihsan Dogramaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="18956" end="18960" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q263518" start="18963" end="18976" title="Louisiana Red" label="Louisiana Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="19030" end="19034" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386741" start="19037" end="19050" title="Harve Bennett" label="Harve Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q19360835" start="19105" end="19118" title="Ariel Camacho" label="Ariel Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q442129" start="19178" end="19191" title="Eugenie Clark" label="Eugenie Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="19257" end="19261" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q110374" start="19264" end="19275" title="Bill Paxton" label="Bill Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="19317" end="19321" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q48041" start="19324" end="19336" title="Dmitry Yazov" label="Dmitry Yazov"/>
<link wikidata="Q125168" start="19343" end="19370" title="Marshal of the Soviet Union" label="Marshal of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="19382" end="19386" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q743512" start="19389" end="19401" title="Farrah Forke" label="Farrah Forke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498774" start="19439" end="19453" title="Shirley Hughes" label="Shirley Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="19497" end="19501" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375750" start="19504" end="19518" title="Gordon Pinsent" label="Gordon Pinsent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49616" start="19573" end="19577" title="2025" label="2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724265" start="19580" end="19591" title="Henry Kelly" label="Henry Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q467500" start="19672" end="19684" title="Roberto Orci" label="Roberto Orci"/>
<link wikidata="Q272173" start="19794" end="19812" title="Æthelberht of Kent" label="Æthelberht of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="19815" end="19822" title="Beatification" label="Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q187744" start="19823" end="19852" title="Ciriaco María Sancha y Hervás" label="Ciriaco María Sancha y Hervás"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254789" start="19855" end="19875" title="Gerland of Agrigento" label="Gerland of Agrigento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255191" start="19878" end="19890" title="John Roberts (missionary)" label="John Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="19915" end="19933" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="19937" end="19944" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="19981" end="19997" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q281427" start="20052" end="20073" title="Maria Adeodata Pisani" label="Maria Adeodata Pisani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346861" start="20084" end="20103" title="Robert of Arbrissel" label="Robert of Arbrissel"/>
<link wikidata="Q283254" start="20116" end="20132" title="Fontevraud Abbey" label="Fontevraud Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q160686" start="20135" end="20149" title="Saint Walpurga" label="Saint Walpurga"/>
<link wikidata="Q200982" start="20189" end="20204" title="Walpurgis Night" label="Walpurgis Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439842" start="20231" end="20271" title="February 25 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="February 25 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q662176" start="20279" end="20295" title="Kitano Tenman-gu" label="Kitano Baika-sai"/>
<link wikidata="Q662176" start="20340" end="20363" title="Kitano Tenman-gu" label="Kitano Tenman-gu Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="20365" end="20370" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163103" start="20380" end="20439" title="Memorial Day for the Victims of the Communist Dictatorships" label="Memorial Day for the Victims of the Communist Dictatorships"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="20441" end="20448" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183705" start="20451" end="20472" title="National Day (Kuwait)" label="National Day (Kuwait)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274389" start="20474" end="20490" title="People Power Revolution" label="People Power Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="20492" end="20503" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="20506" end="20532" title="Public holidays in Suriname" label="Revolution Day in Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158435" start="20534" end="20565" title="Soviet Occupation Day (Georgia)" label="Soviet Occupation Day (Georgia)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10931" wikidata="Q176452" url="?curid=10931" title="Finite-state machine">
<text>A finite-state machine (FSM) or finite-state automaton (FSA, plural: &quot;automata&quot;), finite automaton, or simply a state machine, is a mathematical model of computation. It is an abstract machine that can be in exactly one of a finite number of &quot;states&quot; at any given time. The FSM can change from one state to another in response to some inputs; the change from one state to another is called a &quot;transition&quot;. An FSM is defined by a list of its states, its initial state, and the inputs that trigger each transition. Finite-state machines are of two types—deterministic finite-state machines and non-deterministic finite-state machines. For any non-deterministic finite-state machine, an equivalent deterministic one can be constructed.

The behavior of state machines can be observed in many devices in modern society that perform a predetermined sequence of actions depending on a sequence of events with which they are presented. Simple examples are: vending machines, which dispense products when the proper combination of coins is deposited; elevators, whose sequence of stops is determined by the floors requested by riders; traffic lights, which change sequence when cars are waiting; combination locks, which require the input of a sequence of numbers in the proper order.

The finite-state machine has less computational power than some other models of computation such as the Turing machine. The computational power distinction means there are computational tasks that a Turing machine can do but an FSM cannot. This is because an FSM&#x27;s memory is limited by the number of states it has. A finite-state machine has the same computational power as a Turing machine that is restricted such that its head may only perform &quot;read&quot; operations, and always has to move from left to right. FSMs are studied in the more general field of automata theory.

== Example: coin-operated turnstile ==
An example of a simple mechanism that can be modeled by a state machine is a turnstile. A turnstile, used to control access to subways and amusement park rides, is a gate with three rotating arms at waist height, one across the entryway. Initially the arms are locked, blocking the entry, preventing patrons from passing through. Depositing a coin or token in a slot on the turnstile unlocks the arms, allowing a single customer to push through. After the customer passes through, the arms are locked again until another coin is inserted.

Considered as a state machine, the turnstile has two possible states: &quot;Locked&quot; and &quot;Unlocked&quot;. There are two possible inputs that affect its state: putting a coin in the slot (&quot;coin&quot;) and pushing the arm (&quot;push&quot;). In the locked state, pushing on the arm has no effect; no matter how many times the input &quot;push&quot; is given, it stays in the locked state. Putting a coin in – that is, giving the machine a &quot;coin&quot; input – shifts the state from &quot;Locked&quot; to &quot;Unlocked&quot;. In the unlocked state, putting additional coins in has no effect; that is, giving additional &quot;coin&quot; inputs does not change the state. A customer pushing through the arms gives a &quot;push&quot; input and resets the state to &quot;Locked&quot;.

The turnstile state machine can be represented by a state-transition table, showing for each possible state, the transitions between them (based upon the inputs given to the machine) and the outputs resulting from each input:
The turnstile state machine can also be represented by a directed graph called a state diagram &quot;(above)&quot;. Each state is represented by a node (&quot;circle&quot;). Edges (&quot;arrows&quot;) show the transitions from one state to another. Each arrow is labeled with the input that triggers that transition. An input that doesn&#x27;t cause a change of state (such as a &quot;coin&quot; input in the &quot;Unlocked&quot; state) is represented by a circular arrow returning to the original state. The arrow into the &quot;Locked&quot; node from the black dot indicates it is the initial state.

== Concepts and terminology ==
A &quot;state&quot; is a description of the status of a system that is waiting to execute a &quot;transition&quot;. A transition is a set of actions to be executed when a condition is fulfilled or when an event is received.
For example, when using an audio system to listen to the radio (the system is in the &quot;radio&quot; state), receiving a &quot;next&quot; stimulus results in moving to the next station. When the system is in the &quot;CD&quot; state, the &quot;next&quot; stimulus results in moving to the next track. Identical stimuli trigger different actions depending on the current state.

In some finite-state machine representations, it is also possible to associate actions with a state:
* an entry action: performed &quot;when entering&quot; the state, and
* an exit action: performed &quot;when exiting&quot; the state.

== Representations ==


=== State/Event table ===
Several state-transition table types are used. The most common representation is shown below: the combination of current state (e.g. B) and input (e.g. Y) shows the next state (e.g. C). The complete action&#x27;s information is not directly described in the table and can only be added using footnotes. An FSM definition including the full action&#x27;s information is possible using state tables (see also virtual finite-state machine).

=== UML state machines ===
The Unified Modeling Language has a notation for describing state machines. UML state machines overcome the limitations of traditional finite-state machines while retaining their main benefits. UML state machines introduce the new concepts of hierarchically nested states and orthogonal regions, while extending the notion of actions. UML state machines have the characteristics of both Mealy machines and Moore machines. They support actions that depend on both the state of the system and the triggering event, as in Mealy machines, as well as entry and exit actions, which are associated with states rather than transitions, as in Moore machines.

=== SDL state machines ===
The Specification and Description Language is a standard from ITU that includes graphical symbols to describe actions in the transition:
* send an event
* receive an event
* start a timer
* cancel a timer
* start another concurrent state machine
* decision
SDL embeds basic data types called &quot;Abstract Data Types&quot;, an action language, and an execution semantic in order to make the finite-state machine executable.

=== Other state diagrams ===
There are a large number of variants to represent an FSM such as the one in figure 3.

== Usage ==
In addition to their use in modeling reactive systems presented here, finite-state machines are significant in many different areas, including electrical engineering, linguistics, computer science, philosophy, biology, mathematics, video game programming, and logic. Finite-state machines are a class of automata studied in automata theory and the theory of computation.
In computer science, finite-state machines are widely used in modeling of application behavior (control theory), design of hardware digital systems, software engineering, compilers, network protocols, and computational linguistics.

== Classification ==
Finite-state machines can be subdivided into acceptors, classifiers, transducers and sequencers.

=== Acceptors ===

Acceptors (also called &quot;detectors&quot; or recognizers) produce binary output, indicating whether or not the received input is accepted. Each state of an acceptor is either &quot;accepting&quot; or &quot;non accepting&quot;. Once all input has been received, if the current state is an accepting state, the input is accepted; otherwise it is rejected. As a rule, input is a sequence of symbols (characters); actions are not used. The start state can also be an accepting state, in which case the acceptor accepts the empty string. The example in figure 4 shows an acceptor that accepts the string &quot;nice&quot;. In this acceptor, the only accepting state is state 7.

A (possibly infinite) set of symbol sequences, called a formal language, is a regular language if there is some acceptor that accepts &quot;exactly&quot; that set. For example, the set of binary strings with an even number of zeroes is a regular language (cf. Fig. 5), while the set of all strings whose length is a prime number is not.

An acceptor could also be described as defining a language that would contain every string accepted by the acceptor but none of the rejected ones; that language is &quot;accepted&quot; by the acceptor. By definition, the languages accepted by acceptors are the regular languages.

The problem of determining the language accepted by a given acceptor is an instance of the algebraic path problem—itself a generalization of the shortest path problem to graphs with edges weighted by the elements of an (arbitrary) semiring.

An example of an accepting state appears in Fig. 5: a deterministic finite automaton (DFA) that detects whether the binary input string contains an even number of 0s.

&quot;S&quot;1 (which is also the start state) indicates the state at which an even number of 0s has been input. S1 is therefore an accepting state. This acceptor will finish in an accept state, if the binary string contains an even number of 0s (including any binary string containing no 0s). Examples of strings accepted by this acceptor are ε (the empty string), 1, 11, 11..., 00, 010, 1010, 10110, etc.

=== Classifiers ===
Classifiers are a generalization of acceptors that produce &quot;n&quot;-ary output where &quot;n&quot; is strictly greater than two.

=== Transducers ===


&quot;Transducers&quot; produce output based on a given input and/or a state using actions. They are used for control applications and in the field of computational linguistics.

In control applications, two types are distinguished:

;Moore machine: The FSM uses only entry actions, i.e., output depends only on state. The advantage of the Moore model is a simplification of the behaviour. Consider an elevator door. The state machine recognizes two commands: &quot;command_open&quot; and &quot;command_close&quot;, which trigger state changes. The entry action (E:) in state &quot;Opening&quot; starts a motor opening the door, the entry action in state &quot;Closing&quot; starts a motor in the other direction closing the door. States &quot;Opened&quot; and &quot;Closed&quot; stop the motor when fully opened or closed. They signal to the outside world (e.g., to other state machines) the situation: &quot;door is open&quot; or &quot;door is closed&quot;.

;Mealy machine: The FSM also uses input actions, i.e., output depends on input and state. The use of a Mealy FSM leads often to a reduction of the number of states. The example in figure 7 shows a Mealy FSM implementing the same behaviour as in the Moore example (the behaviour depends on the implemented FSM execution model and will work, e.g., for virtual FSM but not for event-driven FSM). There are two input actions (I:): &quot;start motor to close the door if command_close arrives&quot; and &quot;start motor in the other direction to open the door if command_open arrives&quot;. The &quot;opening&quot; and &quot;closing&quot; intermediate states are not shown.

=== Sequencers ===
&quot;Sequencers&quot; (also called &quot;generators&quot;) are a subclass of acceptors and transducers that have a single-letter input alphabet. They produce only one sequence, which can be seen as an output sequence of acceptor or transducer outputs.

=== Determinism ===
A further distinction is between &quot;deterministic&quot; (DFA) and &quot;non-deterministic&quot; (NFA, GNFA) automata. In a deterministic automaton, every state has exactly one transition for each possible input. In a non-deterministic automaton, an input can lead to one, more than one, or no transition for a given state. The powerset construction algorithm can transform any nondeterministic automaton into a (usually more complex) deterministic automaton with identical functionality.

A finite-state machine with only one state is called a &quot;combinatorial FSM&quot;. It only allows actions upon transition &quot;into&quot; a state. This concept is useful in cases where a number of finite-state machines are required to work together, and when it is convenient to consider a purely combinatorial part as a form of FSM to suit the design tools.

== Alternative semantics ==
There are other sets of semantics available to represent state machines. For example, there are tools for modeling and designing logic for embedded controllers. They combine hierarchical state machines (which usually have more than one current state), flow graphs, and truth tables into one language, resulting in a different formalism and set of semantics. These charts, like Harel&#x27;s original state machines, support hierarchically nested states, orthogonal regions, state actions, and transition actions.

== Mathematical model ==
In accordance with the general classification, the following formal definitions are found.

A &quot;deterministic finite-state machine&quot; or &quot;deterministic finite-state acceptor&quot; is a quintuple formula_1, where:
* formula_2 is the input alphabet (a finite non-empty set of symbols);
* formula_3 is a finite non-empty set of states;
* formula_4 is an initial state, an element of formula_3;
* formula_6 is the state-transition function: formula_7 (in a nondeterministic finite automaton it would be formula_8, i.e. formula_6 would return a set of states);
* formula_10 is the set of final states, a (possibly empty) subset of formula_3.

For both deterministic and non-deterministic FSMs, it is conventional to allow formula_6 to be a partial function, i.e. formula_13 does not have to be defined for every combination of formula_14 and formula_15. If an FSM formula_16 is in a state formula_17, the next symbol is formula_18 and formula_13 is not defined, then formula_16 can announce an error (i.e. reject the input). This is useful in definitions of general state machines, but less useful when transforming the machine. Some algorithms in their default form may require total functions.

A finite-state machine has the same computational power as a Turing machine that is restricted such that its head may only perform &quot;read&quot; operations, and always has to move from left to right. That is, each formal language accepted by a finite-state machine is accepted by such a kind of restricted Turing machine, and vice versa.

A &quot;finite-state transducer&quot; is a sextuple formula_21, where:
* formula_2 is the input alphabet (a finite non-empty set of symbols);
* formula_23 is the output alphabet (a finite non-empty set of symbols);
* formula_3 is a finite non-empty set of states;
* formula_4 is the initial state, an element of formula_3;
* formula_6 is the state-transition function: formula_7;
* formula_29 is the output function.

If the output function depends on the state and input symbol (formula_30) that definition corresponds to the &quot;Mealy model&quot;, and can be modelled as a Mealy machine. If the output function depends only on the state (formula_31) that definition corresponds to the &quot;Moore model&quot;, and can be modelled as a Moore machine. A finite-state machine with no output function at all is known as a semiautomaton or transition system.

If we disregard the first output symbol of a Moore machine, formula_32, then it can be readily converted to an output-equivalent Mealy machine by setting the output function of every Mealy transition (i.e. labeling every edge) with the output symbol given of the destination Moore state. The converse transformation is less straightforward because a Mealy machine state may have different output labels on its incoming transitions (edges). Every such state needs to be split in multiple Moore machine states, one for every incident output symbol.

== Optimization ==

Optimizing an FSM means finding a machine with the minimum number of states that performs the same function. The fastest known algorithm doing this is the Hopcroft minimization algorithm. Other techniques include using an implication table, or the Moore reduction procedure. Additionally, acyclic FSAs can be minimized in linear time.

== Implementation ==

=== Hardware applications ===

In a digital circuit, an FSM may be built using a programmable logic device, a programmable logic controller, logic gates and flip flops or relays. More specifically, a hardware implementation requires a register to store state variables, a block of combinational logic that determines the state transition, and a second block of combinational logic that determines the output of an FSM. One of the classic hardware implementations is the Richards controller.

In a &quot;Medvedev machine&quot;, the output is directly connected to the state flip-flops minimizing the time delay between flip-flops and output.

Through state encoding for low power state machines may be optimized to minimize power consumption.

=== Software applications ===
The following concepts are commonly used to build software applications with finite-state machines:
* Automata-based programming
* Event-driven finite-state machine
* Virtual finite-state machine
* State design pattern

=== Finite-state machines and compilers ===
Finite automata are often used in the frontend of programming language compilers. Such a frontend may comprise several finite-state machines that implement a lexical analyzer and a parser.
Starting from a sequence of characters, the lexical analyzer builds a sequence of language tokens (such as reserved words, literals, and identifiers) from which the parser builds a syntax tree. The lexical analyzer and the parser handle the regular and context-free parts of the programming language&#x27;s grammar.

== See also ==

* Abstract state machines
* Alternating finite automaton
* Communicating finite-state machine
* Control system
* Control table
* Decision tables
* DEVS
* Hidden Markov model
* Petri net
* Pushdown automaton
* Quantum finite automaton
* SCXML
* Semiautomaton
* Semigroup action
* Sequential logic
* State diagram
* Synchronizing word
* Transformation semigroup
* Transition system
* Tree automaton
* Turing machine
* UML state machine
== References ==
==Sources==
* 

== Further reading ==

=== General ===
* Wagner, F., &quot;Modeling Software with Finite State Machines: A Practical Approach&quot;, Auerbach Publications, 2006, .
* ITU-T, &quot;Recommendation Z.100 Specification and Description Language (SDL)&quot;
* Samek, M., &quot;Practical Statecharts in C/C++&quot;, CMP Books, 2002, .
* Samek, M., &quot;Practical UML Statecharts in C/C++, 2nd Edition&quot;, Newnes, 2008, .
* Gardner, T., &quot;Advanced State Management&quot; , 2007
* Cassandras, C., Lafortune, S., &quot;Introduction to Discrete Event Systems&quot;. Kluwer, 1999, .
* Timothy Kam, &quot;Synthesis of Finite State Machines: Functional Optimization&quot;. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston 1997, 
* Tiziano Villa, &quot;Synthesis of Finite State Machines: Logic Optimization&quot;. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston 1997, 
* Carroll, J., Long, D., &quot;Theory of Finite Automata with an Introduction to Formal Languages&quot;. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1989.
* Kohavi, Z., &quot;Switching and Finite Automata Theory&quot;. McGraw-Hill, 1978.
* Gill, A., &quot;Introduction to the Theory of Finite-state Machines&quot;. McGraw-Hill, 1962.
* Ginsburg, S., &quot;An Introduction to Mathematical Machine Theory&quot;. Addison-Wesley, 1962.

=== Finite-state machines (automata theory) in theoretical computer science ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Abstract state machines in theoretical computer science ===

=== Machine learning using finite-state algorithms ===

=== Hardware engineering: state minimization and synthesis of sequential circuits ===
* 
* 

=== Finite Markov chain processes ===
::&quot;We may think of a Markov chain as a process that moves successively through a set of states &quot;s1&quot;, &quot;s2&quot;, …, &quot;sr&quot;. … if it is in state &quot;si&quot; it moves on to the next stop to state &quot;sj&quot; with probability &quot;pij&quot;. These probabilities can be exhibited in the form of a transition matrix&quot; (Kemeny (1959), p. 384)
Finite Markov-chain processes are also known as subshifts of finite type.
* Chapter 6 &quot;Finite Markov Chains&quot;.

== External links ==
* &quot;Modeling a Simple AI behavior using a Finite State Machine&quot; Example of usage in Video Games
* Free On-Line Dictionary of Computing description of Finite-State Machines
* NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures description of Finite-State Machines
* A brief overview of state machine types, comparing theoretical aspects of Mealy, Moore, Harel &amp; UML state machines.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="2" end="22" title="Finite-state machine" label="finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="24" end="27" title="Finite-state machine" label="FSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="32" end="54" title="Finite-state machine" label="finite-state automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="56" end="59" title="Finite-state machine" label="FSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="92" end="108" title="Finite-state machine" label="finite automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="122" end="135" title="Finite-state machine" label="state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651576" start="155" end="175" title="model of computation" label="model of computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q787114" start="186" end="202" title="abstract machine" label="abstract machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="258" end="264" title="State (computer science)" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125955" start="355" end="361" title="Input (computer science)" label="inputs"/>
<link wikidata="Q837528" start="582" end="617" title="Deterministic finite automaton" label="deterministic finite-state machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q617295" start="622" end="661" title="Nondeterministic finite automaton" label="non-deterministic finite-state machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="980" end="995" title="vending machine" label="vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="1073" end="1081" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="1157" end="1170" title="traffic light" label="traffic light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374786" start="1218" end="1234" title="combination lock" label="combination lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="1412" end="1426" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="1578" end="1584" title="Computer memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q214526" start="1877" end="1892" title="automata theory" label="automata theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146283" start="2011" end="2020" title="turnstile" label="turnstile"/>
<link wikidata="Q751944" start="2285" end="2290" title="Token coin" label="token"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303083" start="3324" end="3346" title="state-transition table" label="state-transition table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="3555" end="3569" title="directed graph" label="directed graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q230885" start="3579" end="3592" title="state diagram" label="state diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="3645" end="3649" title="node (graph theory)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303083" start="5030" end="5052" title="state-transition table" label="state-transition table"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5406" end="5418" title="Virtual finite state machine#State Table" label="state tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528011" start="5429" end="5457" title="virtual finite-state machine" label="virtual finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="5492" end="5517" title="Unified Modeling Language" label="Unified Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431942" start="5564" end="5581" title="UML state machine" label="UML state machine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5731" end="5759" title="UML state machine#Hierarchically nested states" label="hierarchically nested states"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5764" end="5782" title="UML state machine#Orthogonal regions" label="orthogonal regions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5814" end="5821" title="UML state machine#Actions and transitions" label="actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126309" start="5875" end="5888" title="Mealy machine" label="Mealy machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q640119" start="5894" end="5907" title="Moore machine" label="Moore machine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5923" end="5930" title="UML state machine#Actions and transitions" label="actions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5994" end="5999" title="UML state machine#Events" label="event"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6034" end="6056" title="UML state machine#Entry and exit actions" label="entry and exit actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q600637" start="6170" end="6208" title="Specification and Description Language" label="Specification and Description Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="6228" end="6231" title="ITU" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="6863" end="6885" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="6887" end="6898" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="6900" end="6916" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="6918" end="6928" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="6930" end="6937" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="6939" end="6949" title="mathematic" label="mathematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753830" start="6952" end="6974" title="video game programming" label="video game programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="6980" end="6985" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214526" start="7044" end="7059" title="automata theory" label="automata theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q844718" start="7068" end="7089" title="theory of computation" label="theory of computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501221" start="7187" end="7201" title="control theory" label="control theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q173156" start="7214" end="7238" title="Digital electronics" label="hardware digital systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="7240" end="7260" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="7262" end="7270" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="7273" end="7289" title="network protocol" label="network protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="7296" end="7321" title="computational linguistics" label="computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="7841" end="7860" title="string (computer science)" label="sequence of symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="8194" end="8209" title="formal language" label="formal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q752532" start="8216" end="8232" title="regular language" label="regular language"/>
<link wikidata="Q752532" start="8737" end="8753" title="regular language" label="regular language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058754" start="8848" end="8870" title="algebraic path problem" label="algebraic path problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058754" start="8902" end="8923" title="shortest path problem" label="shortest path problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333055" start="8988" end="8996" title="semiring" label="semiring"/>
<link wikidata="Q837528" start="9053" end="9083" title="deterministic finite automaton" label="deterministic finite automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="9115" end="9121" title="Binary numeral system" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14392" start="9511" end="9512" title="ε" label="ε"/>
<link wikidata="Q670834" start="9518" end="9530" title="empty string" label="empty string"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="9903" end="9928" title="computational linguistics" label="computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q640119" start="9987" end="10000" title="Moore machine" label="Moore machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126309" start="10714" end="10727" title="Mealy machine" label="Mealy machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528011" start="11063" end="11074" title="Virtual finite-state machine" label="virtual FSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416684" start="11087" end="11103" title="event-driven finite-state machine" label="event-driven FSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q837528" start="11737" end="11740" title="Deterministic finite automaton" label="DFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q617295" start="11777" end="11780" title="Nondeterministic finite automaton" label="NFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532499" start="11782" end="11786" title="Generalized nondeterministic finite automaton" label="GNFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106494" start="12007" end="12028" title="powerset construction" label="powerset construction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12735" end="12762" title="UML state machine#Hierarchically nested states" label="hierarchical state machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q219079" start="12830" end="12841" title="truth table" label="truth table"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920599" start="12938" end="12950" title="David Harel" label="Harel&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13014" end="13032" title="UML state machine#Orthogonal regions" label="orthogonal regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q600590" start="13296" end="13305" title="Tuple" label="quintuple"/>
<link wikidata="Q837518" start="13349" end="13357" title="Alphabet (computer science)" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q617295" start="13564" end="13597" title="nondeterministic finite automaton" label="nondeterministic finite automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756942" start="13846" end="13862" title="partial function" label="partial function"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="14364" end="14378" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166395" start="14653" end="14676" title="finite-state transducer" label="finite-state transducer"/>
<link wikidata="Q600590" start="14688" end="14696" title="sextuple" label="sextuple"/>
<link wikidata="Q837518" start="14741" end="14749" title="Alphabet (computer science)" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126309" start="15222" end="15235" title="Mealy machine" label="Mealy machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q640119" start="15384" end="15397" title="Moore machine" label="Moore machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449364" start="15467" end="15480" title="semiautomaton" label="semiautomaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q176468" start="15484" end="15501" title="transition system" label="transition system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16227" end="16258" title="DFA minimization#Hopcroft&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Hopcroft minimization algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948235" start="16294" end="16311" title="implication table" label="implication table"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="16394" end="16405" title="linear time" label="linear time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121567" start="16466" end="16481" title="digital circuit" label="digital circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063837" start="16511" end="16536" title="programmable logic device" label="programmable logic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q188674" start="16540" end="16569" title="programmable logic controller" label="programmable logic controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="16571" end="16581" title="logic gate" label="logic gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="16587" end="16597" title="Flip-flop (electronics)" label="flip flops"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="16601" end="16606" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="16665" end="16673" title="processor register" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q76505" start="16711" end="16730" title="combinational logic" label="combinational logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330301" start="16900" end="16919" title="Richards controller" label="Richards controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303867" start="17080" end="17108" title="state encoding for low power" label="state encoding for low power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056322" start="17305" end="17331" title="Automata-based programming" label="Automata-based programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416684" start="17334" end="17367" title="Event-driven finite-state machine" label="Event-driven finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528011" start="17370" end="17398" title="Virtual finite-state machine" label="Virtual finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q230866" start="17401" end="17421" title="State pattern" label="State design pattern"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17505" end="17513" title="Compilers#Front end" label="frontend"/>
<link wikidata="Q835922" start="17625" end="17641" title="lexical analysis" label="lexical analyzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q338047" start="17909" end="17921" title="context-free grammar" label="context-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q333385" start="17991" end="18013" title="Abstract state machine" label="Abstract state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300791" start="18017" end="18045" title="Alternating finite automaton" label="Alternating finite automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087261" start="18048" end="18082" title="Communicating finite-state machine" label="Communicating finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q959968" start="18085" end="18099" title="Control system" label="Control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165889" start="18102" end="18115" title="Control table" label="Control table"/>
<link wikidata="Q747762" start="18118" end="18132" title="Decision table" label="Decision table"/>
<link wikidata="Q911082" start="18136" end="18140" title="DEVS" label="DEVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q176769" start="18143" end="18162" title="Hidden Markov model" label="Hidden Markov model"/>
<link wikidata="Q724168" start="18165" end="18174" title="Petri net" label="Petri net"/>
<link wikidata="Q751443" start="18177" end="18195" title="Pushdown automaton" label="Pushdown automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q176837" start="18198" end="18222" title="Quantum finite automaton" label="Quantum finite automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389358" start="18225" end="18230" title="SCXML" label="SCXML"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449364" start="18233" end="18246" title="Semiautomaton" label="Semiautomaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449424" start="18249" end="18265" title="Semigroup action" label="Semigroup action"/>
<link wikidata="Q173245" start="18268" end="18284" title="Sequential logic" label="Sequential logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q230885" start="18287" end="18300" title="State diagram" label="State diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662204" start="18303" end="18321" title="Synchronizing word" label="Synchronizing word"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022116" start="18324" end="18348" title="Transformation semigroup" label="Transformation semigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q176468" start="18351" end="18368" title="Transition system" label="Transition system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872598" start="18371" end="18385" title="Tree automaton" label="Tree automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="18388" end="18402" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431942" start="18405" end="18422" title="UML state machine" label="UML state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176645" start="20096" end="20108" title="Markov chain" label="Markov chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631990" start="20493" end="20517" title="subshifts of finite type" label="subshifts of finite type"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10933" wikidata="Q193076" url="?curid=10933" title="Functional programming">
<text>In computer science, functional programming is a programming paradigm where programs are constructed by applying and composing functions. It is a declarative programming paradigm in which function definitions are trees of expressions that map values to other values, rather than a sequence of imperative statements which update the running state of the program.

In functional programming, functions are treated as first-class citizens, meaning that they can be bound to names (including local identifiers), passed as arguments, and returned from other functions, just as any other data type can. This allows programs to be written in a declarative and composable style, where small functions are combined in a modular manner.

Functional programming is sometimes treated as synonymous with purely functional programming, a subset of functional programming that treats all functions as deterministic mathematical functions, or pure functions. When a pure function is called with some given arguments, it will always return the same result, and cannot be affected by any mutable state or other side effects. This is in contrast with impure procedures, common in imperative programming, which can have side effects (such as modifying the program&#x27;s state or taking input from a user). Proponents of purely functional programming claim that by restricting side effects, programs can have fewer bugs, be easier to debug and test, and be more suited to formal verification.

Functional programming has its roots in academia, evolving from the lambda calculus, a formal system of computation based only on functions. Functional programming has historically been less popular than imperative programming, but many functional languages are seeing use today in industry and education, including Common Lisp, Scheme, Clojure, Wolfram Language, Racket, Erlang, Elixir, OCaml, Haskell, and F#. Lean is a functional programming language commonly used for verifying mathematical theorems. Functional programming is also key to some languages that have found success in specific domains, like JavaScript in the Web, R in statistics, J, K and Q in financial analysis, and XQuery/XSLT for XML. Domain-specific declarative languages like SQL and Lex/Yacc use some elements of functional programming, such as not allowing mutable values. In addition, many other programming languages support programming in a functional style or have implemented features from functional programming, such as C++11, C#, Kotlin, Perl, PHP, Python, Go, Rust, Raku, Scala, and Java (since Java 8).

== History ==
The lambda calculus, developed in the 1930s by Alonzo Church, is a formal system of computation built from function application. In 1937 Alan Turing proved that the lambda calculus and Turing machines are equivalent models of computation, showing that the lambda calculus is Turing complete. Lambda calculus forms the basis of all functional programming languages. An equivalent theoretical formulation, combinatory logic, was developed by Moses Schönfinkel and Haskell Curry in the 1920s and 1930s.

Church later developed a weaker system, the simply typed lambda calculus, which extended the lambda calculus by assigning a data type to all terms. This forms the basis for statically typed functional programming.

The first high-level functional programming language, Lisp, was developed in the late 1950s for the IBM 700/7000 series of scientific computers by John McCarthy while at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Lisp functions were defined using Church&#x27;s lambda notation, extended with a label construct to allow recursive functions. Lisp first introduced many paradigmatic features of functional programming, though early Lisps were multi-paradigm languages, and incorporated support for numerous programming styles as new paradigms evolved. Later dialects, such as Scheme and Clojure, and offshoots such as Dylan and Julia, sought to simplify and rationalise Lisp around a cleanly functional core, while Common Lisp was designed to preserve and update the paradigmatic features of the numerous older dialects it replaced.

Information Processing Language (IPL), 1956, is sometimes cited as the first computer-based functional programming language. It is an assembly-style language for manipulating lists of symbols. It does have a notion of &quot;generator&quot;, which amounts to a function that accepts a function as an argument, and, since it is an assembly-level language, code can be data, so IPL can be regarded as having higher-order functions. However, it relies heavily on the mutating list structure and similar imperative features.

Kenneth E. Iverson developed APL in the early 1960s, described in his 1962 book &quot;A Programming Language&quot; (). APL was the primary influence on John Backus&#x27;s FP. In the early 1990s, Iverson and Roger Hui created J. In the mid-1990s, Arthur Whitney, who had previously worked with Iverson, created K, which is used commercially in financial industries along with its descendant Q.

In the mid-1960s, Peter Landin invented SECD machine, the first abstract machine for a functional programming language, described a correspondence between ALGOL 60 and the lambda calculus, and proposed the ISWIM programming language.

John Backus presented FP in his 1977 Turing Award lecture &quot;Can Programming Be Liberated From the von Neumann Style? A Functional Style and its Algebra of Programs&quot;. He defines functional programs as being built up in a hierarchical way by means of &quot;combining forms&quot; that allow an &quot;algebra of programs&quot;; in modern language, this means that functional programs follow the principle of compositionality. Backus&#x27;s paper popularized research into functional programming, though it emphasized function-level programming rather than the lambda-calculus style now associated with functional programming.

The 1973 language ML was created by Robin Milner at the University of Edinburgh, and David Turner developed the language SASL at the University of St Andrews. Also in Edinburgh in the 1970s, Burstall and Darlington developed the functional language NPL. NPL was based on Kleene Recursion Equations and was first introduced in their work on program transformation. Burstall, MacQueen and Sannella then incorporated the polymorphic type checking from ML to produce the language Hope. ML eventually developed into several dialects, the most common of which are now OCaml and Standard ML.

In the 1970s, Guy L. Steele and Gerald Jay Sussman developed Scheme, as described in the Lambda Papers and the 1985 textbook &quot;Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs&quot;. Scheme was the first dialect of lisp to use lexical scoping and to require tail-call optimization, features that encourage functional programming.

In the 1980s, Per Martin-Löf developed intuitionistic type theory (also called &quot;constructive&quot; type theory), which associated functional programs with constructive proofs expressed as dependent types. This led to new approaches to interactive theorem proving and has influenced the development of subsequent functional programming languages.

The lazy functional language, Miranda, developed by David Turner, initially appeared in 1985 and had a strong influence on Haskell. With Miranda being proprietary, Haskell began with a consensus in 1987 to form an open standard for functional programming research; implementation releases have been ongoing as of 1990.

More recently it has found use in niches such as parametric CAD in the OpenSCAD language built on the CGAL framework, although its restriction on reassigning values (all values are treated as constants) has led to confusion among users who are unfamiliar with functional programming as a concept.

Functional programming continues to be used in commercial settings.

== Concepts ==
A number of concepts and paradigms are specific to functional programming, and generally foreign to imperative programming (including object-oriented programming). However, programming languages often cater to several programming paradigms, so programmers using &quot;mostly imperative&quot; languages may have utilized some of these concepts.

=== First-class and higher-order functions ===
Higher-order functions are functions that can either take other functions as arguments or return them as results. In calculus, an example of a higher-order function is the differential operator formula_1, which returns the derivative of a function formula_2.

Higher-order functions are closely related to first-class functions in that higher-order functions and first-class functions both allow functions as arguments and results of other functions. The distinction between the two is subtle: &quot;higher-order&quot; describes a mathematical concept of functions that operate on other functions, while &quot;first-class&quot; is a computer science term for programming language entities that have no restriction on their use (thus first-class functions can appear anywhere in the program that other first-class entities like numbers can, including as arguments to other functions and as their return values).

Higher-order functions enable partial application or currying, a technique that applies a function to its arguments one at a time, with each application returning a new function that accepts the next argument. This lets a programmer succinctly express, for example, the successor function as the addition operator partially applied to the natural number one.

=== Pure functions ===

Pure functions (or expressions) have no side effects (memory or I/O). This means that pure functions have several useful properties, many of which can be used to optimize the code:
* If the result of a pure expression is not used, it can be removed without affecting other expressions.
* If a pure function is called with arguments that cause no side-effects, the result is constant with respect to that argument list (sometimes called referential transparency or idempotence), i.e., calling the pure function again with the same arguments returns the same result. (This can enable caching optimizations such as memoization.)
* If there is no data dependency between two pure expressions, their order can be reversed, or they can be performed in parallel and they cannot interfere with one another (in other terms, the evaluation of any pure expression is thread-safe).
* If the entire language does not allow side-effects, then any evaluation strategy can be used; this gives the compiler freedom to reorder or combine the evaluation of expressions in a program (for example, using deforestation).

While most compilers for imperative programming languages detect pure functions and perform common-subexpression elimination for pure function calls, they cannot always do this for pre-compiled libraries, which generally do not expose this information, thus preventing optimizations that involve those external functions. Some compilers, such as gcc, add extra keywords for a programmer to explicitly mark external functions as pure, to enable such optimizations. Fortran 95 also lets functions be designated &quot;pure&quot;. C++11 added codice_1 keyword with similar semantics.

=== Recursion ===
Iteration (looping) in functional languages is usually accomplished via recursion. Recursive functions invoke themselves, letting an operation be repeated until it reaches the base case. In general, recursion requires maintaining a stack, which consumes space in a linear amount to the depth of recursion. This could make recursion prohibitively expensive to use instead of imperative loops. However, a special form of recursion known as tail recursion can be recognized and optimized by a compiler into the same code used to implement iteration in imperative languages. Tail recursion optimization can be implemented by transforming the program into continuation passing style during compiling, among other approaches.

The Scheme language standard requires implementations to support proper tail recursion, meaning they must allow an unbounded number of active tail calls. Proper tail recursion is not simply an optimization; it is a language feature that assures users that they can use recursion to express a loop and doing so would be safe-for-space. Moreover, contrary to its name, it accounts for all tail calls, not just tail recursion. While proper tail recursion is usually implemented by turning code into imperative loops, implementations might implement it in other ways. For example, Chicken intentionally maintains a stack and lets the stack overflow. However, when this happens, its garbage collector will claim space back, allowing an unbounded number of active tail calls even though it does not turn tail recursion into a loop.

Common patterns of recursion can be abstracted away using higher-order functions, with catamorphisms and anamorphisms (or &quot;folds&quot; and &quot;unfolds&quot;) being the most obvious examples. Such recursion schemes play a role analogous to built-in control structures such as loops in imperative languages.

Most general purpose functional programming languages allow unrestricted recursion and are Turing complete, which makes the halting problem undecidable, can cause unsoundness of equational reasoning, and generally requires the introduction of inconsistency into the logic expressed by the language&#x27;s type system. Some special purpose languages such as Coq allow only well-founded recursion and are strongly normalizing (nonterminating computations can be expressed only with infinite streams of values called codata). As a consequence, these languages fail to be Turing complete and expressing certain functions in them is impossible, but they can still express a wide class of interesting computations while avoiding the problems introduced by unrestricted recursion. Functional programming limited to well-founded recursion with a few other constraints is called total functional programming.

=== Strict versus non-strict evaluation ===
Functional languages can be categorized by whether they use &quot;strict (eager)&quot; or &quot;non-strict (lazy)&quot; evaluation, concepts that refer to how function arguments are processed when an expression is being evaluated. The technical difference is in the denotational semantics of expressions containing failing or divergent computations. Under strict evaluation, the evaluation of any term containing a failing subterm fails. For example, the expression:
 print length([2+1, 3*2, 1/0, 5-4])

fails under strict evaluation because of the division by zero in the third element of the list. Under lazy evaluation, the length function returns the value 4 (i.e., the number of items in the list), since evaluating it does not attempt to evaluate the terms making up the list. In brief, strict evaluation always fully evaluates function arguments before invoking the function. Lazy evaluation does not evaluate function arguments unless their values are required to evaluate the function call itself.

The usual implementation strategy for lazy evaluation in functional languages is graph reduction. Lazy evaluation is used by default in several pure functional languages, including Miranda, Clean, and Haskell.

 argues for lazy evaluation as a mechanism for improving program modularity through separation of concerns, by easing independent implementation of producers and consumers of data streams. Launchbury 1993 describes some difficulties that lazy evaluation introduces, particularly in analyzing a program&#x27;s storage requirements, and proposes an operational semantics to aid in such analysis. Harper 2009 proposes including both strict and lazy evaluation in the same language, using the language&#x27;s type system to distinguish them.

=== Type systems ===

Especially since the development of Hindley–Milner type inference in the 1970s, functional programming languages have tended to use typed lambda calculus, rejecting all invalid programs at compilation time and risking false positive errors, as opposed to the untyped lambda calculus, that accepts all valid programs at compilation time and risks false negative errors, used in Lisp and its variants (such as Scheme), as they reject all invalid programs at runtime when the information is enough to not reject valid programs. The use of algebraic data types makes manipulation of complex data structures convenient; the presence of strong compile-time type checking makes programs more reliable in absence of other reliability techniques like test-driven development, while type inference frees the programmer from the need to manually declare types to the compiler in most cases.

Some research-oriented functional languages such as Coq, Agda, Cayenne, and Epigram are based on intuitionistic type theory, which lets types depend on terms. Such types are called dependent types. These type systems do not have decidable type inference and are difficult to understand and program with. But dependent types can express arbitrary propositions in higher-order logic. Through the Curry–Howard isomorphism, then, well-typed programs in these languages become a means of writing formal mathematical proofs from which a compiler can generate certified code. While these languages are mainly of interest in academic research (including in formalized mathematics), they have begun to be used in engineering as well. Compcert is a compiler for a subset of the language C that is written in Coq and formally verified.

A limited form of dependent types called generalized algebraic data types (GADT&#x27;s) can be implemented in a way that provides some of the benefits of dependently typed programming while avoiding most of its inconvenience. GADT&#x27;s are available in the Glasgow Haskell Compiler, in OCaml and in Scala, and have been proposed as additions to other languages including Java and C#.

=== Referential transparency ===

Functional programs do not have assignment statements, that is, the value of a variable in a functional program never changes once defined. This eliminates any chances of side effects because any variable can be replaced with its actual value at any point of execution. So, functional programs are referentially transparent.

Consider C assignment statement codice_2, this changes the value assigned to the variable codice_3. Let us say that the initial value of codice_3 was codice_5, then two consecutive evaluations of the variable codice_3 yields codice_7 and codice_8 respectively. Clearly, replacing codice_2 with either codice_7 or codice_8 gives a program a different meaning, and so the expression &quot;is not&quot; referentially transparent. In fact, assignment statements are never referentially transparent.

Now, consider another function such as int plusone(int x) {return x+1;} &quot;is&quot; transparent, as it does not implicitly change the input x and thus has no such side effects.
Functional programs exclusively use this type of function and are therefore referentially transparent.

===Data structures===

Purely functional data structures are often represented in a different way to their imperative counterparts. For example, the array with constant access and update times is a basic component of most imperative languages, and many imperative data-structures, such as the hash table and binary heap, are based on arrays. Arrays can be replaced by maps or random access lists, which admit purely functional implementation, but have logarithmic access and update times. Purely functional data structures have persistence, a property of keeping previous versions of the data structure unmodified. In Clojure, persistent data structures are used as functional alternatives to their imperative counterparts. Persistent vectors, for example, use trees for partial updating. Calling the insert method will result in some but not all nodes being created.

== Comparison to imperative programming ==
Functional programming is very different from imperative programming. The most significant differences stem from the fact that functional programming avoids side effects, which are used in imperative programming to implement state and I/O. Pure functional programming completely prevents side-effects and provides referential transparency.

Higher-order functions are rarely used in older imperative programming. A traditional imperative program might use a loop to traverse and modify a list. A functional program, on the other hand, would probably use a higher-order &quot;map&quot; function that takes a function and a list, generating and returning a new list by applying the function to each list item.

=== Imperative vs. functional programming ===

The following two examples (written in JavaScript) achieve the same effect: they multiply all even numbers in an array by 10 and add them all, storing the final sum in the variable &quot;result&quot;.

Traditional imperative loop:

const numList = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10];
let result = 0;
for (let i = 0; i &lt; numList.length; i++) {
 if (numList[i] % 2 === 0) {
 result += numList[i] * 10;
}
Functional programming with higher-order functions:

const result = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
 .filter(n =&gt; n % 2 === 0)
 .map(a =&gt; a * 10)
 .reduce((a, b) =&gt; a + b, 0);
Sometimes the abstractions offered by functional programming might lead to development of more robust code that avoids certain issues that might arise when building upon large amount of complex, imperative code, such as off-by-one errors (see Greenspun&#x27;s tenth rule).

=== Simulating state ===
There are tasks (for example, maintaining a bank account balance) that often seem most naturally implemented with state. Pure functional programming performs these tasks, and I/O tasks such as accepting user input and printing to the screen, in a different way.

The pure functional programming language Haskell implements them using monads, derived from category theory. Monads offer a way to abstract certain types of computational patterns, including (but not limited to) modeling of computations with mutable state (and other side effects such as I/O) in an imperative manner without losing purity. While existing monads may be easy to apply in a program, given appropriate templates and examples, many students find them difficult to understand conceptually, e.g., when asked to define new monads (which is sometimes needed for certain types of libraries).

Functional languages also simulate states by passing around immutable states. This can be done by making a function accept the state as one of its parameters, and return a new state together with the result, leaving the old state unchanged.
Impure functional languages usually include a more direct method of managing mutable state. Clojure, for example, uses managed references that can be updated by applying pure functions to the current state. This kind of approach enables mutability while still promoting the use of pure functions as the preferred way to express computations.
Alternative methods such as Hoare logic and uniqueness have been developed to track side effects in programs. Some modern research languages use effect systems to make the presence of side effects explicit.
=== Efficiency issues ===
Functional programming languages are typically less efficient in their use of CPU and memory than imperative languages such as C and Pascal. This is related to the fact that some mutable data structures like arrays have a very straightforward implementation using present hardware. Flat arrays may be accessed very efficiently with deeply pipelined CPUs, prefetched efficiently through caches (with no complex pointer chasing), or handled with SIMD instructions. It is also not easy to create their equally efficient general-purpose immutable counterparts. For purely functional languages, the worst-case slowdown is logarithmic in the number of memory cells used, because mutable memory can be represented by a purely functional data structure with logarithmic access time (such as a balanced tree). However, such slowdowns are not universal. For programs that perform intensive numerical computations, functional languages such as OCaml and Clean are only slightly slower than C according to The Computer Language Benchmarks Game. For programs that handle large matrices and multidimensional databases, array functional languages (such as J and K) were designed with speed optimizations.

Immutability of data can in many cases lead to execution efficiency by allowing the compiler to make assumptions that are unsafe in an imperative language, thus increasing opportunities for inline expansion. Even if the involved copying that may seem implicit when dealing with persistent immutable data structures might seem computationally costly, some functional programming languages, like Clojure solve this issue by implementing mechanisms for safe memory sharing between &quot;formally&quot; &quot;immutable&quot; data. Rust distinguishes itself by its approach to data immutability which involves immutable references and a concept called &quot;lifetimes.&quot;

Immutable data with separation of identity and state and shared-nothing schemes can also potentially be more well-suited for concurrent and parallel programming by the virtue of reducing or eliminating the risk of certain concurrency hazards, since concurrent operations are usually atomic and this allows eliminating the need for locks. This is how for example codice_12 classes are implemented, where some of them are immutable variants of the corresponding classes that are not suitable for concurrent use. Functional programming languages often have a concurrency model that instead of shared state and synchronization, leverages message passing mechanisms (such as the actor model, where each actor is a container for state, behavior, child actors and a message queue). This approach is common in Erlang/Elixir or Akka.

Lazy evaluation may also speed up the program, even asymptotically, whereas it may slow it down at most by a constant factor (however, it may introduce memory leaks if used improperly). Launchbury 1993 discusses theoretical issues related to memory leaks from lazy evaluation, and O&#x27;Sullivan &quot;et al.&quot; 2008 give some practical advice for analyzing and fixing them.
However, the most general implementations of lazy evaluation making extensive use of dereferenced code and data perform poorly on modern processors with deep pipelines and multi-level caches (where a cache miss may cost hundreds of cycles) .

==== Abstraction cost ====

Some functional programming languages might not optimize abstractions such as higher order functions like &quot;map&quot; or &quot;filter&quot; as efficiently as the underlying imperative operations. Consider, as an example, the following two ways to check if 5 is an even number in Clojure:

(even? 5)
(.equals (mod 5 2) 0)

When benchmarked using the Criterium tool on a Ryzen 7900X GNU/Linux PC in a Leiningen REPL 2.11.2, running on Java VM version 22 and Clojure version 1.11.1, the first implementation, which is implemented as:

(defn even?
 &quot;Returns true if n is even, throws an exception if n is not an integer&quot;
 {:added &quot;1.0&quot;
 :static true}
 [n] (if (integer? n)
 (zero? (bit-and (clojure.lang.RT/uncheckedLongCast n) 1))
 (throw (IllegalArgumentException. (str &quot;Argument must be an integer: &quot; n)))))
has the mean execution time of 4.76 ms, while the second one, in which .equals is a direct invocation of the underlying Java method, has a mean execution time of 2.8 μs – roughly 1700 times faster. Part of that can be attributed to the type checking and exception handling involved in the implementation of even?. For instance the lo library for Go, which implements various higher-order functions common in functional programming languages using generics. In a benchmark provided by the library&#x27;s author, calling codice_13 is 4% slower than an equivalent codice_14 loop and has the same allocation profile, which can be attributed to various compiler optimizations, such as inlining.

One distinguishing feature of Rust are &quot;zero-cost abstractions&quot;. This means that using them imposes no additional runtime overhead. This is achieved thanks to the compiler using loop unrolling, where each iteration of a loop, be it imperative or using iterators, is converted into a standalone Assembly instruction, without the overhead of the loop controlling code. If an iterative operation writes to an array, the resulting array&#x27;s elements will be stored in specific CPU registers, allowing for constant-time access at runtime.

=== Functional programming in non-functional languages ===

It is possible to use a functional style of programming in languages that are not traditionally considered functional languages. For example, both D and Fortran 95 explicitly support pure functions.

JavaScript, Lua, Python and Go had first class functions from their inception. Python had support for &quot;lambda&quot;, &quot;map&quot;, &quot;reduce&quot;, and &quot;filter&quot; in 1994, as well as closures in Python 2.2, though Python 3 relegated &quot;reduce&quot; to the codice_15 standard library module. First-class functions have been introduced into other mainstream languages such as Perl 5.0 in 1994, PHP 5.3, Visual Basic 9, C# 3.0, C++11, and Kotlin.

In Perl, lambda, map, reduce, filter, and closures are fully supported and frequently used. The book Higher-Order Perl, released in 2005, was written to provide an expansive guide on using Perl for functional programming.

In PHP, anonymous classes, closures and lambdas are fully supported. Libraries and language extensions for immutable data structures are being developed to aid programming in the functional style.

In Java, anonymous classes can sometimes be used to simulate closures; however, anonymous classes are not always proper replacements to closures because they have more limited capabilities. Java 8 supports lambda expressions as a replacement for some anonymous classes.

In C#, anonymous classes are not necessary, because closures and lambdas are fully supported. Libraries and language extensions for immutable data structures are being developed to aid programming in the functional style in C#.

Many object-oriented design patterns are expressible in functional programming terms: for example, the strategy pattern simply dictates use of a higher-order function, and the visitor pattern roughly corresponds to a catamorphism, or fold.

Similarly, the idea of immutable data from functional programming is often included in imperative programming languages, for example the tuple in Python, which is an immutable array, and Object.freeze() in JavaScript.

== Comparison to logic programming ==

Logic programming can be viewed as a generalisation of functional programming, in which functions are a special case of relations.
For example, the function, mother(X) = Y, (every X has only one mother Y) can be represented by the relation mother(X, Y). Whereas functions have a strict input-output pattern of arguments, relations can be queried with any pattern of inputs and outputs. Consider the following logic program:

mother(charles, elizabeth).
mother(harry, diana).

The program can be queried, like a functional program, to generate mothers from children:

?- mother(harry, X).
X = diana.
?- mother(charles, X).
X = elizabeth.

But it can also be queried &quot;backwards&quot;, to generate children:

?- mother(X, elizabeth).
X = charles.
?- mother(X, diana).
X = harry.

It can even be used to generate all instances of the mother relation:

?- mother(X, Y).
X = charles,
Y = elizabeth.
X = harry,
Y = diana.

Compared with relational syntax, functional syntax is a more compact notation for nested functions. For example, the definition of maternal grandmother in functional syntax can be written in the nested form:

maternal_grandmother(X) = mother(mother(X)).

The same definition in relational notation needs to be written in the unnested form:

maternal_grandmother(X, Y) :- mother(X, Z), mother(Z, Y).

Here codice_16 means &quot;if&quot; and codice_17means &quot;and&quot;.

However, the difference between the two representations is simply syntactic. In Ciao Prolog, relations can be nested, like functions in functional programming:

grandparent(X) := parent(parent(X)).
parent(X) := mother(X).
parent(X) := father(X).

mother(charles) := elizabeth.
father(charles) := phillip.
mother(harry) := diana.
father(harry) := charles.

?- grandparent(X,Y).
X = harry,
Y = elizabeth.
X = harry,
Y = phillip.

Ciao transforms the function-like notation into relational form and executes the resulting logic program using the standard Prolog execution strategy.

== Applications ==

=== Text editors ===

Emacs, a highly extensible text editor family uses its own Lisp dialect for writing plugins. The original author of the most popular Emacs implementation, GNU Emacs and Emacs Lisp, Richard Stallman considers Lisp one of his favorite programming languages.

Helix, since version 24.03 supports previewing AST as S-expressions, which are also the core feature of the Lisp programming language family.

=== Spreadsheets ===
Spreadsheets can be considered a form of pure, zeroth-order, strict-evaluation functional programming system. However, spreadsheets generally lack higher-order functions as well as code reuse, and in some implementations, also lack recursion. Several extensions have been developed for spreadsheet programs to enable higher-order and reusable functions, but so far remain primarily academic in nature.

=== Microservices ===
Due to their composability, functional programming paradigms can be suitable for microservices-based architectures.

=== Academia ===
Functional programming is an active area of research in the field of programming language theory. There are several peer-reviewed publication venues focusing on functional programming, including the International Conference on Functional Programming, the Journal of Functional Programming, and the Symposium on Trends in Functional Programming.

=== Industry ===
Functional programming has been employed in a wide range of industrial applications. For example, Erlang, which was developed by the Swedish company Ericsson in the late 1980s, was originally used to implement fault-tolerant telecommunications systems, but has since become popular for building a range of applications at companies such as Nortel, Facebook, Électricité de France and WhatsApp. Scheme, a dialect of Lisp, was used as the basis for several applications on early Apple Macintosh computers and has been applied to problems such as training-simulation software and telescope control. OCaml, which was introduced in the mid-1990s, has seen commercial use in areas such as financial analysis, driver verification, industrial robot programming and static analysis of embedded software. Haskell, though initially intended as a research language, has also been applied in areas such as aerospace systems, hardware design and web programming.

Other functional programming languages that have seen use in industry include Scala, F#, Wolfram Language, Lisp, Standard ML and Clojure. Scala has been widely used in Data science, while ClojureScript, Elm or PureScript are some of the functional frontend programming languages used in production. Elixir&#x27;s Phoenix framework is also used by some relatively popular commercial projects, such as Font Awesome or Allegro (one of the biggest e-commerce platforms in Poland)&#x27;s classified ads platform &quot;Allegro Lokalnie.&quot;

Functional &quot;platforms&quot; have been popular in finance for risk analytics (particularly with large investment banks). Risk factors are coded as functions that form interdependent graphs (categories) to measure correlations in market shifts, similar in manner to Gröbner basis optimizations but also for regulatory frameworks such as Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. Given the use of OCaml and Caml variations in finance, these systems are sometimes considered related to a categorical abstract machine. Functional programming is heavily influenced by category theory.

=== Education ===
Many universities teach functional programming. Some treat it as an introductory programming concept while others first teach imperative programming methods.

Outside of computer science, functional programming is used to teach problem-solving, algebraic and geometric concepts. It has also been used to teach classical mechanics, as in the book &quot;Structure and Interpretation of Classical Mechanics&quot;.

In particular, Scheme has been a relatively popular choice for teaching programming for years.

== See also ==

* Eager evaluation
* Functional reactive programming
* Inductive functional programming
* List of functional programming languages
* List of functional programming topics
* Nested function
* Purely functional programming

== Notes and references ==

== Further reading ==
* Cousineau, Guy and Michel Mauny. &quot;The Functional Approach to Programming&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
* Curry, Haskell Brooks and Feys, Robert and Craig, William. &quot;Combinatory Logic&quot;. Volume I. North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1958.
* Dominus, Mark Jason. &quot;Higher-Order Perl&quot;. Morgan Kaufmann. 2005.
* Graham, Paul. &quot;ANSI Common LISP&quot;. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1996.
* MacLennan, Bruce J. &quot;Functional Programming: Practice and Theory&quot;. Addison-Wesley, 1990.
* 
* Pratt, Terrence W. and Marvin Victor Zelkowitz. &quot;Programming Languages: Design and Implementation&quot;. 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1996.
* Salus, Peter H. &quot;Functional and Logic Programming Languages&quot;. Vol. 4 of Handbook of Programming Languages. Indianapolis, Indiana: Macmillan Technical Publishing, 1998.
* Thompson, Simon. &quot;Haskell: The Craft of Functional Programming&quot;. Harlow, England: Addison-Wesley Longman Limited, 1996.

== External links ==
* An introduction
* &quot;Functional programming in Python&quot; (by David Mertz): part 1, part 2, part 3</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="21" end="43" title="Functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q188267" start="49" end="69" title="programming paradigm" label="programming paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508767" start="104" end="112" title="Function application" label="applying"/>
<link wikidata="Q13461925" start="117" end="126" title="Function composition (computer science)" label="composing"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="127" end="136" title="Function (computer science)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q531152" start="146" end="169" title="declarative programming" label="declarative programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="213" end="218" title="Tree (data structure)" label="trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q778379" start="222" end="233" title="Expression (computer science)" label="expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196827" start="243" end="248" title="Value (computer science)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="293" end="303" title="Imperative programming" label="imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q613299" start="304" end="314" title="Statement (computer science)" label="statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="332" end="345" title="State (computer science)" label="running state"/>
<link wikidata="Q303462" start="415" end="434" title="first-class citizen" label="first-class citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773882" start="494" end="505" title="Identifier (computer languages)" label="identifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410440" start="518" end="527" title="Parameter (computer programming)" label="arguments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242416" start="533" end="541" title="Return value" label="returned"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="582" end="591" title="data type" label="data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q531152" start="637" end="648" title="Declarative programming" label="declarative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156715" start="653" end="663" title="Composability" label="composable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453666" start="711" end="718" title="Modular programming" label="modular"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453809" start="791" end="820" title="purely functional programming" label="purely functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q622381" start="886" end="899" title="Deterministic system" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="913" end="922" title="Function (mathematics)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075265" start="927" end="940" title="pure function" label="pure function"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="1078" end="1083" title="State (computer science)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144241" start="1093" end="1105" title="Side effect (computer science)" label="side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="1139" end="1149" title="Procedure (computer science)" label="procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="1161" end="1183" title="imperative programming" label="imperative programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="1395" end="1399" title="Software bug" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="1414" end="1419" title="Debugging" label="debug"/>
<link wikidata="Q188522" start="1424" end="1428" title="Software testing" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q173326" start="1452" end="1471" title="formal verification" label="formal verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="1514" end="1522" title="academia" label="academia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="1542" end="1557" title="lambda calculus" label="lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="1790" end="1801" title="Common Lisp" label="Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="1803" end="1809" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q51798" start="1811" end="1818" title="Clojure" label="Clojure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241057" start="1820" end="1836" title="Wolfram Language" label="Wolfram Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254148" start="1838" end="1844" title="Racket (programming language)" label="Racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q334879" start="1846" end="1852" title="Erlang (programming language)" label="Erlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362035" start="1854" end="1860" title="Elixir (programming language)" label="Elixir"/>
<link wikidata="Q212587" start="1862" end="1867" title="OCaml" label="OCaml"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="1869" end="1876" title="Haskell" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q648619" start="1882" end="1884" title="F Sharp (programming language)" label="F#"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509476" start="1886" end="1890" title="Lean (proof assistant)" label="Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="2082" end="2092" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="2105" end="2106" title="R (programming language)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q383994" start="2122" end="2123" title="J (programming language)" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042031" start="2125" end="2126" title="K (programming language)" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265638" start="2131" end="2132" title="Q (programming language from Kx Systems)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q850661" start="2160" end="2166" title="XQuery" label="XQuery"/>
<link wikidata="Q32110" start="2167" end="2171" title="XSLT" label="XSLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="2176" end="2179" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="2224" end="2227" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q306650" start="2232" end="2235" title="Lex (software)" label="Lex"/>
<link wikidata="Q305932" start="2236" end="2240" title="Yacc" label="Yacc"/>
<link wikidata="Q23828" start="2307" end="2321" title="mutable object" label="mutable values"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061570" start="2477" end="2482" title="C++11" label="C++11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="2484" end="2486" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816639" start="2488" end="2494" title="Kotlin (programming language)" label="Kotlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="2496" end="2500" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="2502" end="2505" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="2507" end="2513" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q37227" start="2515" end="2517" title="Go (programming language)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q575650" start="2519" end="2523" title="Rust (programming language)" label="Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052676" start="2525" end="2529" title="Raku (programming language)" label="Raku"/>
<link wikidata="Q460584" start="2531" end="2536" title="Scala (programming language)" label="Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="2542" end="2561" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java (since Java 8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="2582" end="2597" title="lambda calculus" label="lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q92741" start="2625" end="2638" title="Alonzo Church" label="Alonzo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="2645" end="2658" title="formal system" label="formal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525525" start="2662" end="2673" title="computation" label="computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508767" start="2685" end="2705" title="function application" label="function application"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="2715" end="2726" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="2763" end="2778" title="Turing machines" label="Turing machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="2853" end="2868" title="Turing complete" label="Turing complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481571" start="2982" end="2999" title="combinatory logic" label="combinatory logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45113" start="3018" end="3035" title="Moses Schönfinkel" label="Moses Schönfinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q92611" start="3040" end="3053" title="Haskell Curry" label="Haskell Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q855192" start="3123" end="3151" title="simply typed lambda calculus" label="simply typed lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="3203" end="3212" title="data type" label="data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="3304" end="3314" title="High-level programming language" label="high-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="3348" end="3352" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3394" end="3413" title="IBM 700/7000 series#Scientific Architecture" label="IBM 700/7000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q92739" start="3441" end="3454" title="John McCarthy (computer scientist)" label="John McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="3464" end="3501" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="3615" end="3624" title="Recursion (computer science)" label="recursive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3736" end="3760" title="Programming paradigm#Multi-paradigm" label="multi-paradigm languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="3869" end="3875" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q51798" start="3880" end="3887" title="Clojure" label="Clojure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268744" start="3911" end="3916" title="Dylan (programming language)" label="Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613697" start="3921" end="3926" title="Julia (programming language)" label="Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="4008" end="4019" title="Common Lisp" label="Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q776372" start="4127" end="4158" title="Information Processing Language" label="Information Processing Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="4261" end="4284" title="assembly language" label="assembly-style language"/>
<link wikidata="Q92629" start="4648" end="4666" title="Kenneth E. Iverson" label="Kenneth E. Iverson"/>
<link wikidata="Q296187" start="4677" end="4680" title="APL (programming language)" label="APL"/>
<link wikidata="Q92746" start="4800" end="4811" title="John Backus" label="John Backus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474061" start="4819" end="4821" title="FP (programming language)" label="FP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358366" start="4855" end="4864" title="Roger Hui" label="Roger Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q383994" start="4873" end="4874" title="J (programming language)" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q93050" start="4894" end="4908" title="Arthur Whitney (computer scientist)" label="Arthur Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042031" start="4958" end="4959" title="K (programming language)" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265638" start="5038" end="5039" title="Q (programming language from Kx Systems)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q92952" start="5060" end="5072" title="Peter Landin" label="Peter Landin"/>
<link wikidata="Q954312" start="5082" end="5094" title="SECD machine" label="SECD machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q787114" start="5106" end="5122" title="abstract machine" label="abstract machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209759" start="5197" end="5205" title="ALGOL 60" label="ALGOL 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="5214" end="5229" title="lambda calculus" label="lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533797" start="5248" end="5253" title="ISWIM" label="ISWIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q92746" start="5277" end="5288" title="John Backus" label="John Backus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474061" start="5299" end="5301" title="FP (programming language)" label="FP"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="5314" end="5326" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="5379" end="5390" title="Von Neumann architecture" label="von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q936559" start="5677" end="5706" title="principle of compositionality" label="principle of compositionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496566" start="5799" end="5825" title="function-level programming" label="function-level programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q860654" start="5927" end="5929" title="ML (programming language)" label="ML"/>
<link wikidata="Q92643" start="5945" end="5957" title="Robin Milner" label="Robin Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="5965" end="5988" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468156" start="5994" end="6006" title="David Turner (computer scientist)" label="David Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048691" start="6030" end="6034" title="SASL (programming language)" label="SASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="6042" end="6066" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955040" start="6158" end="6161" title="NPL (programming language)" label="NPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933521" start="6180" end="6206" title="Kleene&amp;#x27;s recursion theorem" label="Kleene Recursion Equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240252" start="6327" end="6338" title="Polymorphism (computer science)" label="polymorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040754" start="6385" end="6389" title="Hope (programming language)" label="Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q212587" start="6471" end="6476" title="OCaml" label="OCaml"/>
<link wikidata="Q597330" start="6481" end="6492" title="Standard ML" label="Standard ML"/>
<link wikidata="Q92991" start="6509" end="6522" title="Guy L. Steele" label="Guy L. Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q92981" start="6527" end="6545" title="Gerald Jay Sussman" label="Gerald Jay Sussman"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="6556" end="6562" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870378" start="6584" end="6597" title="Lambda Papers" label="Lambda Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249747" start="6626" end="6675" title="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs" label="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034415" start="6727" end="6742" title="lexical scope" label="lexical scoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340959" start="6758" end="6780" title="tail-call optimization" label="tail-call optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067227" start="6845" end="6859" title="Per Martin-Löf" label="Per Martin-Löf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059147" start="6870" end="6896" title="intuitionistic type theory" label="intuitionistic type theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044470" start="6991" end="7009" title="constructive proof" label="constructive proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q997433" start="7024" end="7038" title="dependent type" label="dependent type"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387554" start="7071" end="7098" title="interactive theorem proving" label="interactive theorem proving"/>
<link wikidata="Q780803" start="7213" end="7220" title="Miranda (programming language)" label="Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="7306" end="7313" title="Haskell" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q681263" start="7397" end="7410" title="open standard" label="open standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="7563" end="7566" title="Computer Aided Design" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353120" start="7574" end="7582" title="OpenSCAD" label="OpenSCAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718971" start="7605" end="7609" title="CGAL" label="CGAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="7985" end="8007" title="imperative programming" label="imperative programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="8019" end="8046" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474542" start="8277" end="8298" title="Higher-order function" label="Higher-order function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058681" start="8449" end="8470" title="differential operator" label="differential operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="8500" end="8510" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344046" start="8583" end="8603" title="first-class function" label="first-class function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140358" start="9219" end="9238" title="partial application" label="partial application"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144925" start="9242" end="9250" title="currying" label="currying"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632653" start="9459" end="9477" title="successor function" label="successor function"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="9528" end="9542" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075265" start="9573" end="9586" title="Pure function" label="Pure function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144241" start="9613" end="9625" title="side effect (computer science)" label="side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754278" start="10009" end="10033" title="referential transparency" label="referential transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q368988" start="10037" end="10048" title="idempotence" label="idempotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376168" start="10185" end="10196" title="memoization" label="memoization"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="10319" end="10327" title="parallelization" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326976" start="10429" end="10440" title="thread-safe" label="thread-safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155658" start="10656" end="10669" title="deforestation (computer science)" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178940" start="11019" end="11022" title="GNU Compiler Collection" label="gcc"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="11137" end="11147" title="Fortran 95" label="Fortran 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q651022" start="11272" end="11281" title="Iteration" label="Iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="11344" end="11353" title="recursion" label="recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="11355" end="11374" title="recursion (computer science)" label="Recursive functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="11448" end="11457" title="Recursion (computer science)" label="base case"/>
<link wikidata="Q759899" start="11504" end="11509" title="Call stack" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340959" start="11710" end="11724" title="tail recursion" label="tail recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q749893" start="11923" end="11949" title="continuation passing style" label="continuation passing style"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="11997" end="12003" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q283456" start="12570" end="12577" title="Chicken (Scheme implementation)" label="Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218767" start="12623" end="12637" title="stack overflow" label="stack overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="12671" end="12688" title="Garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959790" start="12907" end="12919" title="catamorphism" label="catamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633567" start="12925" end="12936" title="anamorphism" label="anamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="13102" end="13107" title="Program loops" label="loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="13111" end="13131" title="imperative languages" label="imperative languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="13225" end="13240" title="Turing complete" label="Turing complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q622849" start="13258" end="13273" title="halting problem" label="halting problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502995" start="13274" end="13285" title="undecidable problem" label="undecidable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636734" start="13312" end="13332" title="equational reasoning" label="equational reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="13377" end="13390" title="inconsistency" label="inconsistency"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="13439" end="13450" title="type system" label="type system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131652" start="13491" end="13494" title="Coq (software)" label="Coq"/>
<link wikidata="Q338021" start="13506" end="13518" title="well-founded" label="well-founded"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051809" start="13537" end="13557" title="strongly normalizing" label="strongly normalizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227156" start="13648" end="13654" title="codata (computer science)" label="codata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146827" start="14004" end="14032" title="total functional programming" label="total functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189746" start="14345" end="14367" title="denotational semantics" label="denotational semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597097" start="15168" end="15183" title="graph reduction" label="graph reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q780803" start="15268" end="15275" title="Miranda (programming language)" label="Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q377986" start="15277" end="15282" title="Clean (programming language)" label="Clean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="15288" end="15295" title="Haskell" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465506" start="15382" end="15404" title="separation of concerns" label="separation of concerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930895" start="15645" end="15666" title="operational semantics" label="operational semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q200996" start="15895" end="15924" title="Hindley–Milner type inference" label="Hindley–Milner type inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607208" start="15991" end="16012" title="typed lambda calculus" label="typed lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16077" end="16098" title="false positives and false negatives#False positive error" label="false positive errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="16118" end="16141" title="untyped lambda calculus" label="untyped lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16205" end="16226" title="false positives and false negatives#False negative error" label="false negative errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="16267" end="16273" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322511" start="16395" end="16414" title="algebraic data type" label="algebraic data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q950250" start="16601" end="16624" title="test-driven development" label="test-driven development"/>
<link wikidata="Q586459" start="16632" end="16646" title="type inference" label="type inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131652" start="16792" end="16795" title="Coq (software)" label="Coq"/>
<link wikidata="Q20479" start="16797" end="16801" title="Agda (programming language)" label="Agda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522721" start="16803" end="16810" title="Lennart Augustsson" label="Cayenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382927" start="16816" end="16823" title="Epigram (programming language)" label="Epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059147" start="16837" end="16863" title="intuitionistic type theory" label="intuitionistic type theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q997433" start="16921" end="16935" title="dependent type" label="dependent type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644136" start="17102" end="17120" title="higher-order logic" label="higher-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q975734" start="17134" end="17158" title="Curry–Howard isomorphism" label="Curry–Howard isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="17238" end="17256" title="mathematical proof" label="mathematical proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q173326" start="17293" end="17307" title="formal verification" label="certified code"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101506" start="17389" end="17411" title="formalized mathematics" label="formalized mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155256" start="17465" end="17473" title="Compcert" label="Compcert"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="17479" end="17487" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="17517" end="17518" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557516" start="17607" end="17638" title="generalized algebraic data type" label="generalized algebraic data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318908" start="17825" end="17849" title="Glasgow Haskell Compiler" label="Glasgow Haskell Compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q212587" start="17854" end="17859" title="OCaml" label="OCaml"/>
<link wikidata="Q460584" start="17867" end="17872" title="Scala (programming language)" label="Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="18322" end="18323" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144241" start="18975" end="18987" title="side effect (computer science)" label="side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="19134" end="19148" title="data structure" label="data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="19200" end="19210" title="imperative programming" label="imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q186152" start="19242" end="19247" title="array data structure" label="array"/>
<link wikidata="Q207440" start="19386" end="19396" title="hash table" label="hash table"/>
<link wikidata="Q803847" start="19401" end="19412" title="binary heap" label="binary heap"/>
<link wikidata="Q80585" start="19461" end="19465" title="Map (computer science)" label="maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="19545" end="19554" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427787" start="19621" end="19632" title="Persistent data structure" label="persistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="20051" end="20073" title="imperative programming" label="imperative programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144241" start="20162" end="20174" title="side effect (computer science)" label="side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="20800" end="20810" title="JavaScript (programming language)" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439356" start="21568" end="21585" title="Off-by-one error" label="off-by-one errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159272" start="21591" end="21618" title="Greenspun&amp;#x27;s tenth rule" label="Greenspun&amp;#x27;s tenth rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="21951" end="21958" title="Haskell" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579914" start="21981" end="21987" title="Monad (functional programming)" label="monads"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="22002" end="22017" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q51798" start="22843" end="22850" title="Clojure" label="Clojure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375924" start="23121" end="23132" title="Hoare logic" label="Hoare logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886969" start="23137" end="23147" title="uniqueness type" label="uniqueness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497866" start="23238" end="23251" title="effect system" label="effect system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="23404" end="23407" title="central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="23453" end="23454" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="23459" end="23465" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23736" end="23751" title="pointer chasing" label="pointer chasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212587" start="24259" end="24264" title="OCaml" label="OCaml"/>
<link wikidata="Q377986" start="24269" end="24274" title="Clean (programming language)" label="Clean"/>
<link wikidata="Q30596044" start="24320" end="24357" title="The Computer Language Benchmarks Game" label="The Computer Language Benchmarks Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="24390" end="24398" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="24420" end="24428" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q4307787" start="24431" end="24436" title="array programming" label="array"/>
<link wikidata="Q383994" start="24467" end="24468" title="J (programming language)" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042031" start="24473" end="24474" title="K (programming language)" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663799" start="24707" end="24723" title="inline expansion" label="inline expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51798" start="24911" end="24918" title="Clojure" label="Clojure"/>
<link wikidata="Q575650" start="25044" end="25048" title="Rust (programming language)" label="Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334113" start="25132" end="25142" title="Reference (computer science)" label="references"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734086" start="25245" end="25259" title="Shared-nothing architecture" label="shared-nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="25313" end="25336" title="Parallel computing" label="concurrent and parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q513932" start="25471" end="25477" title="Linearizability" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859284" start="25822" end="25837" title="message passing" label="message passing"/>
<link wikidata="Q344524" start="25862" end="25873" title="actor model" label="actor model"/>
<link wikidata="Q334879" start="25990" end="25996" title="Erlang (programming language)" label="Erlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362035" start="25997" end="26003" title="Elixir (programming language)" label="Elixir"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002307" start="26007" end="26011" title="Akka (toolkit)" label="Akka"/>
<link wikidata="Q573952" start="26014" end="26029" title="Lazy evaluation" label="Lazy evaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q751740" start="26166" end="26177" title="memory leak" label="memory leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053064" start="26776" end="26779" title="Map (higher-order function)" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672873" start="26795" end="26801" title="Filter (higher-order function)" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51798" start="26947" end="26954" title="Clojure" label="Clojure"/>
<link wikidata="Q816754" start="26995" end="27006" title="Benchmarking" label="benchmarked"/>
<link wikidata="Q96416013" start="27037" end="27048" title="Zen 3" label="Ryzen 7900X"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519964" start="27067" end="27076" title="Leiningen (software)" label="Leiningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032810" start="27077" end="27081" title="REPL" label="REPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q193321" start="27101" end="27108" title="JVM" label="Java VM"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="27625" end="27629" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q37227" start="27851" end="27853" title="Go (programming language)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051282" start="27952" end="27960" title="Generic programming" label="generics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="28098" end="28108" title="Memory management" label="allocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663799" start="28185" end="28193" title="inlining" label="inlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q575650" start="28226" end="28230" title="Rust (programming language)" label="Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869750" start="28384" end="28398" title="loop unrolling" label="loop unrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="28500" end="28508" title="Assembly language" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343660" start="28655" end="28695" title="Register allocation" label="will be stored in specific CPU registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="28710" end="28730" title="Time complexity" label="constant-time access"/>
<link wikidata="Q319268" start="28951" end="28952" title="D (programming language)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="28957" end="28967" title="Fortran 95" label="Fortran 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="29004" end="29014" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q207316" start="29016" end="29019" title="Lua (programming language)" label="Lua"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="29021" end="29027" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q37227" start="29032" end="29034" title="Go (programming language)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344046" start="29039" end="29060" title="First-class function" label="first class functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q567612" start="29112" end="29118" title="anonymous function" label="lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053064" start="29132" end="29135" title="Map (higher-order function)" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q951651" start="29149" end="29155" title="Fold (higher-order function)" label="reduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672873" start="29173" end="29179" title="Filter (higher-order function)" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="29400" end="29404" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="29418" end="29421" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q50077" start="29427" end="29441" title="Visual Basic 9" label="Visual Basic 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="29443" end="29445" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061570" start="29451" end="29456" title="C++11" label="C++11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816639" start="29462" end="29468" title="Kotlin (programming language)" label="Kotlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q567612" start="29480" end="29486" title="anonymous function" label="lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053064" start="29488" end="29491" title="Map (higher-order function)" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q951651" start="29493" end="29499" title="Fold (higher-order function)" label="reduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672873" start="29501" end="29507" title="Filter (higher-order function)" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q535335" start="29513" end="29521" title="Closure (computer science)" label="closures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757944" start="29572" end="29589" title="Higher-Order Perl" label="Higher-Order Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="29702" end="29717" title="anonymous class" label="anonymous class"/>
<link wikidata="Q535335" start="29721" end="29729" title="Closure (computer science)" label="closures"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="29895" end="29899" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="30166" end="30168" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="30397" end="30412" title="object-oriented" label="object-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q181156" start="30413" end="30428" title="Design pattern (computer science)" label="design patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q775349" start="30495" end="30511" title="strategy pattern" label="strategy pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q830719" start="30568" end="30575" title="visitor (design pattern)" label="visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959790" start="30609" end="30621" title="catamorphism" label="catamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q951651" start="30626" end="30630" title="fold (higher-order function)" label="fold"/>
<link wikidata="Q275603" start="30891" end="30908" title="Logic programming" label="Logic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119098" start="32365" end="32369" title="Ciao (programming language)" label="Ciao"/>
<link wikidata="Q189722" start="32907" end="32912" title="Emacs" label="Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334586" start="32966" end="32978" title="Emacs Lisp" label="Lisp dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252773" start="33062" end="33071" title="GNU Emacs" label="GNU Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439" start="33088" end="33104" title="Richard Stallman" label="Richard Stallman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33164" end="33169" title="Helix (text editor)" label="Helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q127380" start="33211" end="33214" title="Abstract syntax tree" label="AST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113529" start="33218" end="33231" title="S-expression" label="S-expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q183197" start="33328" end="33339" title="Spreadsheet" label="Spreadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474542" start="33375" end="33387" title="Higher-order function" label="zeroth-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156715" start="33766" end="33779" title="composability" label="composability"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344624" start="33834" end="33847" title="microservices" label="microservices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670534" start="33956" end="33983" title="programming language theory" label="programming language theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="34003" end="34014" title="peer-review" label="peer-review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666458" start="34086" end="34136" title="International Conference on Functional Programming" label="International Conference on Functional Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186917" start="34142" end="34175" title="Journal of Functional Programming" label="Journal of Functional Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889089" start="34185" end="34230" title="Symposium on Trends in Functional Programming" label="Symposium on Trends in Functional Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q334879" start="34348" end="34354" title="Erlang (programming language)" label="Erlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="34383" end="34390" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="34399" end="34407" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140932" start="34460" end="34474" title="Fault tolerance" label="fault-tolerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="34475" end="34493" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="34590" end="34596" title="Nortel" label="Nortel"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="34598" end="34606" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q274591" start="34608" end="34629" title="Électricité de France" label="Électricité de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="34634" end="34642" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="34644" end="34650" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="34665" end="34669" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="34727" end="34742" title="Apple Macintosh" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="34803" end="34822" title="Computer simulation" label="simulation software"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="34827" end="34836" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q212587" start="34846" end="34851" title="OCaml" label="OCaml"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="34953" end="34959" title="software driver" label="driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="34985" end="34990" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335007" start="35026" end="35043" title="embedded software" label="embedded software"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="35045" end="35052" title="Haskell" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q460584" start="35278" end="35283" title="Scala (programming language)" label="Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q648619" start="35285" end="35287" title="F Sharp (programming language)" label="F#"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241057" start="35289" end="35305" title="Wolfram Language" label="Wolfram Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="35307" end="35311" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q597330" start="35313" end="35324" title="Standard ML" label="Standard ML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374463" start="35368" end="35380" title="Data science" label="Data science"/>
<link wikidata="Q51798" start="35388" end="35401" title="ClojureScript" label="ClojureScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366250" start="35403" end="35406" title="Elm (programming language)" label="Elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082796" start="35410" end="35420" title="PureScript" label="PureScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362035" start="35499" end="35505" title="Elixir (programming language)" label="Elixir"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571791" start="35600" end="35612" title="Font Awesome" label="Font Awesome"/>
<link wikidata="Q608776" start="35616" end="35623" title="Allegro Platform" label="Allegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551631" start="36007" end="36020" title="Gröbner basis" label="Gröbner basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164384" start="36078" end="36119" title="Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review" label="Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118153" start="36148" end="36152" title="Caml" label="Caml"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217267" start="36228" end="36256" title="categorical abstract machine" label="categorical abstract machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="36306" end="36321" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="36347" end="36359" title="University" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625084" start="36694" end="36745" title="Structure and Interpretation of Classical Mechanics" label="Structure and Interpretation of Classical Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="36769" end="36775" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881121" start="36868" end="36884" title="Eager evaluation" label="Eager evaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508843" start="36887" end="36918" title="Functional reactive programming" label="Functional reactive programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712089" start="36921" end="36953" title="Inductive functional programming" label="Inductive functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q389085" start="36956" end="36996" title="List of functional programming languages" label="List of functional programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621415" start="36999" end="37036" title="List of functional programming topics" label="List of functional programming topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075246" start="37039" end="37054" title="Nested function" label="Nested function"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453809" start="37057" end="37086" title="Purely functional programming" label="Purely functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="37240" end="37266" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044531" start="37481" end="37496" title="Morgan Kaufmann" label="Morgan Kaufmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q443253" start="37580" end="37593" title="Prentice Hall" label="Prentice Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q103137121" start="37730" end="37753" title="Marvin Victor Zelkowitz" label="Marvin Victor Zelkowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q443253" start="37855" end="37868" title="Prentice Hall" label="Prentice Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38018" end="38048" title="Macmillan Technical Publishing" label="Macmillan Technical Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38150" end="38180" title="Addison-Wesley Longman Limited" label="Addison-Wesley Longman Limited"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10936" wikidata="Q2364" url="?curid=10936" title="February 29">
<text>February 29 is a &quot;leap day&quot; (or &quot;leap year day&quot;)—an intercalary date added periodically to create leap years in the Julian and Gregorian calendars. It is the 60th day of a leap year in both Julian and Gregorian calendars, and 306 days remain until the end of the leap year. It is the last day of February in leap years only. It is also the last day of meteorological winter in the Northern Hemisphere and the last day of meteorological summer in the Southern Hemisphere in leap years.

In the Gregorian calendar, the standard civil calendar used in most of the world, February 29 is added in each year that is an integer multiple of four, unless it is evenly divisible by 100 but not by 400. For example, 1900 was not a leap year, but 2000 was. The Julian calendar—since 1923 a liturgical calendar—has a February 29 every fourth year without exception. Consequently, February 29 in the Julian calendar, since 1900, falls 13 days later than February 29 in the Gregorian, until the year 2100.

The convention of using February 29 was not widely accepted before the 15th century; from Julius Caesar&#x27;s edict in 45 BC until the 16th century (formally), February 24 was doubled instead. In one of its attempts to adopt the Gregorian calendar, Sweden tried (unsuccessfully) to phase in the change by omitting leap days in the 11 successive leap-years, 17001740.

==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*888 – Odo, count of Paris, is crowned king of West Francia (France) by Archbishop Walter of Sens at Compiègne.
*1504 – Christopher Columbus uses his knowledge of a lunar eclipse that night to convince Jamaican natives to provide him with supplies.

===1601–1900===
*1644 – Abel Tasman&#x27;s second Pacific voyage begins as he leaves Batavia in command of three ships.
*1704 – In Queen Anne&#x27;s War, French forces and Native Americans stage a raid on Deerfield, Massachusetts Bay Colony, killing 56 villagers and taking more than 100 captive.
*1712 – February 29 is followed by February 30 in Sweden, in a move to abolish the Swedish calendar for a return to the Julian calendar.
*1720 – Ulrika Eleonora, Queen of Sweden abdicates in favour of her husband, who becomes King Frederick I on March 24.
*1768 – Polish nobles form the Bar Confederation.
*1796 – The Jay Treaty between the United States and Great Britain comes into force, facilitating ten years of peaceful trade between the two nations.
*1892 – St. Petersburg, Florida is incorporated.

===1901–present===
*1908 – James Madison University is founded at Harrisonburg, Virginia, United States as The State Normal and Industrial School for Women by the Virginia General Assembly.
*1912 – The Piedra Movediza (Moving Stone) of Tandil falls and breaks.
*1916 – Tokelau is annexed by the United Kingdom.
* 1916 – In South Carolina, the minimum working age for factory, mill and mine workers is raised from 12 to 14 years old.
*1920 – The Czechoslovak National Assembly adopts the Constitution.
*1936 – The February 26 Incident in Tokyo ends.
*1940 – For her performance as Mammy in &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot;, Hattie McDaniel becomes the first African American to win an Academy Award.
* 1940 – Finland initiates Winter War peace negotiations.
* 1940 – In a ceremony held in Berkeley, California, physicist Ernest Lawrence receives the 1939 Nobel Prize in Physics from Sweden&#x27;s consul general in San Francisco.
*1944 – The Admiralty Islands are invaded in Operation Brewer, led by American general Douglas MacArthur, in World War II.
*1960 – The 5.7  Agadir earthquake shakes coastal Morocco with a maximum perceived intensity of X (&quot;Extreme&quot;), destroying Agadir and leaving 12,000 dead and another 12,000 injured.
*1964 – British Eagle International Airlines Flight 802/6 crashes into the Glungezer mountain in the Tux Alps of Austria, killing all 75 people aboard.
*1968 – Aeroflot Flight 15 crashes Irkutsk Oblast, Soviet Union, due to a loss of control. Eighty-three of the 84 occupants onboard die. The exact cause of the accident is unknown.
*1972 – South Korea withdraws 11,000 of its 48,000 troops from South Vietnam as part of Nixon&#x27;s Vietnamization policy in the Vietnam War.
*1980 – Gordie Howe of the Hartford Whalers makes NHL history as he scores his 800th goal.
*1984 – Pierre Trudeau announces his retirement as Liberal Party leader and Prime Minister of Canada.
*1988 – South African archbishop Desmond Tutu is arrested along with 100 other clergymen during a five-day anti-apartheid demonstration in Cape Town.
* 1988 – Svend Robinson becomes the first member of the House of Commons of Canada to come out as gay.
*1992 – A referendum is begun in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the determination of Bosnian independence.
*1996 – Faucett Perú Flight 251 crashes in the Andes; all 123 passengers and crew are killed.
* 1996 – The Siege of Sarajevo officially ends.
*2000 – Chechens attack a guard post near Ulus Kert, eventually killing 84 Russian paratroopers during the Second Chechen War.
*2004 – Jean-Bertrand Aristide is removed as president of Haiti following a coup.
*2008 – The United Kingdom&#x27;s Ministry of Defence withdraws Prince Harry from a tour of Afghanistan after news of his deployment is leaked to foreign media.
* 2008 – Misha Defonseca admits to fabricating her memoir, &quot;&quot;, in which she claims to have lived with a pack of wolves in the woods during the Holocaust.
*2012 – North Korea agrees to suspend uranium enrichment and nuclear and long-range missile tests in return for US food aid.
*2016 – In the Miqdadiyah bombing: at least 40 people are killed and 58 others wounded following a suicide bombing by ISIL at a Shi&#x27;ite funeral in the city of Miqdadiyah, Diyala, Iraq.
* 2020 – During a demonstration, pro-government colectivos shoot at disputed President and Speaker of the National Assembly Juan Guaidó and his supporters in Barquisimeto, Venezuela, leaving five injured.
* 2020 – The United States and the Taliban sign the Doha Agreement for bringing peace to Afghanistan.
* 2020 – Muhyiddin Yassin is appointed as the 8th Prime Minister of Malaysia, amid the 2020 Malaysian political crisis.
* 2024 – The Flour massacre (also known as the Al-Rashid massacre) took place on al-Rashid street at the Al-Nabulsi roundabout to the west of Gaza City in the Palestinian territory of the Gaza Strip where more than 100 Palestinians were killed and over 750 were wounded after Israeli forces opened fire on Palestinians waiting for humanitarian aid amidst the Israel–Hamas war.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
*1468 – Pope Paul III (d. 1549)
*1528 – Albert V, Duke of Bavaria (d. 1579)
* 1528 – Domingo Báñez, Spanish theologian (d. 1604)
*1572 – Edward Cecil, 1st Viscount Wimbledon (d. 1638)
*1576 – Antonio Neri, Florentine priest and glassmaker (d. 1614)

===1601–1900===
*1640 – Benjamin Keach, Particular Baptist preacher and author whose name is given to Keach&#x27;s Catechism (d. 1704)
*1692 – John Byrom, English poet and educator (d. 1763)
*1724 – Eva Marie Veigel, Austrian-English dancer (d. 1822)
*1736 – Ann Lee, English-American religious leader, founder of the Shakers (d. 1784)
*1792 – Gioachino Rossini, Italian composer (d. 1868)
*1812 – James Milne Wilson, Scottish-Australian soldier and politician, eighth Premier of Tasmania (d. 1880)
*1828 – Emmeline B. Wells, American journalist, poet and activist (d. 1921)
*1836 – Dickey Pearce, American baseball player and manager (d. 1908)
*1840 – Theodor Leber, German ophthalmologist (d. 1917)
*1852 – Frank Gavan Duffy, Irish-Australian lawyer and judge, fourth Chief Justice of Australia (d. 1936)
*1852 – Prince George Maximilianovich, 6th Duke of Leuchtenberg (d. 1912)
*1860 – Herman Hollerith, American statistician and businessman, co-founder of the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company (d. 1929)
*1884 – Richard S. Aldrich, American lawyer and politician (d. 1941)
*1892 – Augusta Savage, American sculptor (d. 1962)
*1896 – Morarji Desai, Indian civil servant and politician, fourth Prime Minister of India (d. 1995)
* 1896 – William A. Wellman, American actor, director, producer and screenwriter (d. 1975)

===1901–present===
*1904 – Jimmy Dorsey, American saxophonist, composer and bandleader (d. 1957)
* 1904 – Pepper Martin, American baseball player and manager (d. 1965)
*1908 – Balthus, French-Swiss painter and illustrator (d. 2001)
* 1908 – Dee Brown, American historian and author (d. 2002)
* 1908 – Alf Gover, English cricketer and coach (d. 2001)
* 1908 – Louie Myfanwy Thomas, Welsh writer (d. 1968)
*1912 – Kamil Tolon, Turkish industrialist (d. 1978)
*1916 – James B. Donovan, American lawyer (d. 1970)
* 1916 – Leonard Shoen, founder of U-Haul Corp. (d. 1999)
*1920 – Fyodor Abramov, Russian author and critic (d. 1983)
* 1920 – Arthur Franz, American actor (d. 2006)
* 1920 – James Mitchell, American actor and dancer (d. 2010)
* 1920 – Michèle Morgan, French-American actress and singer (d. 2016)
* 1920 – Rolland W. Redlin, American lawyer and politician (d. 2011)
*1924 – David Beattie, New Zealand judge and politician, 14th Governor-General of New Zealand (d. 2001)
* 1924 – Carlos Humberto Romero, Salvadoran politician, President of El Salvador (d. 2017)
* 1924 – Al Rosen, American baseball player and manager (d. 2015)
*1928 – Joss Ackland, English actor (d. 2023)
* 1928 – Jean Adamson, British writer and illustrator (&quot;Topsy and Tim&quot;) (d. 2024)
* 1928 – Vance Haynes, American archaeologist, geologist and author
* 1928 – Michael Henshall, English Anglican suffragan bishop (d. 2017)
* 1928 – Seymour Papert, South African mathematician and computer scientist, co-creator of the Logo programming language (d. 2016)
* 1928 – Tempest Storm, born Annie Banks, &quot;The Queen Of Exotic Dancers&quot;, American burlesque performer and actress (d. 2021)
*1932 – Gene H. Golub, American mathematician and academic (d. 2007)
* 1932 – Masten Gregory, American race car driver (d. 1985)
* 1932 – Reri Grist, American soprano and actress
* 1932 – Jaguar, Brazilian cartoonist
* 1932 – Gavin Stevens, Australian cricketer
*1936 – Nh. Dini, Indonesian writer (d. 2018)
* 1936 – Jack R. Lousma, American colonel, astronaut and politician
* 1936 – Henri Richard, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 2020)
* 1936 – Alex Rocco, American actor (d. 2015)
*1940 – Sonja Barend, Dutch talk show host
*1944 – Dennis Farina, American police officer and actor (d. 2013)
* 1944 – Nicholas Frayling, English priest and academic
* 1944 – Phyllis Frelich, American actress (d. 2014)
* 1944 – Steve Mingori, American baseball player (d. 2008)
* 1944 – Paolo Eleuteri Serpieri, Italian author and illustrator
* 1944 – Lennart Svedberg, Swedish ice hockey player (d. 1972).
* 1944 – Saeed Poursamimi, Iranian actor
*1948 – Hermione Lee, English author, critic and academic
* 1948 – Manoel Maria, Brazilian footballer
* 1948 – Patricia A. McKillip, American author (d. 2022)
* 1948 – Sonny M&#x27;Pokomandji, Central African basketball player and politician, Minister of Equipment and Transport (2003–2005)
*1952 – Tim Powers, American author and educator
* 1952 – Raisa Smetanina, Russian cross-country skier
* 1952 – Bart Stupak, American police officer and politician
*1956 – Knut Agnred, Swedish singer, actor and comedian
* 1956 – Jonathan Coleman, English-Australian radio and television host (d. 2021)
* 1956 – Bob Speller, Canadian businessman and politician, 30th Canadian Minister of Agriculture (d. 2021)
* 1956 – Aileen Wuornos, American serial killer (d. 2002)
*1960 – Khaled, Algerian singer-songwriter
* 1960 – Richard Ramirez, American serial killer and sex offender (d. 2013)
* 1960 – Tony Robbins, American author and motivational activist
*1964 – Dave Brailsford, English cyclist and coach
* 1964 – Carmel Busuttil, former Maltese footballer
* 1964 – Lyndon Byers, Canadian ice hockey player and radio host
* 1964 – Mervyn Warren, American tenor, composer and producer
*1968 – Chucky Brown, American basketball player and coach
* 1968 – Gareth Farr, New Zealand composer and percussionist
* 1968 – Pete Fenson, American curler
* 1968 – Bryce Paup, American football player and coach
* 1968 – Howard Tayler, American author and illustrator
* 1968 – Eugene Volokh, Ukrainian-American lawyer and educator
* 1968 – Frank Woodley, Australian actor, producer and screenwriter
*1972 – Sylvie Lubamba, Italian showgirl
* 1972 – Mike Pollitt, English footballer and coach
* 1972 – Antonio Sabàto Jr., Italian-American model and actor
* 1972 – Pedro Sánchez, Prime Minister of Spain
* 1972 – Dave Williams, American singer (d. 2002)
* 1972 – Saul Williams, American singer-songwriter
* 1972 – Pedro Zamora, Cuban-American activist and educator (d. 1994)
*1976 – Vonteego Cummings, American basketball player
* 1976 – Katalin Kovács, Hungarian sprint kayaker
* 1976 – Terrence Long, American baseball player
* 1976 – Ja Rule, American rapper and actor
*1980 – Çağdaş Atan, Turkish footballer and coach
* 1980 – Simon Gagné, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1980 – Rubén Plaza, Spanish cyclist
* 1980 – Clinton Toopi, New Zealand rugby league player
* 1980 – Taylor Twellman, American soccer player and sportscaster
* 1980 – Peter Scanavino, American actor (&quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;)
*1984 – Darren Ambrose, English footballer
* 1984 – Rica Imai, Japanese model and actress
* 1984 – Cullen Jones, American swimmer
* 1984 – Nuria Martínez, Spanish basketball player
* 1984 – Lena Raine, American video game composer and producer
* 1984 – Rakhee Thakrar, English actress
* 1984 – Cam Ward, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1984 – Mark Foster, American singer, songwriter and musician
*1988 – Lena Gercke, German model and television host
* 1988 – Benedikt Höwedes, German footballer
* 1988 – Brent Macaffer, Australian Rules footballer
* 1988 – Hannah Mills, Welsh sports sailor
*1992 – Sean Abbott, Australian cricketer
* 1992 – Eric Kendricks, American football player
* 1992 – Jessica Long, American paralympic swimmer
* 1992 – Jessie T. Usher, American actor
* 1992 – Saphir Taïder, Algerian footballer
*1996 – Nelson Asofa-Solomona, New Zealand rugby league player
* 1996 – Norberto Briasco, Argentine-Armenian footballer
* 1996 – Reece Prescod, British sprinter
* 1996 – Claudia Williams, New Zealand tennis player
*2000 – Tyrese Haliburton, American basketball player
* 2000 – Ferran Torres, Spanish footballer
* 2000 – Jesper Lindstrøm, Danish footballer
*2004 – Lydia Jacoby, American swimmer
* 2004 – Abdukodir Khusanov, Uzbek footballer
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 468 – Pope Hilarius
* 992 – Oswald of Worcester, Anglo-Saxon archbishop and saint (b. 925)
*1460 – Albert III, Duke of Bavaria-Munich (b. 1401)
*1528 – Patrick Hamilton, Scottish Protestant reformer and martyr (b. 1504)
*1592 – Alessandro Striggio, Italian composer and diplomat (b. 1536/1537)
*1600 – Caspar Hennenberger, German pastor, historian and cartographer (b. 1529)

===1601–1900===
*1604 – John Whitgift, English archbishop and academic (b. 1530)
*1712 – Johann Conrad Peyer, Swiss anatomist (b. 1653)
*1744 – John Theophilus Desaguliers, French-English physicist and philosopher (b. 1683)
*1792 – Johann Andreas Stein, German piano builder (b. 1728)
*1820 – Johann Joachim Eschenburg, German historian and critic (b. 1743)
*1848 – Louis-François Lejeune, French general, painter and lithographer (b. 1775)
*1856 – Auguste Chapdelaine, French Christian missionary (b. 1814)
*1868 – Ludwig I of Bavaria (b. 1786)
*1880 – James Milne Wilson, Scottish-Australian soldier and politician, 8th Premier of Tasmania (b. 1812)

===1901–present===
*1904 – Patrick O&#x27;Sullivan, Irish-Australian politician (b. 1818)
* 1904 – Henri Joseph Anastase Perrotin, French astronomer (b. 1845)
*1908 – Pat Garrett, American sheriff (b. 1850)
* 1908 – John Hope, 1st Marquess of Linlithgow, Scottish-Australian politician, 1st Governor-General of Australia (b. 1860)
*1916 – John Nanson, English-Australian journalist and politician (b. 1863)
*1920 – Ernie Courtney, American baseball player (b. 1875)
*1924 – Frederic Chapple, Australian educator (b. 1845)
*1928 – Adolphe Appia, Swiss architect and theorist (b. 1862)
* 1928 – Ina Coolbrith, American poet and librarian (b. 1841)
*1932 – Arthur Mills Lea, Australian entomologist (b. 1868)
* 1932 – Giuseppe Vitali, Italian mathematician (b. 1875)
*1940 – E. F. Benson, English archaeologist and author (b. 1867)
*1944 – Pehr Evind Svinhufvud, Finnish lawyer, judge and politician, 3rd President of Finland (b. 1861)
*1948 – Robert Barrington-Ward, English lawyer and journalist (b. 1891)
*1952 – Sarah Ann Jenyns, Australian entrepreneur (b. 1865)
*1956 – Elpidio Quirino, Filipino lawyer and politician, 6th President of the Philippines (b. 1890)
*1960 – Melvin Purvis, American police officer and FBI agent (b. 1903)
* 1960 – Walter Yust, American journalist and author (b. 1894)
*1964 – Frank Albertson, American actor and singer (b. 1909)
*1968 – Tore Ørjasæter, Norwegian poet and educator (b. 1886)
*1972 – Tom Davies, American football player and coach (b. 1896)
*1976 – Florence P. Dwyer, American politician (b. 1902)
*1980 – Yigal Allon, Israeli general and politician, Prime Minister of Israel (b. 1918)
* 1980 – Gil Elvgren, American painter and illustrator (b. 1914)
*1984 – Ludwik Starski, Polish screenwriter and songwriter (b. 1903)
*1992 – Ruth Pitter, English poet and author (b. 1897)
*1996 – Frank Daniel, Czech-American director, producer and screenwriter (b. 1926)
* 1996 – Wes Farrell, American singer-songwriter and producer (b. 1939)
* 1996 – Ralph Rowe, American baseball player, coach and manager (b. 1924)
*2000 – Dennis Danell, American guitarist (b. 1961)
*2004 – Kagamisato Kiyoji, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 42nd Yokozuna (b. 1923)
* 2004 – Jerome Lawrence, American playwright and author (b. 1915)
* 2004 – Harold Bernard St. John, Barbadian lawyer and politician, 3rd Prime Minister of Barbados (b. 1931)
* 2004 – Lorrie Wilmot, South African cricketer (b. 1943)
*2008 – Janet Kagan, American author (b. 1946)
* 2008 – Erik Ortvad, Danish painter and illustrator (b. 1917)
* 2008 – Akira Yamada, Japanese scholar and philosopher (b. 1922)
*2012 – Davy Jones, English singer, guitarist and actor (b. 1945)
* 2012 – Sheldon Moldoff, American illustrator (b. 1920)
* 2012 – P. K. Narayana Panicker, Indian social leader (b. 1930)
*2016 – Wenn V. Deramas, Filipino director and screenwriter (b. 1966)
* 2016 – Gil Hill, American police officer, actor and politician (b. 1931)
* 2016 – Josefin Nilsson, Swedish singer (b. 1969)
* 2016 – Mumtaz Qadri, Pakistani assassin, executed (b. 1985)
* 2016 – Louise Rennison, English author (b. 1951)
*2020 – Dieter Laser, German actor (b. 1942)
* 2020 – Éva Székely, Hungarian Hall of Fame swimmer and 1952 Olympic champion (b. 1927)
* 2024 – Ali Hassan Mwinyi, 2nd President of Tanzania and 3rd President of Zanzibar (b. 1925)
* 2024 – Brian Mulroney, 18th Prime Minister of Canada (b. 1939)

==Holidays and observances==
* As a Christian feast day:
**Saint John Cassian
**February 29 in the Orthodox church
*Rare Disease Day (in leap years; usually celebrated in common years on February 28)
*Bachelor&#x27;s Day (Ireland and United Kingdom)

==See also==
* February 30
* February 31
* March 0

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on February 29</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2364" start="0" end="11" title="February 29" label="February 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="23" end="31" title="leap day" label="leap day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225911" start="72" end="88" title="intercalation (timekeeping)" label="intercalary date"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="118" end="127" title="leap year" label="leap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="136" end="142" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="147" end="165" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q109" start="316" end="324" title="February" label="February"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="372" end="393" title="meteorological winter" label="meteorological winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="401" end="420" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="441" end="462" title="meteorological summer" label="meteorological summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="470" end="489" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124644" start="546" end="560" title="civil calendar" label="civil calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="725" end="729" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="755" end="759" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="785" end="795" title="Adoption of the Gregorian calendar#Adoption in Eastern Europe" label="since 1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q51617" start="798" end="817" title="liturgical calendar" label="liturgical calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="1173" end="1196" title="Bissextile day" label="February 24 was doubled"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1209" end="1260" title="Adoption of the Gregorian calendar#Sweden" label="one of its attempts to adopt the Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956" start="1408" end="1411" title="AD 888" label="888"/>
<link wikidata="Q208086" start="1414" end="1417" title="Odo of France" label="Odo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28874438" start="1419" end="1433" title="count of Paris" label="count of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q46370" start="1454" end="1466" title="West Francia" label="West Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221177" start="1490" end="1504" title="Walter (archbishop of Sens)" label="Walter of Sens"/>
<link wikidata="Q180871" start="1508" end="1517" title="Compiègne" label="Compiègne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148" start="1520" end="1524" title="1504" label="1504"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="1527" end="1547" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756695" start="1570" end="1596" title="March 1504 lunar eclipse" label="a lunar eclipse that night"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920" start="1674" end="1678" title="1644" label="1644"/>
<link wikidata="Q42188" start="1681" end="1692" title="Abel Tasman" label="Abel Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199713" start="1742" end="1749" title="Batavia, Dutch East Indies" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824" start="1778" end="1782" title="1704" label="1704"/>
<link wikidata="Q869045" start="1788" end="1809" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1829" end="1844" title="Native American (U.S.)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046548" start="1854" end="1897" title="Raid on Deerfield" label="raid on Deerfield, Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6871" start="1955" end="1959" title="1712" label="1712"/>
<link wikidata="Q60674392" start="1989" end="2000" title="February 30" label="February 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130275" start="2037" end="2053" title="Swedish calendar" label="Swedish calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="2074" end="2089" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908" start="2092" end="2096" title="1720" label="1720"/>
<link wikidata="Q52933" start="2099" end="2131" title="Ulrika Eleonora, Queen of Sweden" label="Ulrika Eleonora, Queen of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52932" start="2185" end="2196" title="Frederick I of Sweden" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675" start="2211" end="2215" title="1768" label="1768"/>
<link wikidata="Q874784" start="2241" end="2258" title="Bar Confederation" label="Bar Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818" start="2261" end="2265" title="1796" label="1796"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="2272" end="2282" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="2412" end="2416" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q49236" start="2419" end="2442" title="St. Petersburg, Florida" label="St. Petersburg, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="2481" end="2485" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q258943" start="2488" end="2512" title="James Madison University" label="James Madison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q511935" start="2527" end="2549" title="Harrisonburg, Virginia" label="Harrisonburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="2624" end="2649" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="2652" end="2656" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191558" start="2663" end="2678" title="Piedra Movediza" label="Piedra Movediza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000336" start="2697" end="2703" title="Tandil" label="Tandil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="2723" end="2727" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="2730" end="2737" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="2784" end="2798" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517628" start="2812" end="2823" title="working age" label="working age"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="2862" end="2892" title="Child labor" label="raised from 12 to 14 years old"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="2895" end="2899" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q140359" start="2906" end="2918" title="First Czechoslovak Republic" label="Czechoslovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566435" start="2948" end="2960" title="Czechoslovak Constitution of 1920" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="2963" end="2967" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q477958" start="2974" end="2994" title="February 26 Incident" label="February 26 Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="3011" end="3015" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="3056" end="3074" title="Gone with the Wind (film)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q228904" start="3082" end="3097" title="Hattie McDaniel" label="Hattie McDaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="3116" end="3132" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q508513" start="3136" end="3139" title="12th Academy Awards" label="win"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="3143" end="3156" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="3185" end="3195" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="3247" end="3267" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q169577" start="3279" end="3294" title="Ernest Lawrence" label="Ernest Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="3313" end="3335" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="3355" end="3369" title="Consul General" label="consul general"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3373" end="3386" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="3389" end="3393" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q119230" start="3400" end="3417" title="Admiralty Islands" label="Admiralty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579907" start="3433" end="3449" title="Operation Brewer" label="Operation Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="3475" end="3492" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="3512" end="3516" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q698056" start="3528" end="3545" title="1960 Agadir earthquake" label="Agadir earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="3561" end="3568" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q170350" start="3607" end="3630" title="Mercalli intensity scale" label="X (&amp;quot;Extreme&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="3703" end="3707" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q918595" start="3710" end="3759" title="British Eagle International Airlines Flight 802/6" label="British Eagle International Airlines Flight 802/6"/>
<link wikidata="Q671146" start="3777" end="3786" title="Glungezer" label="Glungezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q697920" start="3803" end="3811" title="Tux Alps" label="Tux Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="3855" end="3859" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662465" start="3862" end="3880" title="Aeroflot Flight 15" label="Aeroflot Flight 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585" start="3889" end="3903" title="Irkutsk Oblast" label="Irkutsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3905" end="3917" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="4036" end="4040" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="4098" end="4111" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="4123" end="4135" title="Richard Nixon" label="Nixon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q927708" start="4136" end="4150" title="Vietnamization" label="Vietnamization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4165" end="4176" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="4179" end="4183" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q358519" start="4186" end="4197" title="Gordie Howe" label="Gordie Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q830968" start="4205" end="4221" title="Hartford Whalers" label="Hartford Whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="4228" end="4231" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="4270" end="4274" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="4277" end="4291" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="4320" end="4333" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="4345" end="4369" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="4372" end="4376" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q43033" start="4404" end="4416" title="Desmond Tutu" label="Desmond Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="4483" end="4492" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="4510" end="4519" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q350091" start="4530" end="4544" title="Svend Robinson" label="Svend Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="4577" end="4603" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="4607" end="4622" title="coming out" label="come out as gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="4625" end="4629" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q208545" start="4657" end="4679" title="Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947346" start="4688" end="4725" title="Bosnian independence referendum, 1992" label="determination of Bosnian independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="4728" end="4732" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438057" start="4735" end="4758" title="Faucett Perú Flight 251" label="Faucett Perú Flight 251"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="4770" end="4779" title="the Andes" label="the Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="4834" end="4851" title="Siege of Sarajevo" label="Siege of Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="4870" end="4874" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q120843" start="4976" end="4994" title="Second Chechen War" label="Second Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="4997" end="5001" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q209617" start="5004" end="5026" title="Jean-Bertrand Aristide" label="Jean-Bertrand Aristide"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="5054" end="5059" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883469" start="5070" end="5076" title="2004 Haitian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="a coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="5079" end="5083" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="5112" end="5131" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q152316" start="5142" end="5154" title="Prince Harry" label="Prince Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q918160" start="5162" end="5181" title="Operation Herrick" label="tour of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q464656" start="5248" end="5263" title="Misha Defonseca" label="Misha Defonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="5388" end="5401" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="5404" end="5408" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="5411" end="5422" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="5441" end="5459" title="uranium enrichment" label="uranium enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="5529" end="5533" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q23043313" start="5543" end="5561" title="2016 Miqdadiyah bombing" label="Miqdadiyah bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="5627" end="5642" title="suicide bombing" label="suicide bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="5646" end="5650" title="ISIL" label="ISIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="5656" end="5668" title="Shi&amp;#x27;ite" label="Shi&amp;#x27;ite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353893" start="5692" end="5702" title="Miqdadiyah" label="Miqdadiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q217075" start="5704" end="5710" title="Diyala Governorate" label="Diyala"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="5720" end="5724" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949845" start="5766" end="5776" title="Colectivo (Venezuela)" label="colectivos"/>
<link wikidata="Q97101278" start="5777" end="5782" title="2020 Barquisimeto shooting" label="shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585014" start="5824" end="5841" title="National Assembly (Venezuela)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q58833335" start="5842" end="5853" title="Juan Guaidó" label="Juan Guaidó"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709" start="5876" end="5888" title="Barquisimeto" label="Barquisimeto"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5936" end="5949" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="5958" end="5965" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q107354956" start="5975" end="5989" title="United States–Taliban deal" label="Doha Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="6012" end="6023" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060949" start="6034" end="6050" title="Muhyiddin Yassin" label="Muhyiddin Yassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="6075" end="6101" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Prime Minister of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q86509170" start="6112" end="6143" title="2020 Malaysian political crisis" label="2020 Malaysian political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="6147" end="6151" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695144" start="6158" end="6172" title="Flour massacre" label="Flour massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="6287" end="6296" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza City"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="6304" end="6325" title="Palestinian territories" label="Palestinian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="6333" end="6343" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="6504" end="6520" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564" start="6550" end="6554" title="1468" label="1468"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="6557" end="6570" title="Pope Paul III" label="Pope Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415" start="6582" end="6586" title="1528" label="1528"/>
<link wikidata="Q60907" start="6589" end="6614" title="Albert V, Duke of Bavaria" label="Albert V, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q934185" start="6634" end="6647" title="Domingo Báñez" label="Domingo Báñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670" start="6679" end="6683" title="1572" label="1572"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976180" start="6686" end="6722" title="Edward Cecil, 1st Viscount Wimbledon" label="Edward Cecil, 1st Viscount Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700" start="6734" end="6738" title="1576" label="1576"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857377" start="6741" end="6753" title="Antonio Neri" label="Antonio Neri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901" start="6816" end="6820" title="1640" label="1640"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581564" start="6823" end="6837" title="Benjamin Keach" label="Benjamin Keach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122370" start="6839" end="6857" title="Particular Baptist" label="Particular Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382078" start="6901" end="6923" title="Keach&amp;#x27;s Catechism" label="Keach&amp;#x27;s Catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685" start="6935" end="6939" title="1692" label="1692"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360179" start="6942" end="6952" title="John Byrom" label="John Byrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926" start="6991" end="6995" title="1724" label="1724"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110537" start="6998" end="7014" title="Eva Marie Veigel" label="Eva Marie Veigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989" start="7051" end="7055" title="1736" label="1736"/>
<link wikidata="Q456543" start="7058" end="7065" title="Ann Lee" label="Ann Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370167" start="7117" end="7124" title="Shakers" label="Shakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805" start="7136" end="7140" title="1792" label="1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="7143" end="7160" title="Gioachino Rossini" label="Gioachino Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933" start="7190" end="7194" title="1812" label="1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139813" start="7197" end="7215" title="James Milne Wilson" label="James Milne Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527933" start="7268" end="7287" title="Premier of Tasmania" label="Premier of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570" start="7299" end="7303" title="1828" label="1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373425" start="7306" end="7323" title="Emmeline B. Wells" label="Emmeline B. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601" start="7375" end="7379" title="1836" label="1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273665" start="7382" end="7395" title="Dickey Pearce" label="Dickey Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619" start="7445" end="7449" title="1840" label="1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q69692" start="7452" end="7465" title="Theodor Leber" label="Theodor Leber"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="7474" end="7489" title="ophthalmologist" label="ophthalmologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="7501" end="7505" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q13473328" start="7508" end="7525" title="Frank Gavan Duffy" label="Frank Gavan Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409185" start="7569" end="7595" title="Chief Justice of Australia" label="Chief Justice of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589734" start="7614" end="7669" title="George Maximilianovich, 6th Duke of Leuchtenberg" label="Prince George Maximilianovich, 6th Duke of Leuchtenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="7681" end="7685" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q192145" start="7688" end="7704" title="Herman Hollerith" label="Herman Hollerith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157637" start="7763" end="7801" title="Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company" label="Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="7813" end="7817" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464195" start="7820" end="7838" title="Richard S. Aldrich" label="Richard S. Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="7882" end="7886" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q273087" start="7889" end="7903" title="Augusta Savage" label="Augusta Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="7934" end="7938" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q218661" start="7941" end="7954" title="Morarji Desai" label="Morarji Desai"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="8000" end="8023" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q290962" start="8043" end="8061" title="William A. Wellman" label="William A. Wellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="8146" end="8150" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q560716" start="8153" end="8165" title="Jimmy Dorsey" label="Jimmy Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q949092" start="8232" end="8245" title="Pepper Martin" label="Pepper Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="8295" end="8299" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q325925" start="8302" end="8309" title="Balthus" label="Balthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q903331" start="8367" end="8376" title="Dee Brown (writer)" label="Dee Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527850" start="8427" end="8436" title="Alf Gover" label="Alf Gover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23002068" start="8485" end="8505" title="Louie Myfanwy Thomas" label="Louie Myfanwy Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="8531" end="8535" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q83961974" start="8538" end="8549" title="Kamil Tolon" label="Kamil Tolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="8584" end="8588" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006746" start="8591" end="8607" title="James B. Donovan" label="James B. Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014506" start="8644" end="8657" title="Leonard Shoen" label="Leonard Shoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862902" start="8670" end="8676" title="U-Haul" label="U-Haul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="8694" end="8698" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q468277" start="8701" end="8715" title="Fyodor Abramov" label="Fyodor Abramov"/>
<link wikidata="Q709403" start="8762" end="8774" title="Arthur Franz" label="Arthur Franz"/>
<link wikidata="Q955098" start="8810" end="8824" title="James Mitchell (actor)" label="James Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q234897" start="8871" end="8885" title="Michèle Morgan" label="Michèle Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164004" start="8941" end="8958" title="Rolland W. Redlin" label="Rolland W. Redlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="9002" end="9006" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017475" start="9009" end="9022" title="David Beattie" label="David Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="9063" end="9094" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="Governor-General of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q880982" start="9114" end="9136" title="Carlos Humberto Romero" label="Carlos Humberto Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q878151" start="9161" end="9185" title="President of El Salvador" label="President of El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747018" start="9205" end="9213" title="Al Rosen" label="Al Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="9263" end="9267" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q471879" start="9270" end="9282" title="Joss Ackland" label="Joss Ackland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058238" start="9317" end="9329" title="Jean Adamson" label="Jean Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304537" start="9369" end="9382" title="Topsy and Tim" label="Topsy and Tim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914032" start="9409" end="9421" title="Vance Haynes" label="Vance Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831099" start="9477" end="9493" title="Michael Henshall" label="Michael Henshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q335027" start="9548" end="9562" title="Seymour Papert" label="Seymour Papert"/>
<link wikidata="Q201436" start="9634" end="9659" title="Logo (programming language)" label="Logo programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q276621" start="9679" end="9692" title="Tempest Storm" label="Tempest Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="9805" end="9809" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384851" start="9812" end="9825" title="Gene H. Golub" label="Gene H. Golub"/>
<link wikidata="Q173421" start="9882" end="9896" title="Masten Gregory" label="Masten Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q459969" start="9942" end="9952" title="Reri Grist" label="Reri Grist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122865" start="9992" end="9998" title="Jaguar (cartoonist)" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528292" start="10030" end="10043" title="Gavin Stevens" label="Gavin Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="10067" end="10071" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051041" start="10074" end="10082" title="Nh. Dini" label="Nh. Dini"/>
<link wikidata="Q363976" start="10121" end="10135" title="Jack R. Lousma" label="Jack R. Lousma"/>
<link wikidata="Q959520" start="10189" end="10202" title="Henri Richard" label="Henri Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q975161" start="10250" end="10260" title="Alex Rocco" label="Alex Rocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="10288" end="10292" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188554" start="10295" end="10307" title="Sonja Barend" label="Sonja Barend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="10331" end="10335" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q352935" start="10338" end="10351" title="Dennis Farina" label="Dennis Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106628" start="10406" end="10423" title="Nicholas Frayling" label="Nicholas Frayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188555" start="10462" end="10477" title="Phyllis Frelich" label="Phyllis Frelich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613389" start="10515" end="10528" title="Steve Mingori" label="Steve Mingori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348216" start="10574" end="10597" title="Paolo Eleuteri Serpieri" label="Paolo Eleuteri Serpieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354886" start="10639" end="10655" title="Lennart Svedberg" label="Lennart Svedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398246" start="10703" end="10719" title="Saeed Poursamimi" label="Saeed Poursamimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="10736" end="10740" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q515543" start="10743" end="10755" title="Hermione Lee" label="Hermione Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767129" start="10802" end="10814" title="Manoel Maria" label="Manoel Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q268755" start="10846" end="10866" title="Patricia A. McKillip" label="Patricia A. McKillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q112062427" start="10903" end="10926" title="Sonny M&amp;#x27;Pokomandji" label="Sonny M&amp;#x27;Pokomandji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="11027" end="11031" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q363810" start="11034" end="11044" title="Tim Powers" label="Tim Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q464868" start="11084" end="11099" title="Raisa Smetanina" label="Raisa Smetanina"/>
<link wikidata="Q809210" start="11138" end="11149" title="Bart Stupak" label="Bart Stupak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="11191" end="11195" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543536" start="11198" end="11209" title="Knut Agnred" label="Knut Agnred"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272806" start="11255" end="11271" title="Jonathan Coleman (presenter)" label="Jonathan Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934050" start="11337" end="11348" title="Bob Speller" label="Bob Speller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294939" start="11392" end="11424" title="Minister of Agriculture (Canada)" label="Canadian Minister of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q264849" start="11444" end="11458" title="Aileen Wuornos" label="Aileen Wuornos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="11494" end="11498" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q312609" start="11501" end="11507" title="Khaled (musician)" label="Khaled"/>
<link wikidata="Q382035" start="11545" end="11560" title="Richard Ramirez" label="Richard Ramirez"/>
<link wikidata="Q380429" start="11621" end="11633" title="Tony Robbins" label="Tony Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="11678" end="11682" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017133" start="11685" end="11700" title="Dave Brailsford" label="Dave Brailsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q951577" start="11737" end="11752" title="Carmel Busuttil" label="Carmel Busuttil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878812" start="11789" end="11801" title="Lyndon Byers" label="Lyndon Byers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306699" start="11854" end="11867" title="Mervyn Warren" label="Mervyn Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="11908" end="11912" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342369" start="11915" end="11927" title="Chucky Brown" label="Chucky Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522839" start="11975" end="11986" title="Gareth Farr" label="Gareth Farr"/>
<link wikidata="Q911322" start="12036" end="12047" title="Pete Fenson" label="Pete Fenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927195" start="12074" end="12084" title="Bryce Paup" label="Bryce Paup"/>
<link wikidata="Q14822525" start="12130" end="12143" title="Howard Tayler" label="Howard Tayler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953757" start="12186" end="12199" title="Eugene Volokh" label="Eugene Volokh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490460" start="12249" end="12262" title="Frank Woodley" label="Frank Woodley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="12309" end="12313" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q17490291" start="12316" end="12330" title="Sylvie Lubamba" label="Sylvie Lubamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721125" start="12358" end="12370" title="Mike Pollitt" label="Mike Pollitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q379461" start="12410" end="12428" title="Antonio Sabàto Jr." label="Antonio Sabàto Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6070218" start="12472" end="12485" title="Pedro Sánchez (Spanish politician)" label="Pedro Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="12487" end="12510" title="Prime Minister of Spain" label="Prime Minister of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q973755" start="12520" end="12533" title="Dave Williams (singer)" label="Dave Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q533369" start="12570" end="12583" title="Saul Williams" label="Saul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496409" start="12621" end="12633" title="Pedro Zamora" label="Pedro Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="12683" end="12687" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735590" start="12690" end="12707" title="Vonteego Cummings" label="Vonteego Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q255535" start="12745" end="12759" title="Katalin Kovács" label="Katalin Kovács"/>
<link wikidata="Q11319792" start="12795" end="12808" title="Terrence Long" label="Terrence Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q309843" start="12844" end="12851" title="Ja Rule" label="Ja Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="12880" end="12884" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q272727" start="12887" end="12898" title="Çağdaş Atan" label="Çağdaş Atan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364695" start="12938" end="12949" title="Simon Gagné" label="Simon Gagné"/>
<link wikidata="Q25932" start="12987" end="12998" title="Rubén Plaza" label="Rubén Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134238" start="13025" end="13038" title="Clinton Toopi" label="Clinton Toopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q735074" start="13081" end="13096" title="Taylor Twellman" label="Taylor Twellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387943" start="13147" end="13162" title="Peter Scanavino" label="Peter Scanavino"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13186" end="13223" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="13232" end="13236" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533579" start="13239" end="13253" title="Darren Ambrose" label="Darren Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q29420" start="13283" end="13292" title="Rica Imai" label="Rica Imai"/>
<link wikidata="Q559120" start="13330" end="13342" title="Cullen Jones" label="Cullen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150367" start="13370" end="13384" title="Nuria Martínez" label="Nuria Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q86351247" start="13421" end="13431" title="Lena Raine" label="Lena Raine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667135" start="13484" end="13498" title="Rakhee Thakrar" label="Rakhee Thakrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q707642" start="13525" end="13533" title="Cam Ward (ice hockey)" label="Cam Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q18223254" start="13571" end="13582" title="Mark Foster (singer)" label="Mark Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="13626" end="13630" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q77435" start="13633" end="13644" title="Lena Gercke" label="Lena Gercke"/>
<link wikidata="Q152897" start="13688" end="13704" title="Benedikt Höwedes" label="Benedikt Höwedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961464" start="13733" end="13747" title="Brent Macaffer" label="Brent Macaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836739" start="13786" end="13798" title="Hannah Mills" label="Hannah Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="13821" end="13825" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440795" start="13828" end="13839" title="Sean Abbott" label="Sean Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206893" start="13871" end="13885" title="Eric Kendricks" label="Eric Kendricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763188" start="13921" end="13933" title="Jessica Long" label="Jessica Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413978" start="13944" end="13962" title="Paralympic swimming" label="paralympic swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519424" start="13972" end="13987" title="Jessie T. Usher" label="Jessie T. Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q867245" start="14013" end="14026" title="Saphir Taïder" label="Saphir Taïder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="14049" end="14053" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866865" start="14056" end="14077" title="Nelson Asofa-Solomona" label="Nelson Asofa-Solomona"/>
<link wikidata="Q28007961" start="14120" end="14136" title="Norberto Briasco" label="Norberto Briasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q31498693" start="14177" end="14190" title="Reece Prescod" label="Reece Prescod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129282" start="14218" end="14234" title="Claudia Williams (tennis)" label="Claudia Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="14263" end="14267" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q63190352" start="14270" end="14287" title="Tyrese Haliburton" label="Tyrese Haliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44297797" start="14325" end="14338" title="Ferran Torres" label="Ferran Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q65967193" start="14368" end="14384" title="Jesper Lindstrøm" label="Jesper Lindstrøm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="14405" end="14409" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q106812132" start="14412" end="14424" title="Lydia Jacoby" label="Lydia Jacoby"/>
<link wikidata="Q111479885" start="14452" end="14470" title="Abdukodir Khusanov" label="Abdukodir Khusanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q30823" start="14517" end="14520" title="468" label="468"/>
<link wikidata="Q172377" start="14523" end="14536" title="Pope Hilarius" label="Pope Hilarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q23724" start="14539" end="14542" title="992" label="992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273281" start="14545" end="14564" title="Oswald of Worcester" label="Oswald of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528" start="14609" end="14613" title="1460" label="1460"/>
<link wikidata="Q61796" start="14616" end="14626" title="Albert III, Duke of Bavaria" label="Albert III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415" start="14662" end="14666" title="1528" label="1528"/>
<link wikidata="Q708980" start="14669" end="14685" title="Patrick Hamilton (martyr)" label="Patrick Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769" start="14738" end="14742" title="1592" label="1592"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377115" start="14745" end="14764" title="Alessandro Striggio" label="Alessandro Striggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720" start="14812" end="14816" title="1600" label="1600"/>
<link wikidata="Q563306" start="14819" end="14838" title="Caspar Hennenberger" label="Caspar Hennenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738" start="14910" end="14914" title="1604" label="1604"/>
<link wikidata="Q473302" start="14917" end="14930" title="John Whitgift" label="John Whitgift"/>
<link wikidata="Q6871" start="14975" end="14979" title="1712" label="1712"/>
<link wikidata="Q117744" start="14982" end="15001" title="Johann Conrad Peyer" label="Johann Conrad Peyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7583" start="15030" end="15034" title="1744" label="1744"/>
<link wikidata="Q658008" start="15037" end="15064" title="John Theophilus Desaguliers" label="John Theophilus Desaguliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805" start="15118" end="15122" title="1792" label="1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q67906" start="15125" end="15145" title="Johann Andreas Stein" label="Johann Andreas Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973" start="15179" end="15183" title="1820" label="1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q86723" start="15186" end="15211" title="Johann Joachim Eschenburg" label="Johann Joachim Eschenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647" start="15252" end="15256" title="1848" label="1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q877593" start="15259" end="15281" title="Louis-François Lejeune" label="Louis-François Lejeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676" start="15335" end="15339" title="1856" label="1856"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585215" start="15342" end="15361" title="Auguste Chapdelaine" label="Auguste Chapdelaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="15380" end="15390" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717" start="15402" end="15406" title="1868" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q44361" start="15409" end="15428" title="Ludwig I of Bavaria" label="Ludwig I of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="15440" end="15444" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139813" start="15447" end="15465" title="James Milne Wilson" label="James Milne Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527933" start="15515" end="15534" title="Premier of Tasmania" label="Premier of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="15566" end="15570" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q21537015" start="15573" end="15596" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Sullivan (Queensland politician)" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q374137" start="15645" end="15675" title="Henri Joseph Anastase Perrotin" label="Henri Joseph Anastase Perrotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="15706" end="15710" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q450746" start="15713" end="15724" title="Pat Garrett" label="Pat Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q335178" start="15762" end="15799" title="John Hope, 1st Marquess of Linlithgow" label="John Hope, 1st Marquess of Linlithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="15837" end="15866" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="15878" end="15882" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q24072978" start="15885" end="15896" title="John Nanson" label="John Nanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="15954" end="15958" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394434" start="15961" end="15975" title="Ernie Courtney" label="Ernie Courtney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="16013" end="16017" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q21537806" start="16020" end="16036" title="Frederic Chapple" label="Frederic Chapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="16069" end="16073" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q124077" start="16076" end="16089" title="Adolphe Appia" label="Adolphe Appia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797509" start="16139" end="16152" title="Ina Coolbrith" label="Ina Coolbrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="16193" end="16197" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865257" start="16200" end="16216" title="Arthur Mills Lea" label="Arthur Mills Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q739969" start="16261" end="16276" title="Giuseppe Vitali" label="Giuseppe Vitali"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="16311" end="16315" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q771698" start="16318" end="16330" title="E. F. Benson" label="E. F. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="16376" end="16380" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q209439" start="16383" end="16404" title="Pehr Evind Svinhufvud" label="Pehr Evind Svinhufvud"/>
<link wikidata="Q29558" start="16448" end="16468" title="President of Finland" label="President of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="16480" end="16484" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341902" start="16487" end="16509" title="Robert Barrington-Ward" label="Robert Barrington-Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="16552" end="16556" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q35829156" start="16559" end="16575" title="Sarah Ann Jenyns" label="Sarah Ann Jenyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="16612" end="16616" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q319943" start="16619" end="16634" title="Elpidio Quirino" label="Elpidio Quirino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="16672" end="16700" title="President of the Philippines" label="President of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="16712" end="16716" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q765838" start="16719" end="16732" title="Melvin Purvis" label="Melvin Purvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="16762" end="16765" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966480" start="16791" end="16802" title="Walter Yust" label="Walter Yust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="16846" end="16850" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082484" start="16853" end="16868" title="Frank Albertson" label="Frank Albertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="16907" end="16911" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502504" start="16914" end="16928" title="Tore Ørjasæter" label="Tore Ørjasæter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="16969" end="16973" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815522" start="16976" end="16986" title="Tom Davies (American football)" label="Tom Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="17034" end="17038" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297019" start="17041" end="17058" title="Florence P. Dwyer" label="Florence P. Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="17091" end="17095" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q319015" start="17098" end="17109" title="Yigal Allon" label="Yigal Allon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="17143" end="17167" title="Prime Minister of Israel" label="Prime Minister of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523814" start="17187" end="17198" title="Gil Elvgren" label="Gil Elvgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="17244" end="17248" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q952864" start="17251" end="17265" title="Ludwik Starski" label="Ludwik Starski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="17313" end="17317" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q531951" start="17320" end="17331" title="Ruth Pitter" label="Ruth Pitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="17368" end="17372" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497162" start="17375" end="17387" title="Frank Daniel" label="Frank Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563720" start="17459" end="17470" title="Wes Farrell" label="Wes Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288036" start="17531" end="17541" title="Ralph Rowe" label="Ralph Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="17598" end="17602" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q961489" start="17605" end="17618" title="Dennis Danell" label="Dennis Danell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="17650" end="17654" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q155316" start="17657" end="17674" title="Kagamisato Kiyoji" label="Kagamisato Kiyoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345471" start="17709" end="17717" title="Yokozuna" label="Yokozuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182811" start="17737" end="17752" title="Jerome Lawrence" label="Jerome Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371769" start="17804" end="17827" title="Harold Bernard St. John" label="Harold Bernard St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921525" start="17866" end="17892" title="Prime Minister of Barbados" label="Prime Minister of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q282234" start="17912" end="17925" title="Lorrie Wilmot" label="Lorrie Wilmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="17962" end="17966" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029714" start="17969" end="17980" title="Janet Kagan" label="Janet Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893994" start="18017" end="18028" title="Erik Ortvad" label="Erik Ortvad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701201" start="18080" end="18092" title="Akira Yamada" label="Akira Yamada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="18138" end="18142" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q312803" start="18145" end="18155" title="Davy Jones (musician)" label="Davy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372500" start="18212" end="18227" title="Sheldon Moldoff" label="Sheldon Moldoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117363" start="18269" end="18292" title="P. K. Narayana Panicker" label="P. K. Narayana Panicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="18326" end="18330" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982905" start="18333" end="18348" title="Wenn V. Deramas" label="Wenn V. Deramas"/>
<link wikidata="Q550580" start="18404" end="18412" title="Gil Hill" label="Gil Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969649" start="18479" end="18494" title="Josefin Nilsson" label="Josefin Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16319327" start="18530" end="18542" title="Mumtaz Qadri" label="Mumtaz Qadri"/>
<link wikidata="Q369398" start="18592" end="18607" title="Louise Rennison" label="Louise Rennison"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="18635" end="18639" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q72246" start="18642" end="18654" title="Dieter Laser" label="Dieter Laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q271507" start="18688" end="18699" title="Éva Székely" label="Éva Székely"/>
<link wikidata="Q744713" start="18711" end="18723" title="International Swimming Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883937" start="18736" end="18757" title="Swimming at the 1952 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s 200 metre breaststroke" label="1952 Olympic champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="18770" end="18774" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q361581" start="18777" end="18794" title="Ali Hassan Mwinyi" label="Ali Hassan Mwinyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241291" start="18800" end="18821" title="President of Tanzania" label="President of Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503632" start="18830" end="18851" title="President of Zanzibar" label="President of Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="18871" end="18885" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="18892" end="18916" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="18974" end="18983" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q313795" start="18993" end="19005" title="John Cassian" label="John Cassian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439847" start="19008" end="19019" title="February 29 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="February 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898140" start="19044" end="19060" title="Rare Disease Day" label="Rare Disease Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949919" start="19129" end="19148" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s Day (tradition)" label="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="19150" end="19157" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="19162" end="19176" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q60674392" start="19194" end="19205" title="February 30" label="February 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q60674392" start="19208" end="19219" title="February 31" label="February 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q60674392" start="19222" end="19229" title="March 0" label="March 0"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10937" wikidata="Q320633" url="?curid=10937" title="Francis Scott Key">
<text>Francis Scott Key (August 1, 1779January 11, 1843) was an American lawyer, author, and poet from Frederick, Maryland, best known as the author of the text of the American national anthem &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot;. Key observed the British bombardment of Fort McHenry in 1814 during the War of 1812. He was inspired upon seeing the American flag still flying over the fort at dawn and wrote the poem &quot;Defence of Fort M&#x27;Henry&quot;; it was published within a week with the suggested tune of the popular song &quot;To Anacreon in Heaven&quot;. The song with Key&#x27;s lyrics became known as &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot; and slowly gained in popularity as an unofficial anthem, finally achieving official status as the national anthem more than a century later under President Herbert Hoover.

Key was a lawyer in Maryland and Washington, D.C. for four decades and worked on important cases, including the Burr conspiracy trial, and he argued numerous times before the Supreme Court. He was nominated for District Attorney for the District of Columbia by President Andrew Jackson, where he served from 1833 to 1841. He was a devout Episcopalian.

Key owned slaves from 1800, during which time abolitionists ridiculed his words, claiming that America was more like the &quot;Land of the Free and Home of the Oppressed&quot;. As District Attorney, he suppressed abolitionists, and he lost a case against Reuben Crandall in 1836 where he accused the defendant&#x27;s abolitionist publications of instigating slaves to rebel. He was also a leader of the American Colonization Society which sent former slaves to Africa. He freed some of his slaves in the 1830s, paying one as his farm foreman to supervise his other slaves. He publicly criticized slavery and gave free legal representation to some slaves seeking freedom, but he also represented owners of runaway slaves. He had eight slaves at the time of his death.

==Early life==

Key was born into an affluent family. Key&#x27;s father John Ross Key was a lawyer, a commissioned officer in the Continental Army, and a judge of English descent. His mother Ann Phoebe Dagworthy Charlton was born (February 6, 1756 – 1830), to Arthur Charlton, a tavern keeper, and his wife, Eleanor Harrison of Frederick in the colony of Maryland.

Key grew up on the family plantation Terra Rubra in Frederick County, Maryland, which is now Carroll County. He graduated from St.John&#x27;s College, Annapolis, Maryland, in 1796 and read law under his uncle Philip Barton Key who was loyal to the British Crown during the War of Independence. He married Mary Tayloe Lloyd on January 1, 1802, daughter of Edward Lloyd IV of Wye House and Elizabeth Tayloe, daughter of John Tayloe II of Mount Airy and sister of John Tayloe III of The Octagon House. The couple raised their 11 children in their Georgetown residence, the Key House.

==&quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot;==
Key and Colonel John Stuart Skinner dined aboard on September 7, 1814, following the Burning of Washington in August. They were the guests of Vice-Admiral Alexander Cochrane, Rear-Admiral George Cockburn, and Major-General Robert Ross. Skinner and Key were there to plead for the release of Dr. William Beanes, a physician who resided in Upper Marlboro, Maryland, and a friend of Key who had been captured in his home on August 28. Beanes was accused of aiding the detention of several British Army stragglers who were ransacking local homes in search of food. Skinner, Key, and the released Beanes were allowed to return under guard to their own truce ship, but they were not allowed to go ashore because they had become familiar with the strength and position of the British units and their intention to launch an attack on Baltimore. Key was unable to do anything but watch the 25-hour bombardment of the American forces at Fort McHenry during the Battle of Baltimore from dawn of September 13 to the next morning.

At dawn, Key was able to see a large American flag waving over the fort, and he started writing a poem about his experience on the back of a letter that he had kept in his pocket. On September 16, Key, Skinner, and Beanes were released from the fleet. When they arrived in Baltimore that evening, Key completed the poem in his room at the Indian Queen Hotel. His untitled and unsigned manuscript was printed as a broadside the next day under the title &quot;Defence of Fort M&#x27;Henry&quot;, with the notation: &quot;Tune – Anacreon in Heaven&quot;. This was a popular tune that Key had already used as a setting for his 1805 song &quot;When the Warrior Returns&quot;, celebrating American heroes of the First Barbary War. It was published in newspapers, first in Baltimore and then across the nation, under the new title The Star-Spangled Banner. It was somewhat difficult to sing, yet it became increasingly popular, competing with &quot;Hail, Columbia&quot; (1796) as the de facto national anthem by the time of the Mexican–American War and the American Civil War. The song was finally adopted as the American national anthem more than a century after its first publication by Act of Congress in 1931, signed by President Herbert Hoover.

==Legal career==

Key was a leading attorney in Frederick, Maryland, and Washington, D.C., for many years, with an extensive real estate and trial practice. He and his family settled in Georgetown in 1805 or 1806, near the new national capital. He assisted his uncle Philip Barton Key in the sensational conspiracy trial of Aaron Burr and in the expulsion of Senator John Smith of Ohio. He made the first of his many arguments before the United States Supreme Court in 1807. In 1808, he assisted President Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s attorney general in &quot;United Statesv.Peters&quot;.

In 1829, Key assisted in the prosecution of Tobias Watkins, former U.S. Treasury auditor under President John Quincy Adams, for misappropriating public funds. He also handled the Petticoat affair concerning Secretary of War John Eaton, and he served as the attorney for Sam Houston in 1832 during his trial for assaulting Representative William Stanbery of Ohio. After years as an adviser to President Jackson, Key was nominated by the President to District Attorney for the District of Columbia in 1833. He served from 1833 to 1841 while also handling his own private legal cases. In 1835, he prosecuted Richard Lawrence for his attempt to assassinate President Jackson at the top steps of the Capitol, the first attempt to kill an American president.

==Key and slavery==
Key purchased his first slave in 1800 or 1801 and owned six slaves in 1820. He freed seven in the 1830s, and owned eight when he died. One of his freed slaves continued to work for him for wages as his farm&#x27;s foreman, supervising several slaves. Key also represented several slaves seeking their freedom, as well as several slave-owners seeking return of their runaway slaves. Key was one of the executors of John Randolph of Roanoke&#x27;s will, which freed his 400 slaves, and Key fought to enforce the will for the next decade and to provide the freedmen and women with land to support themselves.

Key is known to have publicly criticized slavery&#x27;s cruelties, and a newspaper editorial stated that &quot;he often volunteered to defend the downtrodden sons and daughters of Africa.&quot; The editor said that Key &quot;convinced me that slavery was wrong—radically wrong&quot;.

A quote increasingly credited to Key stating that free black people are &quot;a distinct and inferior race of people, which all experience proves to be the greatest evil that afflicts a community&quot; is erroneous. The quote is taken from an 1838 letter that Key wrote to Reverend Benjamin Tappan of Maine who had sent Key a questionnaire about the attitudes of Southern religious institutions about slavery. Rather than representing a statement by Key identifying his personal thoughts, the words quoted are offered by Key to describe the attitudes of others who assert that former slaves could not remain in the U.S. as paid laborers. This was the official policy of the American Colonization Society. Key was an ACS leader and fundraiser for the organization, but he himself did not send the men and women he freed to Africa upon their emancipation. The original confusion around this quote arises from ambiguities in the 1937 biography of Key by Edward S. Delaplaine.

Key was a founding member and active leader of the American Colonization Society (ACS), whose primary goal was to send free black people to Africa. Though many free black people were born in the United States by this time, historians argue that upper-class American society, of which Key was a part, could never &quot;envision a multiracial society&quot;. The ACS was not supported by most abolitionists or free black people of the time, but the organization&#x27;s work would eventually lead to the creation of Liberia in 1847.

===Anti-abolitionism===
In the early 1830s American thinking on slavery changed quite abruptly. Considerable opposition to the American Colonization Society&#x27;s project emerged. Led by newspaper editor and publisher William Lloyd Garrison, a growing portion of the population noted that only a very small number of free black people were actually moved, and they faced brutal conditions in West Africa, with very high mortality. Free Black people made it clear that few of them wanted to move, and if they did, it would be to Canada, Mexico, or Central America, not Africa. The leaders of the American Colonization Society, including Key, were predominantly slave owners. The Society was intended to preserve slavery, rather than eliminate it. In the words of philanthropist Gerrit Smith, it was &quot;quite as much an Anti-Abolition, as Colonization Society&quot;. &quot;This Colonization Society had, by an invisible process, half conscious, half unconscious, been transformed into a serviceable organ and member of the Slave Power.&quot;

The alternative to the colonization of Africa, project of the American Colonization Society, was the total and immediate abolition of slavery in the United States. This Key was firmly against, with or without slave owner compensation, and he used his position as District Attorney to attack abolitionists. In 1833, he secured a grand jury indictment against Benjamin Lundy, editor of the anti-slavery publication &quot;Genius of Universal Emancipation&quot;, and his printer William Greer, for libel after Lundy published an article that declared, &quot;There is neither mercy nor justice for colored people in this district [of Columbia]&quot;. Lundy&#x27;s article, Key said in the indictment, &quot;was intended to injure, oppress, aggrieve, and vilify the good name, fame, credit &amp; reputation of the Magistrates and constables&quot; of Washington. Lundy left town rather than face trial; Greer was acquitted.

====Prosecution of Reuben Crandall====

In a larger unsuccessful prosecution, in August 1836 Key obtained an indictment against Reuben Crandall, brother of controversial Connecticut teacher Prudence Crandall, who had recently moved to Washington, D.C. It accused Crandall of &quot;seditious libel&quot; after two marshals (who operated as slave catchers in their off hours) found Crandall had a trunk full of anti-slavery publications in his Georgetown residence and office, five days after the Snow riot, caused by rumors that a mentally ill slave had attempted to kill an elderly white woman. In an April 1837 trial that attracted nationwide attention and that congressmen attended, Key charged that Crandall&#x27;s publications instigated slaves to rebel. Crandall&#x27;s attorneys acknowledged he opposed slavery, but denied any intent or actions to encourage rebellion. Evidence was introduced that the anti-slavery publications were packing materials used by his landlady in shipping his possessions to him. He had not &quot;published&quot; anything; he had given one copy to one man who had asked for it.

Key, in his final address to the jury said:

The jury acquitted Crandall of all charges. This public and humiliating defeat, as well as family tragedies in 1835, diminished Key&#x27;s political ambition. He resigned as District Attorney in 1840. He remained a staunch proponent of African colonization and a strong critic of the abolition movement until his death.

Crandall died shortly after his acquittal of pneumonia contracted in the Washington jail.

==Religion==
Key was a devout and prominent Episcopalian. In his youth, he almost became an Episcopal priest rather than a lawyer. Throughout his life he sprinkled biblical references in his correspondence. He was active in All Saints Parish in Frederick, Maryland, near his family&#x27;s home. He also helped found or financially support several parishes in the new national capital, including St. John&#x27;s Episcopal Church in Georgetown, Trinity Episcopal Church in present-day Judiciary Square, and Christ Church in Alexandria (at the time, in the District of Columbia). He was described as a &quot;devoted and intimate friend&quot; of Bishop William Meade of Virginia, and his &quot;good literary taste&quot; was credited for the quality of the church&#x27;s hymnal.

From 1818 until his death in 1843, Key was associated with the American Bible Society. He successfully opposed an abolitionist resolution presented to that group around 1838. 

Key also helped found two Episcopal seminaries, one in Baltimore and the other across the Potomac River in Alexandria (the Virginia Theological Seminary). Key also published a prose work called &quot;The Power of Literature, and Its Connection with Religion&quot;, in 1834.

==Death and legacy==
On January 11, 1843, Key died at the home of his daughter Elizabeth Howard in Baltimore from pleurisy at age 63. He was initially interred in Old Saint Paul&#x27;s Cemetery in the vault of John Eager Howard but in 1866, his body was moved to his family plot in Frederick at Mount Olivet Cemetery.

The Key Monument Association erected a memorial in 1898 and the remains of both Francis Scott Key and his wife, Mary Tayloe Lloyd, were placed in a crypt in the base of the monument.

Despite several efforts to preserve it, the Francis Scott Key residence was ultimately dismantled in1947. The residence had been located at 351618MStreet in Georgetown.

Though Key had written poetry from time to time, often with heavily religious themes, these works were not collected and published until 14years after his death. Two of his religious poems used as Christian hymns include &quot;Before the Lord We Bow&quot; and &quot;Lord, with Glowing Heart I&#x27;d Praise Thee&quot;.

In1806, Key&#x27;s sister, Anne Phoebe Charlton Key, married Roger B. Taney, who would later become Chief Justice of the United States. In 1846 one daughter, Alice, married U.S. Senator George H. Pendleton and another, Ellen Lloyd, married Simon F. Blunt. In1859, Key&#x27;s son Philip Barton Key II, who also served as United States Attorney for the District of Columbia, was shot and killed by Daniel Sicklesa U.S.Representative from New York who would serve as a general in the American Civil Warafter he discovered that Philip Barton Key was having an affair with his wife. Sickles was acquitted in the first use of the temporary insanity defense. In1861, Key&#x27;s grandson Francis Key Howard was imprisoned in Fort McHenry with the Mayor of Baltimore George William Brown and other locals deemed to be Confederate sympathizers.

F. Scott Fitzgerald, whose full name was Francis Scott Key Fitzgerald was a distant cousin and the namesake of Key. Key&#x27;s direct descendants include geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan, guitarist Dana Key, and American fashion designer and socialite Pauline de Rothschild.

==Monuments and memorials==

* Francis Scott Key Monument in Baltimore, Maryland; French sculptor Antonin Mercié was commissioned after $25,000 was given for the work. It was erected in the city in 1911.
* Two bridges were named in Key&#x27;s honor:
** The first is between the Rosslyn section of Arlington County, Virginia, and Georgetown in Washington, D.C., where Key had lived. The home, which was dismantled in 1947 as part of construction of the Whitehurst Freeway, was located on M Street NW, in the area between the Key Bridge and the intersection of M Street and Whitehurst Freeway, as is illustrated on a sign in nearby Francis Scott Key park.
** The other bridge was part of the Baltimore Beltway crossing the outer harbor of Baltimore, and was located at the approximate point where the British anchored to shell Fort McHenry. It stood until March 26, 2024, when it was destroyed by a cargo ship.
* St. John&#x27;s College, Annapolis, from which Key graduated in 1796, has an auditorium named in his honor.
* Francis Scott Key was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1970.
* He is buried at Mount Olivet Cemetery in Frederick, the same resting place as that of Thomas Johnson, the first governor of Maryland, and friend Barbara Fritchie, who allegedly waved the American flag out of her home in defiance of Stonewall Jackson&#x27;s march through the city during the Civil War.
* Francis Scott Key Hall at the University of Maryland, College Park is named in his honor. The George Washington University also has a residence hall in Key&#x27;s honor at the corner of 20th and F Streets.
* Francis Scott Key High School in rural Carroll County, Maryland.
* Francis Scott Key Middle School in Houston, Texas
* Francis Scott Key Middle School in Silver Spring, Maryland
* Francis Scott Key Elementary School (several, including California, Maryland, Virginia, Washington, D.C.); Francis Scott Key School in Philadelphia.
* Francis Scott Key Mall in Frederick, Frederick County, Maryland.
* The Frederick Keys minor league baseball team – a Baltimore affiliate – is named after Key.
* The World War II Liberty ship was named in his honor.
* The US Navy named a submarine in his honor, the .
* A monument to Francis Scott Key was commissioned by San Francisco businessman James Lick, who donated some $60,000 for a sculpture of Key to be raised in Golden Gate Park. The nation&#x27;s first memorial to Francis Scott Key, the travertine monument was executed by sculptor William W. Story in Rome in 1885–87. The city of San Francisco allocated some to renovate the Key monument, and repairs had been recently finished on the monument as of April 2020. The statue was toppled by protesters on June 19, 2020. It has been replaced by 350 black steel sculptures—each high—that honor the first 350 Africans kidnapped and forced onto a slave ship headed across the Atlantic from Angola to Virginia in 1619. The sculptor is Dana King.
==See also==

* In God We Trust
* War of 1812

==References==
==External links==

* 2014 biography, &quot;What So Proudly We Hailed: Francis Scott Key, A Life &quot;
* 
* 
* Short biography
* Francis Scott Key biography at Cyber Hymnal
* Preservation of the Residence of Francis Scott Key, Special Collections Research Center, Estelle and Melvin Gelman Library, The George Washington University. This pamphlet was written by the Columbia Historical Society in an effort to save the Francis Scott Key home from destruction in the 1940s.
* &quot;Booknotes&quot; interview with Irvin Molotsky on &quot;The Flag, The Poet and The Song&quot;, September 9, 2001.
* &quot;Francis Scott Key&#x27;s OTHER Verse&quot; – selections from Key&#x27;s other poetry and verse.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q320633" start="0" end="17" title="Francis Scott Key" label="Francis Scott Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q472675" start="97" end="116" title="Frederick, Maryland" label="Frederick, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="193" end="217" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438634" start="265" end="277" title="Fort McHenry" label="Fort McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="297" end="308" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288405" start="533" end="554" title="The Anacreontic Song" label="To Anacreon in Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="803" end="817" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994776" start="932" end="947" title="Burr conspiracy" label="Burr conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="1081" end="1105" title="President Andrew Jackson" label="President Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="1158" end="1170" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q89500063" start="1415" end="1443" title="Trial of Reuben Crandall" label="case against Reuben Crandall"/>
<link wikidata="Q210911" start="1576" end="1605" title="American Colonization Society" label="American Colonization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255709" start="2013" end="2026" title="John Ross Key" label="John Ross Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="2071" end="2087" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q653553" start="2344" end="2355" title="Terra Rubra" label="Terra Rubra"/>
<link wikidata="Q501345" start="2359" end="2385" title="Frederick County, Maryland" label="Frederick County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q501323" start="2400" end="2414" title="Carroll County, Maryland" label="Carroll County"/>
<link wikidata="Q663625" start="2434" end="2456" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s College (Annapolis/Santa Fe)" label="St.John&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="2458" end="2477" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300597" start="2491" end="2499" title="Reading law" label="read law"/>
<link wikidata="Q895887" start="2516" end="2533" title="Philip Barton Key" label="Philip Barton Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344185" start="2662" end="2677" title="Edward Lloyd (Continental Congress)" label="Edward Lloyd IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039706" start="2681" end="2690" title="Wye House" label="Wye House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260306" start="2725" end="2739" title="John Tayloe II" label="John Tayloe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919298" start="2743" end="2753" title="Mount Airy Plantation" label="Mount Airy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260307" start="2768" end="2783" title="John Tayloe III" label="John Tayloe III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754672" start="2787" end="2804" title="The Octagon House" label="The Octagon House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468648" start="2851" end="2861" title="Georgetown (Washington, D.C.)" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912390" start="2877" end="2886" title="Key House" label="Key House"/>
<link wikidata="Q897786" start="3015" end="3036" title="Burning of Washington" label="Burning of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q714600" start="3085" end="3103" title="Alexander Cochrane" label="Alexander Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355040" start="3118" end="3133" title="Sir George Cockburn, 10th Baronet" label="George Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538405" start="3153" end="3164" title="Robert Ross (British Army officer)" label="Robert Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q753334" start="3268" end="3292" title="Upper Marlboro, Maryland" label="Upper Marlboro, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="3416" end="3428" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438634" start="3857" end="3869" title="Fort McHenry" label="Fort McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850527" start="3881" end="3900" title="Battle of Baltimore" label="Battle of Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288405" start="4475" end="4493" title="Anacreon in Heaven" label="Anacreon in Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q468293" start="4655" end="4672" title="First Barbary War" label="First Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="4773" end="4797" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360131" start="4891" end="4905" title="Hail, Columbia" label="Hail, Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="4970" end="4990" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4999" end="5017" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="5176" end="5190" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468648" start="5379" end="5389" title="Georgetown (Washington, D.C.)" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q895887" start="5460" end="5477" title="Philip Barton Key" label="Philip Barton Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q179090" start="5517" end="5527" title="Aaron Burr" label="Aaron Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q541460" start="5552" end="5570" title="John Smith (Ohio politician, died 1824)" label="Senator John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5631" end="5658" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="5699" end="5715" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18910585" start="5823" end="5837" title="Tobias Watkins" label="Tobias Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="5884" end="5901" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q946735" start="5958" end="5974" title="Petticoat affair" label="Petticoat affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q878759" start="6003" end="6013" title="John Eaton (politician)" label="John Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="6049" end="6060" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018711" start="6116" end="6132" title="William Stanbery" label="William Stanbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912001" start="6384" end="6400" title="Richard Lawrence (failed assassin)" label="Richard Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341317" start="6967" end="6991" title="John Randolph of Roanoke" label="John Randolph of Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q210911" start="8119" end="8148" title="American Colonization Society" label="American Colonization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q210911" start="8470" end="8499" title="American Colonization Society" label="American Colonization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="8931" end="8938" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q360155" start="9168" end="9190" title="William Lloyd Garrison" label="William Lloyd Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104317" start="9727" end="9739" title="Gerrit Smith" label="Gerrit Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522748" start="9974" end="9985" title="Slave Power" label="Slave Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="10115" end="10156" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolition of slavery in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156250" start="10203" end="10227" title="compensated emancipation" label="slave owner compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896160" start="10352" end="10366" title="Benjamin Lundy" label="Benjamin Lundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533281" start="10413" end="10445" title="Genius of Universal Emancipation" label="Genius of Universal Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="10488" end="10493" title="Defamation" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q89500063" start="11021" end="11055" title="Trial of Reuben Crandall" label="indictment against Reuben Crandall"/>
<link wikidata="Q512490" start="11102" end="11119" title="Prudence Crandall" label="Prudence Crandall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445335" start="11193" end="11208" title="seditious libel" label="seditious libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961411" start="11251" end="11264" title="slave catcher" label="slave catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="11321" end="11333" title="anti-slavery" label="anti-slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071062" start="11407" end="11416" title="Snow Riot" label="Snow riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155622" start="11654" end="11669" title="Slave rebellion" label="slaves to rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="12526" end="12538" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864158" start="12706" end="12723" title="All Saints Church (Frederick, Maryland)" label="All Saints Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q63470380" start="12877" end="12909" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church, Georgetown" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468648" start="12913" end="12923" title="Georgetown (Washington, D.C.)" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953676" start="12925" end="12949" title="Trinity Episcopal Church (Washington, D.C.)" label="Trinity Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303071" start="12965" end="12981" title="Judiciary Square" label="Judiciary Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108734" start="12987" end="13000" title="Christ Church (Alexandria, Virginia)" label="Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="13004" end="13014" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015522" start="13131" end="13144" title="William Meade" label="William Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q463561" start="13320" end="13342" title="American Bible Society" label="American Bible Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="13524" end="13537" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934628" start="13557" end="13586" title="Virginia Theological Seminary" label="Virginia Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55998" start="13823" end="13831" title="pleurisy" label="pleurisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084889" start="13872" end="13902" title="Old Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s Cemetery" label="Old Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q653713" start="13919" end="13936" title="John Eager Howard" label="John Eager Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q472675" start="13991" end="14000" title="Frederick, Maryland" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922566" start="14004" end="14025" title="Mount Olivet Cemetery (Frederick)" label="Mount Olivet Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="14176" end="14181" title="crypt" label="crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="14589" end="14593" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14763" end="14777" title="Roger B. Taney" label="Roger B. Taney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="14802" end="14836" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q552459" start="14888" end="14907" title="George H. Pendleton" label="George H. Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19664292" start="14942" end="14956" title="Simon F. Blunt" label="Simon F. Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183182" start="14981" end="15001" title="Philip Barton Key II" label="Philip Barton Key II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889552" start="15022" end="15073" title="United States Attorney for the District of Columbia" label="United States Attorney for the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160530" start="15098" end="15112" title="Daniel Sickles" label="Daniel Sickles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="15183" end="15201" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481622" start="15382" end="15400" title="Frank Key Howard" label="Francis Key Howard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15419" end="15431" title="Fort McHenry" label="Fort McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627428" start="15441" end="15459" title="List of mayors of Baltimore" label="Mayor of Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546302" start="15460" end="15480" title="George William Brown (mayor)" label="George William Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="15511" end="15522" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15538" end="15557" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="15703" end="15721" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214761" start="15733" end="15741" title="Dana Key" label="Dana Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q292860" start="15787" end="15808" title="Pauline de Rothschild" label="Pauline de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482419" start="15842" end="15868" title="Francis Scott Key Monument" label="Francis Scott Key Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274629" start="15909" end="15923" title="Antonin Mercié" label="Antonin Mercié"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688414" start="16064" end="16073" title="Key Bridge (Washington, D.C.)" label="The first"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369880" start="16089" end="16096" title="Rosslyn, Virginia" label="Rosslyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="16108" end="16134" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468648" start="16140" end="16150" title="Georgetown (Washington, D.C.)" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q718261" start="16263" end="16281" title="U.S. Route 29 in the District of Columbia" label="Whitehurst Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482413" start="16468" end="16484" title="Francis Scott Key Bridge (Baltimore)" label="The other bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214113" start="16501" end="16518" title="Interstate 695 (Maryland)" label="Baltimore Beltway"/>
<link wikidata="Q125145943" start="16693" end="16718" title="Francis Scott Key Bridge collapse" label="destroyed by a cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q663625" start="16722" end="16756" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s College (Annapolis/Santa Fe)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s College, Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q230752" start="16799" end="16809" title="auditorium" label="auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="16872" end="16896" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922566" start="16924" end="16945" title="Mount Olivet Cemetery (Frederick, Maryland)" label="Mount Olivet Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889298" start="16994" end="17008" title="Thomas Johnson (jurist)" label="Thomas Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858903" start="17053" end="17069" title="Barbara Fritchie" label="Barbara Fritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="17140" end="17157" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Stonewall Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="17199" end="17208" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="17242" end="17278" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland, College Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="17306" end="17334" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691925" start="17420" end="17449" title="Francis Scott Key High School" label="Francis Scott Key High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q501323" start="17459" end="17483" title="Carroll County, Maryland" label="Carroll County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398073" start="17487" end="17518" title="Key Middle School (Texas)" label="Francis Scott Key Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17539" end="17570" title="Silver Spring, Maryland#Middle schools" label="Francis Scott Key Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="17574" end="17597" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244004" start="17668" end="17676" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County Public Schools" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="17678" end="17686" title="Francis Scott Key Elementary School (Arlington, Virginia)" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896359" start="17688" end="17704" title="The Palisades, Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5482420" start="17707" end="17731" title="Francis Scott Key School" label="Francis Scott Key School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="17735" end="17747" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482423" start="17751" end="17773" title="Francis Scott Key Mall" label="Francis Scott Key Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q501345" start="17788" end="17814" title="Frederick County, Maryland" label="Frederick County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498202" start="17822" end="17836" title="Frederick Keys" label="Frederick Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="17868" end="17877" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17916" end="17928" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q593485" start="17929" end="17941" title="Liberty ship" label="Liberty ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q76376280" start="18022" end="18051" title="Statue of Francis Scott Key (San Francisco)" label="monument to Francis Scott Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q629500" start="18098" end="18108" title="James Lick" label="James Lick"/>
<link wikidata="Q635559" start="18174" end="18190" title="Golden Gate Park" label="Golden Gate Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q187156" start="18251" end="18261" title="travertine" label="travertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335728" start="18296" end="18312" title="William W. Story" label="William W. Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312521" start="18517" end="18530" title="Juneteenth" label="June 19, 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q69525019" start="18608" end="18724" title="First Africans in Virginia" label="first 350 Africans kidnapped and forced onto a slave ship headed across the Atlantic from Angola to Virginia in 1619"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214763" start="18742" end="18751" title="Dana King" label="Dana King"/>
<link wikidata="Q270871" start="18769" end="18784" title="In God We Trust" label="In God We Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="18787" end="18798" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10938" wikidata="Q402439" url="?curid=10938" title="FSU">
<text>FSU may refer to:

*Florida State University, a large public research university in Tallahassee, Florida
*Ferris State University, Michigan
*Frostburg State University, Maryland
*Fayetteville State University, North Carolina
*Fairmont State University, West Virginia
*Fitchburg State University, Massachusetts
*Framingham State University, Massachusetts
*Free Speech Union, British organisation
*Friends Stand United, street gang
*Finance Sector Union, Australian trade union
*Financial Services Union, Irish trade union
*Fédération Syndicale Unitaire, French trade union
*Former Soviet Union, collective term for the fifteen countries that formed the Soviet Union until 1991
*Fuse-Switch-Unit, opposite of SFU, relating to the order an electrical fuse is inserted in a circuit

==See also==
*California State University, Fresno, also known as Fresno State University
*University of Jena, also known as Friedrich Schiller University, Thuringia, Germany</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q402439" start="0" end="3" title="FSU" label="FSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q861548" start="20" end="44" title="Florida State University" label="Florida State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407897" start="106" end="129" title="Ferris State University" label="Ferris State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470544" start="141" end="167" title="Frostburg State University" label="Frostburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399078" start="179" end="208" title="Fayetteville State University" label="Fayetteville State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981651" start="226" end="251" title="Fairmont State University" label="Fairmont State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982087" start="268" end="294" title="Fitchburg State University" label="Fitchburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982077" start="311" end="338" title="Framingham State University" label="Framingham State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859074" start="355" end="372" title="Free Speech Union" label="Free Speech Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464553" start="396" end="416" title="Friends Stand United" label="Friends Stand United"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449549" start="431" end="451" title="Finance Sector Union" label="Finance Sector Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070513" start="477" end="501" title="Financial Services Union" label="Financial Services Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q612621" start="522" end="551" title="Fédération Syndicale Unitaire" label="Fédération Syndicale Unitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="573" end="592" title="Former Soviet Union" label="Former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q182221" start="737" end="752" title="Fuse (electrical)" label="electrical fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026919" start="793" end="828" title="California State University, Fresno" label="California State University, Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q154561" start="869" end="887" title="University of Jena" label="University of Jena"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10939" wikidata="Q192161" url="?curid=10939" title="Formal language">
<text>In logic, mathematics, computer science, and linguistics, a formal language consists of words whose letters are taken from an alphabet and are well-formed according to a specific set of rules called a formal grammar.

The alphabet of a formal language consists of symbols, letters, or tokens that concatenate into strings called words. Words that belong to a particular formal language are sometimes called &quot;well-formed words&quot; or &quot;well-formed formulas&quot;. A formal language is often defined by means of a formal grammar such as a regular grammar or context-free grammar, which consists of its formation rules.

In computer science, formal languages are used, among others, as the basis for defining the grammar of programming languages and formalized versions of subsets of natural languages, in which the words of the language represent concepts that are associated with meanings or semantics. In computational complexity theory, decision problems are typically defined as formal languages, and complexity classes are defined as the sets of the formal languages that can be parsed by machines with limited computational power. In logic and the foundations of mathematics, formal languages are used to represent the syntax of axiomatic systems, and mathematical formalism is the philosophy that all of mathematics can be reduced to the syntactic manipulation of formal languages in this way.

The field of formal language theory studies primarily the purely syntactic aspects of such languages—that is, their internal structural patterns. Formal language theory sprang out of linguistics, as a way of understanding the syntactic regularities of natural languages.

== History ==

In the 17th century, Gottfried Leibniz imagined and described the characteristica universalis, a universal and formal language which utilised pictographs. Later, Carl Friedrich Gauss investigated the problem of Gauss codes.

Gottlob Frege attempted to realize Leibniz&#x27;s ideas, through a notational system first outlined in &quot;Begriffsschrift&quot; (1879) and more fully developed in his 2-volume Grundgesetze der Arithmetik (1893/1903). This described a &quot;formal language of pure language.&quot;

In the first half of the 20th century, several developments were made with relevance to formal languages. Axel Thue published four papers relating to words and language between 1906 and 1914. The last of these introduced what Emil Post later termed &#x27;Thue Systems&#x27;, and gave an early example of an undecidable problem. Post would later use this paper as the basis for a 1947 proof &quot;that the word problem for semigroups was recursively insoluble&quot;, and later devised the canonical system for the creation of formal languages.

In 1907, Leonardo Torres Quevedo introduced a formal language for the description of mechanical drawings (mechanical devices), in Vienna. He published &quot;Sobre un sistema de notaciones y símbolos destinados a facilitar la descripción de las máquinas&quot; (&quot;On a system of notations and symbols intended to facilitate the description of machines&quot;). Heinz Zemanek rated it as an equivalent to a programming language for the numerical control of machine tools.

Noam Chomsky devised an abstract representation of formal and natural languages, known as the Chomsky hierarchy. In 1959 John Backus developed the Backus-Naur form to describe the syntax of a high level programming language, following his work in the creation of FORTRAN. Peter Naur was the secretary/editor for the ALGOL60 Report in which he used Backus–Naur form to describe the Formal part of ALGOL60.

== Words over an alphabet ==

An &quot;alphabet&quot;, in the context of formal languages, can be any set; its elements are called &quot;letters&quot;. An alphabet may contain an infinite number of elements; however, most definitions in formal language theory specify alphabets with a finite number of elements, and many results apply only to them. It often makes sense to use an alphabet in the usual sense of the word, or more generally any finite character encoding such as ASCII or Unicode.

A word over an alphabet can be any finite sequence (i.e., string) of letters. The set of all words over an alphabet Σ is usually denoted by Σ* (using the Kleene star). The length of a word is the number of letters it is composed of. For any alphabet, there is only one word of length 0, the &quot;empty word&quot;, which is often denoted by e, ε, λ or even Λ. By concatenation one can combine two words to form a new word, whose length is the sum of the lengths of the original words. The result of concatenating a word with the empty word is the original word.

In some applications, especially in logic, the alphabet is also known as the &quot;vocabulary&quot; and words are known as &quot;formulas&quot; or &quot;sentences&quot;; this breaks the letter/word metaphor and replaces it by a word/sentence metaphor.

==Definition==
A formal language &quot;L&quot; over an alphabet Σ is a subset of Σ*, that is, a set of words over that alphabet. Sometimes the sets of words are grouped into expressions, whereas rules and constraints may be formulated for the creation of &#x27;well-formed expressions&#x27;.

In computer science and mathematics, which do not usually deal with natural languages, the adjective &quot;formal&quot; is often omitted as redundant.

While formal language theory usually concerns itself with formal languages that are described by some syntactic rules, the actual definition of the concept &quot;formal language&quot; is only as above: a (possibly infinite) set of finite-length strings composed from a given alphabet, no more and no less. In practice, there are many languages that can be described by rules, such as regular languages or context-free languages. The notion of a formal grammar may be closer to the intuitive concept of a &quot;language&quot;, one described by syntactic rules. By an abuse of the definition, a particular formal language is often thought of as being accompanied with a formal grammar that describes it.

==Examples==

The following rules describe a formal language  over the alphabet Σ = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, +, =}:
* Every nonempty string that does not contain &quot;+&quot; or &quot;=&quot; and does not start with &quot;0&quot; is in .
* The string &quot;0&quot; is in .
* A string containing &quot;=&quot; is in  if and only if there is exactly one &quot;=&quot;, and it separates two valid strings of .
* A string containing &quot;+&quot; but not &quot;=&quot; is in  if and only if every &quot;+&quot; in the string separates two valid strings of .
* No string is in  other than those implied by the previous rules.
Under these rules, the string &quot;23+4=555&quot; is in , but the string &quot;=234=+&quot; is not. This formal language expresses natural numbers, well-formed additions, and well-formed addition equalities, but it expresses only what they look like (their syntax), not what they mean (semantics). For instance, nowhere in these rules is there any indication that &quot;0&quot; means the number zero, &quot;+&quot; means addition, &quot;23+4=555&quot; is false, etc.

=== Constructions ===
For finite languages, one can explicitly enumerate all well-formed words. For example, we can describe a language  as just  = {a, b, ab, cba}. The degenerate case of this construction is the empty language, which contains no words at all ( = ∅).

However, even over a finite (non-empty) alphabet such as Σ = {a, b} there are an infinite number of finite-length words that can potentially be expressed: &quot;a&quot;, &quot;abb&quot;, &quot;ababba&quot;, &quot;aaababbbbaab&quot;, ... Therefore, formal languages are typically infinite, and describing an infinite formal language is not as simple as writing &quot;L&quot; = {a, b, ab, cba}. Here are some examples of formal languages:
* = Σ*, the set of &quot;all&quot; words over Σ;
* = {a}* = {a&quot;n&quot;}, where &quot;n&quot; ranges over the natural numbers and &quot;a&quot;n&quot;&quot; means &quot;a&quot; repeated &quot;n&quot; times (this is the set of words consisting only of the symbol &quot;a&quot;);
* the set of syntactically correct programs in a given programming language (the syntax of which is usually defined by a context-free grammar);
* the set of inputs upon which a certain Turing machine halts; or
* the set of maximal strings of alphanumeric ASCII characters on this line, i.e.,&lt;br&gt; the set {the, set, of, maximal, strings, alphanumeric, ASCII, characters, on, this, line, i, e}.

== Language-specification formalisms ==

Formal languages are used as tools in multiple disciplines. However, formal language theory rarely concerns itself with particular languages (except as examples), but is mainly concerned with the study of various types of formalisms to describe languages. For instance, a language can be given as
* those strings generated by some formal grammar;
* those strings described or matched by a particular regular expression;
* those strings accepted by some automaton, such as a Turing machine or finite-state automaton;
* those strings for which some decision procedure (an algorithm that asks a sequence of related YES/NO questions) produces the answer YES.

Typical questions asked about such formalisms include:

* What is their expressive power? (Can formalism &quot;X&quot; describe every language that formalism &quot;Y&quot; can describe? Can it describe other languages?)
* What is their recognizability? (How difficult is it to decide whether a given word belongs to a language described by formalism &quot;X&quot;?)
* What is their comparability? (How difficult is it to decide whether two languages, one described in formalism &quot;X&quot; and one in formalism &quot;Y&quot;, or in &quot;X&quot; again, are actually the same language?).

Surprisingly often, the answer to these decision problems is &quot;it cannot be done at all&quot;, or &quot;it is extremely expensive&quot; (with a characterization of how expensive). Therefore, formal language theory is a major application area of computability theory and complexity theory. Formal languages may be classified in the Chomsky hierarchy based on the expressive power of their generative grammar as well as the complexity of their recognizing automaton. Context-free grammars and regular grammars provide a good compromise between expressivity and ease of parsing, and are widely used in practical applications.

== Operations on languages ==

Certain operations on languages are common. This includes the standard set operations, such as union, intersection, and complement. Another class of operation is the element-wise application of string operations.

Examples: suppose formula_1 and formula_2 are languages over some common alphabet formula_3.
* The &quot;concatenation&quot; formula_4 consists of all strings of the form formula_5 where formula_6 is a string from formula_1 and formula_8 is a string from formula_2.
* The &quot;intersection&quot; formula_10 of formula_1 and formula_2 consists of all strings that are contained in both languages
* The &quot;complement&quot; formula_13 of formula_1 with respect to formula_3 consists of all strings over formula_3 that are not in formula_1.
* The Kleene star: the language consisting of all words that are concatenations of zero or more words in the original language;
* &quot;Reversal&quot;:
** Let &quot;ε&quot; be the empty word, then formula_18, and
** for each non-empty word formula_19 (where formula_20are elements of some alphabet), let formula_21,
** then for a formal language formula_22, formula_23.
* String homomorphism

Such string operations are used to investigate closure properties of classes of languages. A class of languages is closed under a particular operation when the operation, applied to languages in the class, always produces a language in the same class again. For instance, the context-free languages are known to be closed under union, concatenation, and intersection with regular languages, but not closed under intersection or complement. The theory of trios and abstract families of languages studies the most common closure properties of language families in their own right.

== Applications ==

=== Programming languages ===
A compiler usually has two distinct components. A lexical analyzer, sometimes generated by a tool like codice_1, identifies the tokens of the programming language grammar, e.g. identifiers or keywords, numeric and string literals, punctuation and operator symbols, which are themselves specified by a simpler formal language, usually by means of regular expressions. At the most basic conceptual level, a parser, sometimes generated by a parser generator like codice_2, attempts to decide if the source program is syntactically valid, that is if it is well formed with respect to the programming language grammar for which the compiler was built.

Of course, compilers do more than just parse the source code – they usually translate it into some executable format. Because of this, a parser usually outputs more than a yes/no answer, typically an abstract syntax tree. This is used by subsequent stages of the compiler to eventually generate an executable containing machine code that runs directly on the hardware, or some intermediate code that requires a virtual machine to execute.

=== Formal theories, systems, and proofs ===


In mathematical logic, a &quot;formal theory&quot; is a set of sentences expressed in a formal language.

A &quot;formal system&quot; (also called a &quot;logical calculus&quot;, or a &quot;logical system&quot;) consists of a formal language together with a deductive apparatus (also called a &quot;deductive system&quot;). The deductive apparatus may consist of a set of transformation rules, which may be interpreted as valid rules of inference, or a set of axioms, or have both. A formal system is used to derive one expression from one or more other expressions. Although a formal language can be identified with its formulas, a formal system cannot be likewise identified by its theorems. Two formal systems formula_24 and formula_25 may have all the same theorems and yet differ in some significant proof-theoretic way (a formula A may be a syntactic consequence of a formula B in one but not another for instance).

A &quot;formal proof&quot; or &quot;derivation&quot; is a finite sequence of well-formed formulas (which may be interpreted as sentences, or propositions) each of which is an axiom or follows from the preceding formulas in the sequence by a rule of inference. The last sentence in the sequence is a theorem of a formal system. Formal proofs are useful because their theorems can be interpreted as true propositions.

====Interpretations and models====
Formal languages are entirely syntactic in nature, but may be given semantics that give meaning to the elements of the language. For instance, in mathematical logic, the set of possible formulas of a particular logic is a formal language, and an interpretation assigns a meaning to each of the formulas—usually, a truth value.

The study of interpretations of formal languages is called formal semantics. In mathematical logic, this is often done in terms of model theory. In model theory, the terms that occur in a formula are interpreted as objects within mathematical structures, and fixed compositional interpretation rules determine how the truth value of the formula can be derived from the interpretation of its terms; a &quot;model&quot; for a formula is an interpretation of terms such that the formula becomes true.

== See also ==
* Combinatorics on words
* Formal method
* Free monoid
* Grammar framework
* Mathematical notation
* String (computer science)

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
; Works cited


; General references

* A. G. Hamilton, &quot;Logic for Mathematicians&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 1978, .
* Seymour Ginsburg, &quot;Algebraic and automata theoretic properties of formal languages&quot;, North-Holland, 1975, .
* Michael A. Harrison, &quot;Introduction to Formal Language Theory&quot;, Addison-Wesley, 1978.
* Grzegorz Rozenberg, Arto Salomaa, &quot;Handbook of Formal Languages: Volume I-III&quot;, Springer, 1997, .
* Patrick Suppes, &quot;Introduction to Logic&quot;, D. Van Nostrand, 1957, .
==External links==
*University of Maryland, Formal Language Definitions
* James Power, &quot;Notes on Formal Language Theory and Parsing&quot; , 29 November 2002.
* Drafts of some chapters in the &quot;Handbook of Formal Language Theory&quot;, Vol. 1–3, G. Rozenberg and A. Salomaa (eds.), Springer Verlag, (1997):
** Alexandru Mateescu and Arto Salomaa, &quot;Preface&quot; in Vol.1, pp. v–viii, and &quot;Formal Languages: An Introduction and a Synopsis&quot;, Chapter 1 in Vol. 1, pp. 1–39
** Sheng Yu, &quot;Regular Languages&quot;, Chapter 2 in Vol. 1
** Jean-Michel Autebert, Jean Berstel, Luc Boasson, &quot;Context-Free Languages and Push-Down Automata&quot;, Chapter 3 in Vol. 1
** Christian Choffrut and Juhani Karhumäki, &quot;Combinatorics of Words&quot;, Chapter 6 in Vol. 1
** Tero Harju and Juhani Karhumäki, &quot;Morphisms&quot;, Chapter 7 in Vol. 1, pp. 439–510
** Jean-Eric Pin, &quot;Syntactic semigroups&quot;, Chapter 10 in Vol. 1, pp. 679–746
** M. Crochemore and C. Hancart, &quot;Automata for matching patterns&quot;, Chapter 9 in Vol. 2
** Dora Giammarresi, Antonio Restivo, &quot;Two-dimensional Languages&quot;, Chapter 4 in Vol. 3, pp. 215–267</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="3" end="8" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="10" end="21" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="23" end="39" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="45" end="56" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="60" end="75" title="Formal language" label="formal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8171" start="88" end="92" title="word" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372244" start="100" end="107" title="symbol (formal)" label="letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q837518" start="126" end="134" title="alphabet (formal languages)" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27684055" start="143" end="154" title="well-formedness" label="well-formed"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="201" end="215" title="formal grammar" label="formal grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q175928" start="285" end="291" title="Type–token distinction" label="tokens"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="314" end="321" title="String (computer science)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q655328" start="446" end="465" title="well-formed formula" label="well-formed formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="523" end="537" title="formal grammar" label="formal grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q645527" start="548" end="563" title="regular grammar" label="regular grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q338047" start="567" end="587" title="context-free grammar" label="context-free grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005945" start="611" end="625" title="formation rule" label="formation rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="732" end="752" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="902" end="911" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="916" end="947" title="computational complexity theory" label="computational complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="949" end="965" title="decision problem" label="decision problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q908207" start="1014" end="1030" title="complexity class" label="complexity class"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="1093" end="1111" title="Parsing" label="parsed by machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="1149" end="1154" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q833585" start="1163" end="1189" title="foundations of mathematics" label="foundations of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q792542" start="1244" end="1260" title="axiomatic system" label="axiomatic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433067" start="1267" end="1289" title="Formalism (philosophy of mathematics)" label="mathematical formalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="1424" end="1446" title="Formal language" label="formal language theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="1476" end="1485" title="syntactic" label="syntactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="1663" end="1679" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="1719" end="1736" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142306" start="1764" end="1791" title="characteristica universalis" label="characteristica universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="1840" end="1851" title="pictographs" label="pictographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="1860" end="1880" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q96755115" start="1909" end="1920" title="Gauss notation" label="Gauss codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="1923" end="1936" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Gottlob Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q814390" start="2032" end="2047" title="Begriffsschrift" label="Begriffsschrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q372010" start="2313" end="2322" title="Axel Thue" label="Axel Thue"/>
<link wikidata="Q351366" start="2433" end="2442" title="Emil Post" label="Emil Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502995" start="2514" end="2533" title="undecidable problem" label="undecidable problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233738" start="2695" end="2711" title="Post canonical system" label="canonical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q716862" start="2760" end="2783" title="Leonardo Torres Quevedo" label="Leonardo Torres Quevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="2881" end="2887" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q43768" start="3113" end="3126" title="Heinz Zemanek" label="Heinz Zemanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="3158" end="3178" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="3224" end="3236" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q190913" start="3318" end="3335" title="Chomsky hierarchy" label="Chomsky hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q92746" start="3345" end="3356" title="John Backus" label="John Backus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="3487" end="3494" title="FORTRAN" label="FORTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q92618" start="3496" end="3506" title="Peter Naur" label="Peter Naur"/>
<link wikidata="Q211577" start="3572" end="3588" title="Backus–Naur form" label="Backus–Naur form"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="3732" end="3735" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="3809" end="3817" title="countable set" label="infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="4010" end="4018" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="4080" end="4098" title="character encoding" label="character encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="4107" end="4112" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="4116" end="4123" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="4184" end="4190" title="string (computer science)" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q849775" start="4280" end="4291" title="Kleene star" label="Kleene star"/>
<link wikidata="Q126002" start="4489" end="4502" title="concatenation" label="concatenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="4725" end="4730" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="5013" end="5019" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="5303" end="5319" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q752532" start="5771" end="5787" title="regular language" label="regular language"/>
<link wikidata="Q729271" start="5792" end="5813" title="context-free language" label="context-free language"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="5832" end="5846" title="formal grammar" label="formal grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="6850" end="6864" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="6976" end="6982" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="7005" end="7014" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q917661" start="7356" end="7366" title="degeneracy (mathematics)" label="degenerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="7451" end="7452" title="∅" label="∅"/>
<link wikidata="Q338047" start="8296" end="8316" title="context-free grammar" label="context-free grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="8360" end="8374" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q737372" start="8417" end="8429" title="alphanumeric" label="alphanumeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="8430" end="8435" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="8947" end="8961" title="formal grammar" label="formal grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="9016" end="9034" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q214526" start="9069" end="9078" title="Automata theory" label="automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="9090" end="9104" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="9108" end="9130" title="finite-state automaton" label="finite-state automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="9163" end="9181" title="decision procedure" label="decision procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="9186" end="9195" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q818930" start="10111" end="10131" title="computability theory" label="computability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="10136" end="10153" title="computational complexity theory" label="complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q190913" start="10197" end="10214" title="Chomsky hierarchy" label="Chomsky hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214526" start="10320" end="10329" title="automata theory" label="automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q338047" start="10331" end="10351" title="Context-free grammar" label="Context-free grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q645527" start="10357" end="10372" title="regular grammar" label="regular grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="10433" end="10440" title="parsing" label="parsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q126002" start="10840" end="10853" title="concatenation" label="concatenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849775" start="11282" end="11293" title="Kleene star" label="Kleene star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623989" start="11648" end="11667" title="String homomorphism" label="String homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623989" start="11674" end="11691" title="string operations" label="string operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720939" start="11716" end="11734" title="Closure (mathematics)" label="closure properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q729271" start="11945" end="11966" title="context-free language" label="context-free language"/>
<link wikidata="Q752532" start="12041" end="12057" title="regular language" label="regular language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159445" start="12123" end="12128" title="cone (formal languages)" label="trios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065587" start="12133" end="12163" title="abstract family of languages" label="abstract families of languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q835922" start="12349" end="12365" title="lexical analyzer" label="lexical analyzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q306650" start="12402" end="12410" title="lex programming tool" label="codice_1"/>
<link wikidata="Q853614" start="12476" end="12486" title="identifier" label="identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192029" start="12491" end="12499" title="Keyword (computer programming)" label="keywords"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="12645" end="12664" title="regular expressions" label="regular expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="12704" end="12710" title="parser" label="parser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076785" start="12737" end="12753" title="parser generator" label="parser generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q127380" start="13147" end="13167" title="abstract syntax tree" label="abstract syntax tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q778586" start="13245" end="13255" title="executable" label="executable"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="13267" end="13279" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q837330" start="13324" end="13341" title="intermediate code" label="intermediate code"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="13358" end="13373" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="13437" end="13455" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509500" start="13497" end="13506" title="sentence (mathematical logic)" label="sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="13692" end="13711" title="deductive apparatus" label="deductive apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068763" start="13806" end="13825" title="transformation rule" label="transformation rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="13894" end="13899" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q852732" start="13943" end="13949" title="Proof theory" label="derive"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="14498" end="14509" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068763" start="14598" end="14615" title="rule of inference" label="rule of inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="14877" end="14886" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="14968" end="14973" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q523607" start="15055" end="15069" title="interpretation (logic)" label="interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185521" start="15123" end="15134" title="truth value" label="truth value"/>
<link wikidata="Q963731" start="15196" end="15212" title="Formal semantics (logic)" label="formal semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="15268" end="15280" title="model theory" label="model theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851710" start="15367" end="15390" title="Structure (mathematical logic)" label="mathematical structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985058" start="15653" end="15675" title="Combinatorics on words" label="Combinatorics on words"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049183" start="15678" end="15691" title="Formal method" label="Formal method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500266" start="15694" end="15705" title="Free monoid" label="Free monoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="15708" end="15725" title="Grammar framework" label="Grammar framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140046" start="15728" end="15749" title="Mathematical notation" label="Mathematical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="15752" end="15777" title="String (computer science)" label="String (computer science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="15936" end="15962" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q92797" start="15974" end="15990" title="Seymour Ginsburg" label="Seymour Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729674" start="16094" end="16113" title="Michael A. Harrison" label="Michael A. Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612543" start="16191" end="16209" title="Grzegorz Rozenberg" label="Grzegorz Rozenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q578300" start="16211" end="16223" title="Arto Salomaa" label="Arto Salomaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119470" start="16397" end="16419" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q176916" start="16667" end="16682" title="Springer Verlag" label="Springer Verlag"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10940" wikidata="Q581535" url="?curid=10940" title="Free to Choose">
<text>Free to Choose: A Personal Statement is a 1980 book by economists Milton and Rose D. Friedman, accompanied by a ten-part series broadcast on public television, that advocates free market principles. It was primarily a response to an earlier landmark book and television series &quot;The Age of Uncertainty&quot;, by the noted economist John Kenneth Galbraith.

==Overview==
&quot;Free to Choose: A Personal Statement&quot; maintains that the free market works best for all members of a society, provides examples of how the free market engenders prosperity, and maintains that it can solve problems where other approaches have failed. Published in January 1980, the 297 page book contains 10 chapters. The book was on top of the United States best sellers list for 5 weeks.

PBS broadcast the programs, beginning in January 1980. It was filmed at the invitation of Robert Chitester, the owner of WQLN-TV. It was based on a 15-part series of taped public lectures and question-and-answer sessions. The general format was that of Milton Friedman visiting and narrating a number of success and failure stories in history, which he attributes to free-market capitalism or the lack thereof (e.g., Hong Kong is commended for its free markets, while India is excoriated for relying on centralized planning especially for its protection of its traditional textile industry). Following the primary show, Friedman would engage in discussion moderated by Robert McKenzie with a number of selected debaters drawn from trade unions, academy and the business community, such as Donald Rumsfeld (then of G.D. Searle &amp; Company) and Frances Fox Piven of City University of New York. The interlocutors would offer objections to or support for the proposals put forward by Friedman, who would in turn respond. After the final episode, Friedman sat down for an interview with Lawrence Spivak.

===Guest debaters===
Guest debaters included:

* Gregory Anrig (Commissioner of Massachusetts Department of Education) – Episode 6
* Jagdish Bhagwati (economist) – Episode 2
* Samuel Bowles (economist) – Vol. 3 Episode 5
* William H. Brady (Founder and President of W.H. Brady Co.) – Episode 8
* Clarence J. Brown (politician) – Episode 9
* Joan Claybrook (Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration) – Episode 7
* Barber Conable (politician, President of the World Bank) – Episode 1
* John Coons (law professor, school choice activist) – Episode 6
* Robert Crandall (Brookings Institution economist) – Episode 7
* Richard Deason (IBEW union leader) – Episode 2
* James R. Dumpson (bureaucrat, social worker, academic) – Episode 4
* Otmar Emminger (President of Deutsche Bundesbank) – Episode 9
* Bob Galvin (CEO of Motorola, Inc.) – Episode 1
* Ernest Green (U.S. Assistant Secretary of Labor) – Episode 8
* Michael Harrington (author, academic, activist) – Episode 1
* Nicholas von Hoffman (journalist, political commentator/columnist) – Episode 3
* Helen Hughes (economist) – Episode 2
* Peter Jay (economist, journalist, diplomat) – Episodes 3, 5
* Robert Lampman (economist) – Episode 4
* Richard Landau (medical professor) – Episode 7
* Robert Lekachman (economist) – Episode 3
* William McChesney Martin (former Chairman of the Federal Reserve) – Episode 9
* Helen Bohen O&#x27;Bannon (economist, bureaucrat, social worker) – Episode 4
* Kathleen O&#x27;Reilly (Consumer Federation of America consumer advocate) – Episode 7
* Russell W. Peterson (chemist, politician) – Episode 1
* Frances Fox Piven (academic) – Episode 5
* Donald Rumsfeld (politician, President of G. D. Searle &amp; Company) – Episode 2
* Albert Shanker (President of United Federation of Teachers and American Federation of Teachers teachers&#x27; unions) – Episode 6
* Thomas Shannon (executive director of the National School Boards Association) – Episode 6
* Thomas Sowell (economist, author, columnist) – Episodes 4, 5
* Beryl Wayne Sprinkel (Executive Vice President of Harris Bank) – Episode 9
* Peter Temin (economist) – Episode 3
* Lynn R. Williams (International Secretary of United Steelworkers) – Episode 8
* Walter E. Williams (economist, political commentator) – Episode 8
===1990 rebroadcast===
The series was rebroadcast in 1990 with Linda Chavez moderating the episodes. Arnold Schwarzenegger, George Shultz, Ronald Reagan, David D. Friedman, and Steve Allen, each give personal introductions for one episode. This time, after the documentary segment, Milton Friedman sits down with a single discussion participant to debate the points raised in the episode.

==Positions advocated==
The Friedmans advocate &quot;laissez-faire&quot; economic policies, often criticizing interventionist government policies and their cost in personal freedoms and economic efficiency in the United States and abroad. They argue that international free trade has been restricted through tariffs and protectionism while domestic free trade and freedom have been limited through high taxation and regulation. They cite the 19th-century United Kingdom, the United States before the Great Depression, and modern Hong Kong as ideal examples of a minimalist economic policy. They contrast the economic growth of Japan after the Meiji Restoration and the economic stagnation of India after its independence from the British Empire, and argue that India has performed worse despite its superior economic potential due to its centralized planning. They argue that even countries with command economies, including the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, have been forced to adopt limited market mechanisms in order to operate. The authors argue against government taxation on gas and tobacco and government regulation of the public school systems. The Friedmans argue that the Federal Reserve exacerbated the Great Depression by neglecting to prevent the decline of the money supply in the years leading up to it. They further argue that the American public falsely perceived the Depression to be a result of a failure of capitalism rather than the government, and that the Depression allowed the Federal Reserve Board to centralize its control of the monetary system despite its responsibility for it.

On the subject of welfare, the Friedmans argue that the United States has maintained a higher degree of freedom and productivity by avoiding the nationalizations and extensive welfare systems of Western European countries such as the United Kingdom and Sweden. However, they also argue that welfare practices since the New Deal under &quot;the HEW empire&quot; have been harmful. They argue that public assistance programs have become larger than originally envisioned and are creating &quot;wards of the state&quot; as opposed to &quot;self-reliant individuals.&quot; They also argue that the Social Security System is fundamentally flawed, that urban renewal and public housing programs have contributed to racial inequality and diminished quality of low-income housing, and that Medicare and Medicaid are responsible for rising healthcare prices in the United States. They suggest completely replacing the welfare state with a negative income tax as a less harmful alternative.

The Friedmans also argue that declining academic performance in the United States is the result of increasing government control of the American education system tracing back to the 1840s, but suggest a voucher system as a politically feasible solution. They blame the 1970s recession and lower quality of consumer goods on extensive business regulations since the 1960s, and advocate abolishing the Food and Drug Administration, the Interstate Commerce Commission, the Consumer Product Safety Commission, Amtrak, and Conrail. They argue that the energy crisis would be resolved by abolishing the Department of Energy and price floors on crude oil. They recommend replacing the Environmental Protection Agency and environmental regulation with an effluent charge. They criticize labor unions for raising prices and lowering demand by enforcing high wage levels, and for contributing to unemployment by limiting jobs. They argue that inflation is caused by excessive government spending, the Federal Reserve&#x27;s attempts to control interest rates, and full employment policy. They call for tighter control of Fed money supply despite the fact that it will result in a temporary period of high unemployment and low growth due to the interruption of the wage-price spiral. In the final chapter, they take note of recent current events that seem to suggest a return to free-market principles in academic thought and public opinion, and argue in favor of an &quot;economic Bill of Rights&quot; to cement the changes.

==Video chapters (1980 version)==
# The Power of the Market
# The Tyranny of Control
# Anatomy of Crisis
# From Cradle to Grave
# Created Equal
# What&#x27;s Wrong with Our Schools?
# Who Protects the Consumer?
# Who Protects the Worker?
# How to Cure Inflation
# How to Stay Free

==Video chapters (1990 version)==
# The Power of the Market – Introduction by Arnold Schwarzenegger
# The Tyranny of Control – Introduction by George Shultz
# Freedom and Prosperity (featured only in the 1990 version) – Introduction by Ronald Reagan
# The Failure of Socialism (original title: &quot;What&#x27;s Wrong With Our Schools?&quot;) – Introduction by David D. Friedman
# Created Equal – Introduction by Steve Allen

==See also==
* Bob Chitester
* &quot;The Age of Uncertainty&quot;
* &quot;The Commanding Heights&quot;

== References ==
* 

== External links ==
* Streaming of the original 1980 television series &quot;Free to Choose&quot; as well as an updated 1990 version.
* &quot;Free To Choose&quot; Media page
* &quot;Jeremy Arendt&#x27;s Video Collections from PBS Broadcast&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="66" end="72" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q433201" start="77" end="93" title="Rose D. Friedman" label="Rose D. Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="141" end="158" title="public television" label="public television"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="175" end="186" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q9557010" start="283" end="305" title="The Age of Uncertainty" label="The Age of Uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q186042" start="336" end="358" title="John Kenneth Galbraith" label="John Kenneth Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="775" end="778" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954705" start="896" end="903" title="WQLN (TV)" label="WQLN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="1278" end="1298" title="centralized planning" label="centralized planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="1318" end="1328" title="protectionism" label="protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q607081" start="1348" end="1364" title="textile industry" label="textile industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347549" start="1444" end="1459" title="Robert McKenzie (psephologist)" label="Robert McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="1564" end="1579" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q198605" start="1589" end="1614" title="G.D. Searle &amp;amp; Company" label="G.D. Searle &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q274697" start="1620" end="1637" title="Frances Fox Piven" label="Frances Fox Piven"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="1641" end="1668" title="City University of New York" label="City University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q74110" start="1860" end="1875" title="Lawrence E. Spivak" label="Lawrence Spivak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1927" end="1940" title="Gregory Anrig" label="Gregory Anrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784248" start="1958" end="1995" title="Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education" label="Massachusetts Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q559903" start="2011" end="2027" title="Jagdish Bhagwati" label="Jagdish Bhagwati"/>
<link wikidata="Q125842" start="2054" end="2067" title="Samuel Bowles (economist)" label="Samuel Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q897097" start="2144" end="2158" title="Brady Corporation" label="W.H. Brady Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q4983802" start="2174" end="2191" title="Bud Brown (politician)" label="Clarence J. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204950" start="2219" end="2233" title="Joan Claybrook" label="Joan Claybrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967350" start="2256" end="2302" title="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration" label="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q443631" start="2318" end="2332" title="Barber Conable" label="Barber Conable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="2363" end="2373" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2389" end="2399" title="John Coons" label="John Coons"/>
<link wikidata="Q865436" start="2401" end="2414" title="Legal education" label="law professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248822" start="2416" end="2429" title="school choice" label="school choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343175" start="2454" end="2469" title="Robert Crandall" label="Robert Crandall"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="2471" end="2492" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2518" end="2532" title="Richard Deason" label="Richard Deason"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048868" start="2534" end="2538" title="International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers" label="IBEW"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="2539" end="2544" title="Trade union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141596" start="2567" end="2583" title="James R. Dumpson" label="James R. Dumpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q572700" start="2585" end="2595" title="bureaucrat" label="bureaucrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="2597" end="2608" title="social work" label="social work"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="2612" end="2620" title="Academia" label="academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725901" start="2636" end="2650" title="Otmar Emminger" label="Otmar Emminger"/>
<link wikidata="Q162222" start="2665" end="2684" title="Deutsche Bundesbank" label="Deutsche Bundesbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435195" start="2700" end="2710" title="Bob Galvin" label="Bob Galvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="2719" end="2733" title="Motorola" label="Motorola, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="2763" end="2796" title="United States Department of Labor" label="U.S. Assistant Secretary of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q434828" start="2812" end="2830" title="Michael Harrington" label="Michael Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="2840" end="2848" title="Academia" label="academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985045" start="2874" end="2894" title="Nicholas von Hoffman" label="Nicholas von Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="2908" end="2929" title="Pundit (expert)" label="political commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702497" start="2955" end="2967" title="Helen Hughes (economist)" label="Helen Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160053" start="2994" end="3003" title="Peter Jay (diplomat)" label="Peter Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q38545724" start="3056" end="3070" title="Robert Lampman" label="Robert Lampman"/>
<link wikidata="Q22132959" start="3097" end="3111" title="Richard Landau" label="Richard Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q126945" start="3113" end="3130" title="Medical education" label="medical professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346843" start="3146" end="3162" title="Robert Lekachman" label="Robert Lekachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349310" start="3189" end="3213" title="William McChesney Martin" label="William McChesney Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666591" start="3222" end="3253" title="Chairman of the Federal Reserve" label="Chairman of the Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702917" start="3269" end="3294" title="Helen O&amp;#x27;Bannon" label="Helen Bohen O&amp;#x27;Bannon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3348" end="3370" title="Kathleen O&amp;#x27;Reilly" label="Kathleen O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164659" start="3372" end="3402" title="Consumer Federation of America" label="Consumer Federation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043093" start="3403" end="3420" title="Consumer activism" label="consumer advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q881892" start="3436" end="3455" title="Russell W. Peterson" label="Russell W. Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="3457" end="3464" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q274697" start="3492" end="3509" title="Frances Fox Piven" label="Frances Fox Piven"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="3535" end="3550" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q198605" start="3577" end="3603" title="G. D. Searle &amp;amp; Company" label="G. D. Searle &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711205" start="3619" end="3633" title="Albert Shanker" label="Albert Shanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887762" start="3648" end="3677" title="United Federation of Teachers" label="United Federation of Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743760" start="3682" end="3713" title="American Federation of Teachers" label="American Federation of Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944788" start="3793" end="3827" title="National School Boards Association" label="National School Boards Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q553449" start="3843" end="3856" title="Thomas Sowell" label="Thomas Sowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q829289" start="3906" end="3926" title="Beryl Wayne Sprinkel" label="Beryl Wayne Sprinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835981" start="3956" end="3967" title="BMO Harris Bank" label="Harris Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177268" start="3983" end="3994" title="Peter Temin" label="Peter Temin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709177" start="4021" end="4037" title="Lynn R. Williams" label="Lynn R. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q494197" start="4066" end="4085" title="United Steelworkers" label="United Steelworkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964738" start="4101" end="4119" title="Walter E. Williams" label="Walter E. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551458" start="4230" end="4242" title="Linda Chavez" label="Linda Chavez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="4268" end="4289" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q313411" start="4291" end="4304" title="George Shultz" label="George Shultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="4306" end="4319" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q353915" start="4321" end="4338" title="David D. Friedman" label="David D. Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q553276" start="4344" end="4355" title="Steve Allen" label="Steve Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="4610" end="4623" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q880363" start="4667" end="4682" title="Interventionism (politics)" label="interventionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="4865" end="4871" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="5012" end="5026" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5032" end="5045" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="5057" end="5073" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="5086" end="5095" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146626" start="5165" end="5180" title="Economic history of Japan" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5184" end="5189" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="5200" end="5217" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q874884" start="5226" end="5245" title="economic stagnation" label="economic stagnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5249" end="5254" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5287" end="5301" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="5453" end="5470" title="Planned economy" label="command economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5486" end="5498" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="5503" end="5513" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931829" start="5625" end="5640" title="Fuel tax" label="taxation on gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="5645" end="5652" title="Tobacco tax" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="5738" end="5753" title="Federal Reserve System" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5770" end="5786" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q842206" start="5831" end="5843" title="money supply" label="money supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440396" start="6058" end="6079" title="Federal Reserve Board of Governors" label="Federal Reserve Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="6183" end="6190" title="Welfare state" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="6310" end="6325" title="nationalization" label="nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="6360" end="6374" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="6399" end="6413" title="Welfare state in the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="6418" end="6424" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6509" end="6512" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services#Department of Health, Education, and Welfare" label="HEW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551338" start="6561" end="6587" title="Social programs in the United States" label="public assistance programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q831704" start="6657" end="6675" title="wards of the state" label="wards of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="6759" end="6781" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security System"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="6812" end="6825" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="6830" end="6844" title="public housing" label="public housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279585" start="6874" end="6891" title="Racial inequality in the United States" label="racial inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="6947" end="6955" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="6960" end="6968" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q641399" start="7095" end="7114" title="negative income tax" label="negative income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q861654" start="7283" end="7308" title="Education in the United States" label="American education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q173810" start="7350" end="7364" title="School voucher" label="voucher system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560230" start="7416" end="7431" title="1973–1975 recession" label="1970s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q868404" start="7453" end="7467" title="consumer goods" label="consumer goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="7547" end="7575" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647715" start="7581" end="7611" title="Interstate Commerce Commission" label="Interstate Commerce Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995379" start="7617" end="7651" title="U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission" label="Consumer Product Safety Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="7653" end="7659" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="7665" end="7672" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574284" start="7694" end="7707" title="1970s energy crisis" label="energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="7744" end="7764" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936477" start="7769" end="7780" title="price floor" label="price floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="7785" end="7794" title="Petroleum" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="7825" end="7856" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395051" start="7861" end="7885" title="Environmental policy of the United States" label="environmental regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q295822" start="7894" end="7909" title="Ecotax" label="effluent charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="7926" end="7938" title="Trade union" label="labor unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875012" start="7971" end="7977" title="Law of demand" label="demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q628708" start="8033" end="8045" title="Unemployment in the United States" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="8181" end="8194" title="interest rate" label="interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q384136" start="8201" end="8216" title="full employment" label="full employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q277622" start="8401" end="8418" title="Price/wage spiral" label="wage-price spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q191296" start="8618" end="8632" title="Bill of rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q112260502" start="9386" end="9399" title="Bob Chitester" label="Bob Chitester"/>
<link wikidata="Q9557010" start="9408" end="9430" title="The Age of Uncertainty" label="The Age of Uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726975" start="9445" end="9467" title="The Commanding Heights" label="The Commanding Heights"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10945" wikidata="Q171288" url="?curid=10945" title="Albert Park Circuit">
<text>The Albert Park Circuit is a motorsport street circuit around Albert Park Lake in the suburb of Albert Park in Melbourne. It is used annually as a circuit for the Formula One Australian Grand Prix, the supporting Supercars Championship Melbourne SuperSprint and other associated support races. The circuit has an FIA Grade 1 licence.

Although the entire track consists of normally public roads, each sector includes medium to high-speed characteristics more commonly associated with dedicated racetracks facilitated by grass and gravel run-off safety zones that are reconstructed annually. However, the circuit also has characteristics of a street circuit&#x27;s enclosed nature due to concrete barriers annually built along the Lakeside Drive curve, in particular, where run-off is not available due to the proximity of the lake shore.

==Design==

The circuit uses everyday sections of road that circle Albert Park Lake, a small man-altered lake (originally a large lagoon formed as part of the ancient Yarra River course) just south of the Central Business District of Melbourne. The road sections that are used were rebuilt before the inaugural event in 1996 to ensure consistency and smoothness. As a result, compared to other circuits that are held on public roads, the Albert Park track has quite a smooth surface. Before 2007 there existed only a few other places on the Formula 1 calendar with a body of water close to the track. Many of the new tracks, such as Valencia, Singapore and Abu Dhabi are close to a body of water.

The course is considered to be quite fast and relatively easy to drive, drivers having commented that the consistent placement of corners allows them to easily learn the circuit and achieve competitive times. However, the flat terrain around the lake, coupled with a track design that features few true straights, means that the track is not conducive to overtaking or easy spectating unless in possession of a grandstand seat.
Each year, most of the trackside fencing, pedestrian overpasses, grandstands, and other motorsport infrastructure are erected approximately two months before the Grand Prix weekend and removed within 6 weeks after the event. The land around the circuit (including a large aquatic centre, a golf course, a Lakeside Stadium, some restaurants, and rowing boathouses) has restricted access during that entire period. Dissent is still prevalent among nearby residents and users of those other facilities, and some still maintain a silent protest against the event. Nevertheless, the event is reasonably popular in Melbourne and Australia (with a large European population and a general interest in motorsport). Middle Park, the home of South Melbourne FC was demolished in 1994 due to expansion at Albert Park.

The Grand Prix regularly draws crowds of over 270,000 spectators, with the 2024 drawing a record crowd of 452,055, including 132,106 on the main raceday. There has never been a night race at Albert Park, although the 2009 and 2010 events both started at 5:00 p.m. local time. The current contract for the Grand Prix at the circuit concludes in 2035.

Following the postponement of the Australian Grand Prix in 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the track underwent layout changes, the most notable part was the modification of the turn 9–10 complex from a heavy right-left corner to a fast-sweeping right-left corner into turns 11 and 12. Further modifications included the widening of the pit lane by and the reprofiling of turn 13. Also, some corners were widened such as turn 1, turn 3, turn 6, turn 7, and turn 15. The 2022 pole position lap time was 2.6 seconds quicker than in 2019.

==Everyday access==

During the nine months of the year when the track is not required for Grand Prix preparation or the race weekend, most of the track can be driven by ordinary street-registered vehicles either clockwise or anti-clockwise.

Only the sections between turns 3, 4, and 5, then 5 and 6, differ significantly from the race track configuration. Turn 4 is replaced by a car park access road running directly from turns 3 to 5. Between turns 5 and 6, the road is blocked. It is possible to drive from turn 5 on to Albert Road and back on to the track at turn 7 though three sets of lights control the flow of this option. The only set of lights on the actual track is halfway between turns 12 and 13, where drivers using Queens Road are catered for. The chicanes at turns 11 and 12 are considerably more open than that used in the Grand Prix, using the escape roads. Turn 9 is also a car park and traffic is directed down another escape road.

The speed limit is generally , while some short sections have a speed limit of , which is still slower than an F1 car under pit lane speed restrictions. The back of the track, turns 7 to 13 inclusive, is known as Lakeside Drive. Double lines separate the two-way traffic along most of Lakeside Drive with short road islands approximately every which means overtaking is illegal here. Black Swans live and breed in Albert Park, and frequently cross the road causing traffic delays, sometimes with up to five cygnets (young swans).

Approximately 80% of the track edge is lined with short parkland-style chain-linked fencing leaving normal drivers less room for error than F1 drivers have during race weekend. There is however substantial shoulder room between the outside of each lane and the fencing, which is used as parking along Aughtie Drive during the other nine months.

==History==
===Albert Park Circuit (1953–1958)===
Prior to World War II, attempts were made to use Albert Park for motor racing. The first was in 1934 but failed due to opposition, and a second attempt for a motorcycle race in 1937 similarly failed. Finally in 1953 the Light Car Club of Australia were able to secure use of the circuit for that year&#x27;s Australian Grand Prix.
Albert Park is the only venue to host the Australian Grand Prix in both World Championship and non-World Championship formats with an earlier configuration of the current circuit used for the race on two occasions during the 1950s. During this time racing was conducted in an anti-clockwise direction as opposed to the current circuit which runs clockwise.

Known as the Albert Park Circuit, the original course hosted a total of six race meetings:
* 21 November 1953 – featuring the 1953 Australian Grand Prix, won by Doug Whiteford (Talbot-Lago T26C)
* 26 and 27 March 1955 – the first Moomba meeting, which involved an alliance with the Moomba festival and The Argus newspaper, featuring the Moomba TT, won by Doug Whiteford (Triumph TR2) and the Argus Trophy, also won by Doug Whiteford (Talbot-Lago)

* 11 March and 18 March 1956 – the second Moomba meeting, featuring the 1956 Moomba TT won by Tony Gaze (HWM Jaguar), and on the second weekend the 1956 Argus Trophy, won by Reg Hunt (Maserati 250F)
* 25 November &amp; 2 December 1956 – featuring the 1956 Australian Tourist Trophy, won by Stirling Moss (Maserati 300S), and on the second weekend the 1956 Australian Grand Prix, also won by Stirling Moss (Maserati 250F)
* 17 and 24 March 1957 – the third Moomba meeting – featuring the Victorian Tourist Trophy won by Doug Whiteford (Maserati 300S), and the Victorian Trophy, won by Lex Davison (Ferrari 500). The Victorian Trophy was retrospectively designated as the second round of the 1957 Australian Drivers&#x27; Championship
* 23 and 30 November 1958 – featuring the 1958 Victorian Tourist Trophy, won by Doug Whiteford (Maserati 300S), and, on the second weekend, the 1958 Melbourne Grand Prix, (a round of the 1958 Australian Drivers&#x27; Championship), won by Stirling Moss (Cooper Coventry Climax)

The November 1958 meeting was the last on the original incarnation of the circuit, as it closed shortly after.

==Events==
; Current

* March: Formula One &quot;Australian Grand Prix&quot;, FIA Formula 2 Championship, FIA Formula 3 Championship, Supercars Championship &quot;Melbourne SuperSprint&quot;, Porsche Carrera Cup Australia Championship

; Former

* Aussie Racing Cars (2007–2009)
* Australian Drivers&#x27; Championship (1957–1958, 1996)
* Australian Mini Challenge (2009–2010)
* Australian Formula 4 Championship (2019)
* Australian Formula Ford Championship (2009–2010, 2012)
* Australian Grand Prix Formula Libre (1953, 1956)
* Australian GT Championship (2008–2010, 2016–2019)
* Australian Tourist Trophy (1956)
* Ferrari Challenge Asia-Pacific (2018–2019)
* Porsche Supercup (1999)
* S5000 Australian Drivers&#x27; Championship (2022)
* Supercars Championship
** &quot;Supercars Challenge&quot; (1996–2006, 2008–2017)
* V8 Ute Racing Series (2005–2007)

==Race lap records==
As of March 2024, the fastest official race lap records at the Albert Park Circuit are listed as:

==See also==
* Adelaide Street Circuit

==References==
==External links==

*Albert Park at Official Formula 1 website 
*Melbourne Grand Prix Circuit Guide
*Albert Park Melbourne Grand Prix Circuit on Google Maps (Current Formula 1 Tracks)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171288" start="4" end="23" title="Albert Park Circuit" label="Albert Park Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="29" end="39" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q926439" start="40" end="54" title="street circuit" label="street circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710971" start="62" end="78" title="Albert Park and Lake" label="Albert Park Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q591771" start="96" end="107" title="Albert Park, Victoria" label="Albert Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="111" end="120" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="163" end="174" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870" start="175" end="196" title="Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="213" end="235" title="Supercars Championship" label="Supercars Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803181" start="236" end="257" title="Melbourne SuperSprint" label="Melbourne SuperSprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="313" end="316" title="FIA" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q171406" start="1472" end="1480" title="Valencia Street Circuit" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171390" start="1482" end="1491" title="Marina Bay Street Circuit" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q172869" start="1496" end="1505" title="Yas Marina Circuit" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796966" start="1948" end="1958" title="grandstand" label="grandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="2255" end="2266" title="golf course" label="golf course"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935190" start="2270" end="2286" title="Lakeside Stadium" label="Lakeside Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="2498" end="2505" title="protest" label="protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q279966" start="2671" end="2682" title="Middle Park (stadium)" label="Middle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510813" start="2696" end="2714" title="South Melbourne FC" label="South Melbourne FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q591771" start="2758" end="2769" title="Albert Park, Victoria" label="Albert Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q591771" start="2963" end="2974" title="Albert Park, Victoria" label="Albert Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q72635834" start="3182" end="3186" title="2021 Formula One World Championship" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="3199" end="3216" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131044" start="5002" end="5013" title="Black swan" label="Black Swans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5765" end="5792" title="Light Car Club of Australia" label="Light Car Club of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567711" start="6360" end="6386" title="1953 Australian Grand Prix" label="1953 Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301005" start="6395" end="6409" title="Doug Whiteford" label="Doug Whiteford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491415" start="6411" end="6427" title="Talbot-Lago T26C" label="Talbot-Lago T26C"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907391" start="6516" end="6531" title="Moomba Festival" label="Moomba festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714229" start="6536" end="6545" title="The Argus (Melbourne)" label="The Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189289" start="6571" end="6580" title="1955 Moomba TT" label="Moomba TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301005" start="6589" end="6603" title="Doug Whiteford" label="Doug Whiteford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790333" start="6605" end="6616" title="Triumph TR2" label="Triumph TR2"/>
<link wikidata="Q28428168" start="6626" end="6638" title="1955 Argus Trophy" label="Argus Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301005" start="6652" end="6666" title="Doug Whiteford" label="Doug Whiteford"/>
<link wikidata="Q787757" start="6668" end="6679" title="Talbot-Lago" label="Talbot-Lago"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190246" start="6754" end="6768" title="1956 Moomba TT" label="1956 Moomba TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q172607" start="6776" end="6785" title="Tony Gaze" label="Tony Gaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035731" start="6787" end="6790" title="Hersham &amp;amp; Walton Motors" label="HWM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325072" start="6791" end="6797" title="Jaguar XK6 engine" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189891" start="6830" end="6847" title="1956 Argus Trophy" label="1956 Argus Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173741" start="6866" end="6879" title="Maserati 250F" label="Maserati 250F"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025581" start="6933" end="6963" title="1956 Australian Tourist Trophy" label="1956 Australian Tourist Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="6972" end="6985" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850744" start="6987" end="7000" title="Maserati 300S" label="Maserati 300S"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568650" start="7033" end="7059" title="1956 Australian Grand Prix" label="1956 Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173741" start="7088" end="7101" title="Maserati 250F" label="Maserati 250F"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025114" start="7169" end="7193" title="1957 Victorian Tourist Trophy" label="Victorian Tourist Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301005" start="7201" end="7215" title="Doug Whiteford" label="Doug Whiteford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850744" start="7217" end="7230" title="Maserati 300S" label="Maserati 300S"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537541" start="7266" end="7277" title="Lex Davison" label="Lex Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407704" start="7279" end="7290" title="Ferrari 500" label="Ferrari 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568970" start="7372" end="7414" title="1957 Australian Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship" label="1957 Australian Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q28428334" start="7457" end="7486" title="1958 Victorian Tourist Trophy" label="1958 Victorian Tourist Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301005" start="7495" end="7509" title="Doug Whiteford" label="Doug Whiteford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850744" start="7511" end="7524" title="Maserati 300S" label="Maserati 300S"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693476" start="7559" end="7584" title="1958 Melbourne Grand Prix" label="1958 Melbourne Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969900" start="7602" end="7644" title="1958 Australian Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship" label="1958 Australian Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="7654" end="7667" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="7669" end="7675" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q173016" start="7676" end="7691" title="Coventry Climax" label="Coventry Climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="7837" end="7848" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870" start="7855" end="7876" title="Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q29383721" start="7884" end="7910" title="FIA Formula 2 Championship" label="FIA Formula 2 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q50612772" start="7912" end="7938" title="FIA Formula 3 Championship" label="FIA Formula 3 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="7940" end="7962" title="Supercars Championship" label="Supercars Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803181" start="7969" end="7990" title="Melbourne SuperSprint" label="Melbourne SuperSprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056099" start="7998" end="8040" title="Porsche Carrera Cup Australia Championship" label="Porsche Carrera Cup Australia Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822822" start="8054" end="8072" title="Aussie Racing Cars" label="Aussie Racing Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949180" start="8087" end="8124" title="Australian Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship" label="Australian Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824426" start="8145" end="8170" title="Australian Mini Challenge" label="Australian Mini Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870015" start="8185" end="8218" title="Formula 4 Australian Championship" label="Australian Formula 4 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824188" start="8228" end="8264" title="Australian Formula Ford Championship" label="Australian Formula Ford Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870" start="8285" end="8320" title="Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian Grand Prix Formula Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630012" start="8336" end="8362" title="GT World Challenge Australia" label="Australian GT Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824762" start="8388" end="8413" title="Australian Tourist Trophy" label="Australian Tourist Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8423" end="8453" title="Ferrari Challenge#Ferrari Challenge Asia-Pacific" label="Ferrari Challenge Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277220" start="8468" end="8484" title="Porsche Supercup" label="Porsche Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q63253711" start="8494" end="8537" title="S5000 Australian Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship" label="S5000 Australian Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="8547" end="8569" title="Supercars Championship" label="Supercars Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090030" start="8579" end="8598" title="Supercars Challenge (event)" label="Supercars Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052483" start="8630" end="8650" title="V8 Ute Racing Series" label="V8 Ute Racing Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q83234" start="8799" end="8822" title="Adelaide Street Circuit" label="Adelaide Street Circuit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10946" wikidata="Q9102" url="?curid=10946" title="Monaco Grand Prix">
<text>The Monaco Grand Prix () is a Formula One motor racing event held annually on the Circuit de Monaco, in late May or early June. Run since 1929, it is widely considered to be one of the most important and prestigious automobile races in the world, and is one of the races—along with the Indianapolis 500 and the 24 Hours of Le Mans—that form the Triple Crown of Motorsport. It is the only Grand Prix that does not adhere to the FIA&#x27;s mandated minimum race distance for Formula One races.

The race is held on a narrow course laid out in the streets of Monaco, with many elevation changes and tight corners as well as the tunnel, making it one of the most demanding circuits in Formula One. In spite of the relatively low average speeds, the Monaco circuit is a dangerous place to race due to how narrow the track is, and the race often involves the intervention of a safety car.

The first Monaco Grand Prix took place on 14 April 1929, and the race eventually became part of the pre-Second World War European Championship and was included in the first World Championship of Drivers in 1950. It was twice designated the European Grand Prix, in 1955 and 1963, when this title was an honorary designation given each year to one Grand Prix race in Europe. Graham Hill was known as &quot;Mr. Monaco&quot; due to his five Monaco wins in the 1960s. Ayrton Senna won the race more times than any other driver, with six victories, winning five races consecutively between 1989 and 1993. In the 81 editions of the Monaco Grand Prix, only two Monégasque drivers have won the race, Louis Chiron in 1931 and Charles Leclerc in 2024.

The circuit has been called &quot;an exceptional location of glamour and prestige&quot;. Prior to 2026, the Formula One event is usually held on the last weekend of May and is known as one of the largest weekends in motor racing, as the Formula One race occurs on the same Sunday as the Indianapolis 500 (IndyCar Series) and the Coca-Cola 600 (NASCAR Cup Series).
==History==

===Origins===
Like many European races, the Monaco Grand Prix predates the current World Championship. The principality&#x27;s first Grand Prix was organised in 1929 by Antony Noghès, under the auspices of Prince Louis II, through the Automobile Club de Monaco (ACM), of which he was president. The ACM organised the Rallye Automobile Monte Carlo, and in 1928 applied to the &quot;Association Internationale des Automobiles Clubs Reconnus&quot; (AIACR), the international governing body of motorsport, to be upgraded from a regional French club to full national status. Their application was refused due to the lack of a major motorsport event held wholly within Monaco&#x27;s boundaries. The rally could not be considered, as it mostly used the roads of other European countries.
To attain full national status, Noghès proposed the creation of an automobile Grand Prix in the streets of Monte Carlo. He obtained the official sanction of Prince Louis II and the support of Monégasque &quot;Grand Prix&quot; driver Louis Chiron. Chiron thought Monaco&#x27;s topography was well-suited to setting up a race track.

The first race, held on 14 April 1929, was won by William Grover-Williams (using the pseudonym &quot;Williams&quot;), driving a works Bugatti Type 35B. It was an invitation-only event, but not all of those who were invited decided to attend. The leading Maserati and Alfa Romeo drivers decided not to compete, but Bugatti was well represented. Mercedes sent their leading driver, Rudolf Caracciola. Starting fifteenth, Caracciola drove a fighting race, taking his SSK into the lead before wasting minutes on refuelling and a tyre change to finish second. Another driver who competed using a pseudonym was &quot;Georges Philippe&quot;, the Baron Philippe de Rothschild. Chiron was unable to compete, having a prior commitment to compete in the Indianapolis 500.

Caracciola&#x27;s SSK was refused permission to race the following year, but Chiron did compete (in the works Bugatti Type 35C), when he was beaten by privateer René Dreyfus and his Bugatti Type 35B, and finished second. Chiron took victory in the 1931 race driving a Bugatti. He remained the only native of Monaco to have won the event until 2024.

===Pre-war===
The race quickly grew in importance after its inception. Because of the high number of races which were being termed &#x27;Grands Prix&#x27;, the AIACR formally recognised the most important race of each of its affiliated national automobile clubs as International Grands Prix, or &quot;Grandes Épreuves&quot;, and in 1933 Monaco was ranked as such alongside the French, Belgian, Italian, and Spanish Grands Prix. That year&#x27;s race was the first Grand Prix in which grid positions were decided, as they are now, by practice time rather than the established method of balloting. The race saw Achille Varzi and Tazio Nuvolari exchange the lead many times before the race settled in Varzi&#x27;s favour on the final lap when Nuvolari&#x27;s car caught fire.

The race became a round of the new European Championship in 1936, when stormy weather and a broken oil line led to a series of crashes, eliminating the Mercedes-Benzes of Chiron, Fagioli, and von Brauchitsch, as well as Bernd Rosemeyer&#x27;s &quot;Typ C&quot; for newcomer Auto Union; Rudolf Caracciola, proving the truth of his nickname, &quot;Regenmeister&quot; (Rainmaster), went on to win. In 1937, von Brauchitsch duelled Caracciola before coming out on top. It was the last prewar &quot;Grand Prix&quot; at Monaco, for in 1938, the lack of profits for organisers, and demand for nearly £500 (approximately £ adjusted to inflation) in appearance money per top entrant led AIACR to cancel the event, while looming war overtook it in 1939, and the Second World War ended organised racing in Europe until 1945.

===Post-war Grand Prix===

Racing in Europe started again on 9 September 1945 at the Bois de Boulogne Park in the city of Paris, four months and one day after the end of the war in Europe. However, the Monaco Grand Prix was not run between 1945 and 1947 due to financial reasons. In 1946, a new premier racing category, Grand Prix, was defined by the Fédération Internationale de l&#x27;Automobile (FIA), the successor of the AIACR, based on the pre-war voiturette class. A Monaco Grand Prix was run to this formula in 1948, won by the future world champion Nino Farina in a Maserati 4CLT.

The 1948 race included a motorbike race, but after the first F1 race in 1950, in 1952 was a non-championship sports car race.

===Formula One===
====Early championship days====
The 1949 event was cancelled due to the death of Prince Louis II; it was included in the new Formula One World Drivers&#x27; Championship the following year. The race provided future five-time world champion Juan Manuel Fangio with his first win in a World Championship race, as well as third place for the 51-year-old Louis Chiron, his best result in the World Championship era. However, there was no race in 1951 due to budgetary concerns and a lack of regulations in the sport.

1952 was the first of the two years in which the World Drivers&#x27; Championship was run to less powerful Formula Two regulations. The race was run to sports car rules instead, and it did not form part of the World Championship.

No races were held in 1953 or 1954 due to the fact that the car regulations were not finalized.

The Monaco Grand Prix returned in 1955, again as part of the Formula One World Championship, and this would begin a streak of 64 consecutive years in which the race was held. In the 1955 race, Maurice Trintignant won in Monte Carlo for the first time and Chiron again scored points and at 56 became the oldest driver to compete in a Formula One Grand Prix. It was not until 1957, when Fangio won again, that the Grand Prix saw a double winner. Between 1954 and 1961 Fangio&#x27;s former Mercedes colleague, Stirling Moss, went one better, as did Trintignant, who won the race again in 1958 driving a Cooper. The 1961 race saw Moss fend off three works Ferrari 156s in a year-old privateer Rob Walker Racing Team Lotus 18 to take his third Monaco victory.
====Graham Hill&#x27;s era====
Britain&#x27;s Graham Hill won the race five times in the 1960s and became known as &quot;King of Monaco&quot; and &quot;Mr. Monaco&quot;. He first won in 1963, and then won the next two years. In the 1965 race, he took pole position and led from the start, but went up an escape road on lap 25 to avoid hitting a slow backmarker. Re-joining in fifth place, Hill set several new lap records on the way to winning. The race was also notable for Jim Clark&#x27;s absence (he was participating in the Indianapolis 500), and for Paul Hawkins&#x27;s Lotus ending up in the harbour. Hill&#x27;s teammate, Briton Jackie Stewart, won in 1966 and New Zealander Denny Hulme won in 1967, but Hill won the next two years, the 1969 event being his final Formula One championship victory, by which time he was a double Formula One world champion.

====Track alterations, safety, and increasing business interests====

By the start of the 1970s, efforts by Jackie Stewart saw several Formula One events cancelled because of safety concerns. For the 1969 event, Armco barriers were placed at specific points for the first time in the circuit&#x27;s history. Before that, the circuit&#x27;s conditions were (aside from the removal of people&#x27;s production cars parked on the side of the road) virtually identical to everyday road use. If a driver went off, he had a chance to crash into whatever was next to the track (buildings, trees, lamp posts, glass windows, and even a train station), and in Alberto Ascari&#x27;s and Paul Hawkins&#x27;s cases, the harbour water, because the concrete road the course used had no Armco to protect the drivers from going off the track and into the Mediterranean. The circuit gained more Armco in specific points for the next two races, and by 1972, the circuit was almost completely Armco-lined. For the first time in its history, the Monaco circuit was altered in 1972, as the pits were moved next to the waterfront straight between the chicane and Tabac, and the chicane was moved further forward right before Tabac, becoming the junction point between the pits and the course. The course was changed again for the 1973 race. The Rainier III Nautical Stadium was constructed where the straight that went behind the pits was, and the circuit introduced a double chicane that went around the new swimming pool (this chicane complex is known today as &quot;Swimming Pool&quot;). This created space for a whole new pit facility, and in 1976 the course was altered yet again; the Sainte Devote corner was made slower and a chicane was placed right before the pit straight.

By the early 1970s, as Brabham team owner Bernie Ecclestone started to marshal the collective bargaining power of the Formula One Constructors Association (FOCA), Monaco was prestigious enough to become an early bone of contention. Historically, the number of cars permitted in a race was decided by the race organiser, in this case the ACM, which had always set a low number of around 16. In 1972, Ecclestone started to negotiate deals which relied on FOCA guaranteeing at least 18 entrants for every race. A stand-off over this issue left the 1972 race in jeopardy until the ACM gave in and agreed that 26 cars could participate – the same number permitted at most other circuits. Two years later, in 1974, the ACM got the numbers back down to 18.

Because of its tight confines, slow average speeds, and punishing nature, Monaco has often thrown up unexpected results. In the 1982 race, René Arnoux led the first 15 laps before retiring. Alain Prost then led until four laps from the end, when he spun off on the wet track, hit the barriers and lost a wheel, giving Riccardo Patrese the lead. Patrese himself spun with only a lap and a half to go, letting Didier Pironi through to the front, followed by Andrea de Cesaris. On the last lap, Pironi ran out of fuel in the tunnel, but De Cesaris also ran out of fuel before he could overtake. In the meantime, Patrese had bump-started his car and went through to score his first Grand Prix win.

In 1983, the ACM became entangled in the disagreements between Fédération Internationale du Sport Automobile (FISA) and FOCA. The ACM, with the agreement of Bernie Ecclestone, negotiated an individual television rights deal with ABC in the United States. This broke an agreement enforced by FISA for a single central negotiation of television rights. Jean-Marie Balestre, president of FISA, announced that the Monaco Grand Prix would not form part of the Formula One world championship in 1985. The ACM fought their case in the French courts. They won the case and the race was eventually reinstated.

In 1986, the Nouvelle Chicane was added by expanding into the nearby water to make the track wider.

====Era of Prost &amp; Senna dominance ====

For the decade from 1984 to 1993, the race was won by only two drivers, arguably the two best drivers in Formula One at the time – Frenchman Alain Prost and Brazilian Ayrton Senna. Prost, already a winner of the support race for Formula Three cars in 1979, took his first Monaco win at the 1984 race. The race started 45 minutes late after heavy rain. Prost led briefly before Nigel Mansell overtook him on lap 11. Mansell crashed out five laps later, letting Prost back into the lead. On lap 27, Prost led from Ayrton Senna&#x27;s Toleman and Stefan Bellof&#x27;s Tyrrell. Senna was catching Prost, and Bellof was catching both of them in the only naturally aspirated car in the race. However, on lap 31, the race was controversially stopped due to conditions deemed to be undriveable. Later, FISA fined the clerk of the course, Jacky Ickx, $6,000 and suspended his licence for not consulting the stewards before stopping the race. The drivers received only half of the points that would usually be awarded, as the race had been stopped before two-thirds of the intended race distance had been completed.

Prost won 1985 after polesitter Senna retired with a blown Renault engine in his Lotus after over-revving it at the start, and Michele Alboreto in the Ferrari retook the lead twice, but he went off the track at Sainte-Devote, where Brazilian Nelson Piquet and Italian Riccardo Patrese had a huge accident only a few laps previously and oil and debris littered the track. Prost passed Alboreto, who retook the Frenchman, and then he punctured a tyre after running over bodywork debris from the Piquet/Patrese accident, which dropped him to 4th. He was able to pass his Roman countrymen Andrea De Cesaris and Elio de Angelis, but finished 2nd behind Prost. The French Prost dominated 1986 after starting from pole position, a race where the Nouvelle Chicane had been changed on the grounds of safety.

Senna holds the record for the most victories in Monaco, with six, including five consecutive wins between 1989 and 1993, as well as eight podium finishes in ten starts. His 1987 win was the first time a car with an active suspension had won a Grand Prix. He won this race after Briton Nigel Mansell in a Williams-Honda went out with a broken exhaust. His win was very popular with the people of Monaco, and when he was arrested on the Monday following the race for riding a motorcycle without wearing a helmet, he was released by the officers after they realised who he was. Senna dominated 1988 and was able to get ahead of his teammate Prost while the Frenchman was held up for most of the race by Austrian Gerhard Berger in a Ferrari. By the time Prost got past Berger, he pushed as hard as he could and set a lap some 6 seconds faster than Senna&#x27;s; Senna then set 2 fastest laps, and while pushing as hard as possible, he touched the barrier at the Portier corner and crashed into the Armco separating the road from the Mediterranean. Senna was so upset that he went back to his Monaco flat and was not heard from until the evening. Prost went on to win for the fourth time.

Senna dominated 1989 while Prost was stuck behind backmarker René Arnoux and others; the Brazilian also dominated 1990 and 1991. At the 1992 event Nigel Mansell, who had won all five races held to that point in the season, took pole and dominated the race in his Williams FW14B-Renault. However, with seven laps remaining, Mansell suffered a loose wheel nut and was forced into the pits, emerging behind Senna&#x27;s McLaren-Honda, who was on worn tyres. Mansell, on fresh tyres, set a lap record almost two seconds quicker than Senna&#x27;s and closed from 5.2 to 1.9 seconds in only two laps. The pair duelled around Monaco for the final four laps but Mansell could find no way past, finishing just two-tenths of a second behind the Brazilian. It was Senna&#x27;s fifth win at Monaco, equalling Graham Hill&#x27;s record. Senna had a poor start to the 1993 event, crashing in practice and qualifying 3rd behind pole-sitter Prost and the rising German star Michael Schumacher. Both of them beat Senna to the first corner, but Prost had to serve a time penalty for jumping the start and Schumacher retired after suspension problems, so Senna took his sixth win to break Graham Hill&#x27;s record for most wins at the Monaco Grand Prix. Runner-up Damon Hill commented, &quot;If my father was around now, he would be the first to congratulate Ayrton.&quot;

====1990s: Tragedies and triumphs====

The 1994 race was an emotional and tragic affair. It came two weeks after the San Marino Grand Prix at Imola in which Austrian Roland Ratzenberger and Ayrton Senna both died in crashes on successive days. During the Monaco event, Austrian Karl Wendlinger had an accident in his Sauber in the tunnel; he went into a coma and was to miss the rest of the season. The German Michael Schumacher won the 1994 Monaco event. Schumacher also won the 1995 event. The 1996 race saw Michael Schumacher take pole position before crashing out on the first lap after being overtaken by Damon Hill. Hill led the first 40 laps before his engine expired in the tunnel. Jean Alesi took the lead but suffered suspension failure 20 laps later. Olivier Panis, who started in 14th place, moved into the lead and stayed there until the end of the race, being pushed all the way by David Coulthard. It was Panis&#x27;s only win, and the last for his Ligier team. Only three cars crossed the finish line, but seven were classified.
====21st century ====
In 2004, land reclamation work was completed, allowing expansion of the pit area with larger temporary garages. A temporary 6,000 seat grandstand would also constructed in the Swimming Pool area. 

Seven-time world champion Schumacher would eventually win the race five times, matching Graham Hill&#x27;s record. In his appearance at the 2006 event, he attracted criticism when, while provisionally holding pole position and with the qualifying session drawing to a close, he stopped his car at the Rascasse hairpin, blocking the track and obliging competitors to slow down. Although Schumacher claimed it was the unintentional result of a genuine car failure, the FIA disagreed and he was sent to the back of the grid.

In July 2010, Bernie Ecclestone announced that a 10-year deal had been reached with the race organisers, keeping the race on the calendar until at least 2020.

In 2019 the fastest yet qualifying lap was set by Lewis Hamilton in qualifying (Q3) for the 2019 Monaco Grand Prix, at a time of 1:10.166.

=====2020s=====

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the FIA announced the 2020 Monaco Grand Prix&#x27;s postponement, along with the two other races scheduled for May 2020, to help prevent the spread of the virus.
However, later the same day the Automobile Club de Monaco confirmed that the Grand Prix was instead cancelled, making 2020 the first time the Grand Prix was not run since 1954. The race returned in 2021.

The 2022 event saw the Monégasque driver, Charles Leclerc of Scuderia Ferrari, achieve his first Monaco Grand Prix pole position at the Circuit de Monaco (he had taken pole the previous year but could not start due to driveshaft failure). However, a critical strategical error meant Leclerc would drop to fourth, with Sergio Pérez winning the race.

In 2024, Charles Leclerc became the second Monégasque to win the race after Louis Chiron won the 1931 edition of the race. The race was the first time the top 10 cars finished in their starting order, and there were no successful overtakes. 

In November 2024, the ACM signed a new race contract to remain on the F1 calendar until the 2031 season, extending their previous agreement which was set to expire in 2025. As part of this deal, the ACM relinquished advertising rights and television coverage to Formula One Management, with previous races having their television coverage produced by Tele Monte Carlo. From 2026, the race will be held on the first weekend of June, and will therefore no longer clash with the Indianapolis 500.

==Circuit==

The Grand Prix takes place on the Circuit de Monaco which traverses the narrow city streets of Monte Carlo and La Condamine alongside Monaco&#x27;s harbour, Port Hercules. It has hosted the Grand Prix every time it has been run since 1929 – only the Italian Grand Prix, which has been held at Autodromo Nazionale Monza during every Formula One regulated year except 1980, has a similarly lengthy and close relationship with a single circuit.
The race circuit has many elevation changes, tight corners, and a narrow course that requires millimetre accuracy and makes it one of the most demanding tracks in Formula One racing. Drivers will often touch the track walls to achieve a fast lap time. In 1929, &quot;La Vie Automobile&quot; magazine offered the opinion that &quot;Any respectable traffic system would have covered the track with «Danger» sign posts left, right and centre&quot;. , two drivers have crashed and ended up in the harbour, the most famous being Alberto Ascari in 1955. Despite undergoing minor changes throughout its history, the circuit is largely unchanged since 1929 and remains widely regarded as the ultimate test of driving skills and mental strength. If Monaco were not already an existing Grand Prix, it is unlikely that its street circuit would be permitted to host Formula One due to its short track length and concerns with safety and overtaking. However, as the &#x27;Crown Jewel&#x27; of Formula One with a near century-old heritage in motorsport, Monaco is granted some exceptions to accommodate its limited possibilities for expansion.

Triple Formula One champion Nelson Piquet famously described racing at Monaco as &quot;like riding a bicycle around your living room,&quot; illustrating the unique challenges posed by the circuit&#x27;s narrow streets. He further emphasized the significance of victory at Monaco by stating that &quot;a win here was worth two anywhere else&quot;.

Notably, the circuit includes a tunnel. The contrast of daylight and gloom when entering/exiting the tunnel presents &quot;challenges not faced elsewhere&quot;, as the drivers have to &quot;adjust their vision as they emerge from the tunnel at the fastest point of the track and brake for the chicane in the daylight.&quot;.

The fastest-ever qualifying lap was set by Lewis Hamilton in qualifying (Q3) for the 2019 Monaco Grand Prix, at a time of 1:10.166.

===Viewing areas===
During the Grand Prix weekend, spectators crowd around the Monaco Circuit. There are a number of temporary grandstands built around the circuit, mostly around the harbour area. The rich and famous spectators often arrive on their boats and the yachts through the harbour. Balconies around Monaco become viewing areas for the race as well. Many hotels and residents cash in on the bird&#x27;s eye views of the race.

=== Criticism ===
Although Formula One cars have grown in size, the Circuit de Monaco has rarely expanded (with the notable exception of the addition of the Nouvelle Chicane in 1986), limiting overtaking opportunities and on-track entertainment. The circuit has only one DRS zone. Various ideas have been suggested to make the circuit longer, safer, and more conducive to overtakes. One suggestion was to extend the race track along the east side of Hercules harbor and add a second DRS zone. Lewis Hamilton accepted that the Principality was unlikely to widen the roads for the race, but suggested adding &quot;more variability&quot; by introducing more pit stops or special tyre compounds.

The 2024 Monaco Grand Prix was considered particularly dull. Although Formula One mandates a pit stop at every race, a lap-one red flag allowed drivers to pit at the start of the race, essentially converting their races into a zero-stop race. The impracticality of passing allowed drivers at the front to preserve their tyres by driving very slowly; second-placed Oscar Piastri said that at one point the pace was &quot;slower than Formula 2.&quot; The top ten drivers in qualifying finished in the exact same order, and Max Verstappen joked about needing a pillow. The following season, the FIA passed a new rule requiring all drivers to make at least two pit stops at Monaco, with the explicit goal of making the race more entertaining.

==Organization==

The Monaco Grand Prix is organised each year by the &quot;Automobile Club de Monaco&quot; which also runs the Monte Carlo Rally and previously ran the Junior Monaco Kart Cup.

The Monaco Grand Prix differs in several ways from other Grands Prix. The practice session for the race was traditionally held on the Thursday preceding the race instead of Friday. This allows the streets to be opened to the public again on Friday. From the 2022 event onwards the first two Formula One practice sessions will now be held on Friday, bringing the running schedule for Formula One in line with other Grands Prix. Support races will still be run on Thursday. Until the late 1990s the race started at 3:30 p.m. local time – an hour and a half later than other European Formula One races. In recent years the race has fallen in line with the other Formula One races for the convenience of television viewers. Historically, the event was traditionally held on the week of Ascension Day, since 2003 the race has been held in May. From 2026, the race will be held in the first weekend of June.

For many years, the numbers of cars admitted to Grands Prix was at the discretion of the race organisers – Monaco had the smallest grids, ostensibly because of its narrow and twisting track. Only 18 cars were permitted to start the 1975 Monaco Grand Prix, compared to 23 to 26 cars at all other rounds that year. 

The erecting of the circuit takes six weeks, and the removal after the race takes three weeks. Until 2017, there was no proper podium at the race. Instead, a section of the track was closed after the race to act as parc fermé, a place where the cars are held for official inspection. The first three drivers in the race left their cars there and walked directly to the royal box where the &#x27;podium&#x27; ceremony was held, which was considered a custom for the race. The trophies were handed out before the national anthems for the winning driver and team are played, as opposed to other Grands Prix where the anthems are played first.
==Fame==

The Monaco Grand Prix is widely considered to be one of the most important and prestigious automobile races in the world alongside the Indianapolis 500 and the 24 Hours of Le Mans. These three races are considered to form a &quot;Triple Crown&quot; of the three most famous motor races in the world. As of 2023, Graham Hill is the only driver to have won the Triple Crown, by winning all three races. The practice session for Monaco overlaps with that for the Indianapolis 500, and the races themselves sometimes clash. As the two races take place on opposite sides of the Atlantic Ocean and form part of different championships, it is difficult for one driver to compete effectively in both during his career. Juan Pablo Montoya and Fernando Alonso are the only active drivers to have won two of the three events.

In awarding its first gold medal for motorsport to Prince Rainier III, the Fédération Internationale de l&#x27;Automobile (FIA) characterised the Monaco Grand Prix as contributing &quot;an exceptional location of glamour and prestige&quot; to motorsport. The Grand Prix has been run under the patronage of three generations of Monaco&#x27;s royal family: Louis II, Rainier III and Albert II, all of whom have taken a close interest in the race. A large part of the principality&#x27;s income comes from tourists attracted by the warm climate and the famous casino, but it is also a tax haven and is home to many millionaires, including several Formula One drivers.

Monaco has produced four native Formula One drivers—Louis Chiron, André Testut, Olivier Beretta, and Charles Leclerc—but its tax status has made it home to many drivers over the years, including Gilles Villeneuve and Ayrton Senna. Of the Formula One contenders, several have property in the principality, including Jenson Button and David Coulthard, who was part owner of a hotel there. Because of the small size of the principality and the location of the circuit, drivers whose races end early can usually get back to their apartments in minutes. Ayrton Senna famously retired to his apartment after crashing out of the lead of the 1988 race. In the 2006 race, after retiring due to a mechanical failure while in second place, Kimi Räikkönen retired to his yacht, which was parked in the harbour.

The Grand Prix attracts big-name celebrities each year who come to experience the glamour and prestige of the event. Big parties are held in the nightclubs on the Grand Prix weekend, and the Port Hercule fills up with party-goers joining in the celebrations.

===Criticism===

In the 21st century, several commentators and F1 drivers have called the Grand Prix the most boring race of all circuits, both to drive and to watch as a spectator. Criticism has been directed towards how few overtake attempts are performed, as well as how frequently the driver who sets the pole position wins. Fernando Alonso has said that the race is &quot;the most boring race ever,&quot; and Lewis Hamilton stated that the 2022 Grand Prix &quot;wasn&#x27;t really racing.&quot;

==Winners==
===Repeat winners (drivers)===
&quot;Drivers in bold are competing in the Formula One championship in the current season.&quot;

===Repeat winners (constructors)===
&quot;Teams in bold are competing in the Formula One championship in the current season.&quot;
&quot;A pink background indicates an event which was not part of the Formula One World Championship.&quot;
&quot;A yellow background indicates an event which was part of the pre-war European Championship.&quot;

===Repeat winners (engine manufacturers)===
&quot;Manufacturers in bold are competing in the Formula One championship in the current season.&quot;
&quot;A pink background indicates an event which was not part of the Formula One World Championship.&quot;
&quot;A yellow background indicates an event which was part of the pre-war European Championship.&quot;
* Between 1998 and 2005 built by Ilmor, funded by Mercedes

** Built by Cosworth, funded by Ford

*** Built by Porsche

===By year===
&quot;A pink background indicates an event which was not part of the Formula One World Championship.&quot;
&quot;A yellow background indicates an event which was part of the pre-war European Championship.&quot;

==Previous circuit configurations==
==See also==
* Triple Crown

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*Kettlewell, Mike. &quot;Monaco: Road Racing on the Riviera&quot;, in Northey, Tom, editor. &quot;World of Automobiles&quot;, Volume 12, pp. 1381–4. London: Orbis, 1974.
==External links==

* Monaco Grand Prix at the Automobile Club de Monaco official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9102" start="4" end="21" title="Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="30" end="41" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q171400" start="82" end="99" title="Circuit de Monaco" label="Circuit de Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="286" end="302" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="311" end="330" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533221" start="345" end="371" title="Triple Crown of Motorsport" label="Triple Crown of Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="427" end="430" title="FIA" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="556" end="562" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q173089" start="871" end="881" title="safety car" label="safety car"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="988" end="1004" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542483" start="1005" end="1026" title="European Championship (auto racing)" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q68926" start="1057" end="1094" title="1950 Formula One season" label="World Championship of Drivers in 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994" start="1124" end="1143" title="European Grand Prix" label="European Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128" start="1257" end="1268" title="Graham Hill" label="Graham Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="1347" end="1359" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q419312" start="1468" end="1472" title="1989 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q419393" start="1477" end="1481" title="1993 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q173226" start="1575" end="1587" title="Louis Chiron" label="Louis Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q17541912" start="1600" end="1615" title="Charles Leclerc" label="Charles Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q115910301" start="1619" end="1623" title="2024 Monaco Grand Prix" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="1842" end="1854" title="motor racing" label="motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="1913" end="1929" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="1931" end="1945" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104915" start="1955" end="1968" title="Coca-Cola 600" label="Coca-Cola 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="1970" end="1987" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="2086" end="2104" title="Formula One" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="2136" end="2146" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773198" start="2172" end="2185" title="Antony Noghès" label="Antony Noghès"/>
<link wikidata="Q316543" start="2209" end="2224" title="Louis II, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q787490" start="2238" end="2263" title="Automobile Club de Monaco" label="Automobile Club de Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q725531" start="2320" end="2349" title="Monte Carlo Rally" label="Rallye Automobile Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="2891" end="2902" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="2976" end="2986" title="Monaco" label="Monégasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q173226" start="3017" end="3029" title="Louis Chiron" label="Louis Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113897" start="3120" end="3130" title="1929 Monaco Grand Prix" label="first race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702458" start="3166" end="3189" title="William Grover-Williams" label="William Grover-Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384416" start="3244" end="3249" title="Factory-backed" label="works"/>
<link wikidata="Q27401" start="3250" end="3257" title="Bugatti" label="Bugatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377378" start="3258" end="3266" title="Bugatti Type 35" label="Type 35B"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928981" start="3370" end="3378" title="Maserati in motorsport" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3383" end="3393" title="Alfa Romeo in motorsport#Grand Prix racing" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q994195" start="3460" end="3468" title="Mercedes-Benz in motorsport" label="Mercedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q57365" start="3496" end="3513" title="Rudolf Caracciola" label="Rudolf Caracciola"/>
<link wikidata="Q56315914" start="3580" end="3583" title="Mercedes-Benz SSK" label="SSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q557930" start="3755" end="3783" title="Philippe de Rothschild" label="Baron Philippe de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301433" start="4029" end="4038" title="Privateer (motorsport)" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q563374" start="4039" end="4051" title="René Dreyfus" label="René Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113903" start="4126" end="4135" title="1931 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1931 race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="4529" end="4545" title="Grandes Épreuves" label="Grandes Épreuves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997" start="4605" end="4611" title="French Grand Prix" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954" start="4613" end="4620" title="Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036" start="4622" end="4629" title="Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9208" start="4635" end="4642" title="Spanish Grand Prix" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q173729" start="4656" end="4677" title="1933 Monaco Grand Prix" label="That year&amp;#x27;s race"/>
<link wikidata="Q905151" start="4813" end="4819" title="ballot" label="ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q340261" start="4837" end="4850" title="Achille Varzi" label="Achille Varzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q174277" start="4855" end="4869" title="Tazio Nuvolari" label="Tazio Nuvolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542483" start="5037" end="5058" title="European Championship (auto racing)" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q994195" start="5154" end="5167" title="Mercedes-Benz in motorsport" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q173038" start="5181" end="5188" title="Luigi Fagioli" label="Fagioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q68168" start="5194" end="5209" title="Manfred von Brauchitsch" label="von Brauchitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60403" start="5222" end="5237" title="Bernd Rosemeyer" label="Bernd Rosemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q318571" start="5276" end="5286" title="Auto Union racing car" label="Auto Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q57365" start="5288" end="5305" title="Rudolf Caracciola" label="Rudolf Caracciola"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5754" end="5770" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q209626" start="5902" end="5918" title="Bois de Boulogne" label="Bois de Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5939" end="5944" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="6137" end="6147" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="6168" end="6214" title="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile" label="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="6271" end="6281" title="Voiturette (F2)" label="voiturette"/>
<link wikidata="Q798632" start="6336" end="6340" title="1948 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040" start="6375" end="6386" title="Nino Farina" label="Nino Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549417" start="6392" end="6405" title="Maserati 4CLT" label="Maserati 4CLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q68926" start="6723" end="6741" title="1950 Formula One season" label="the following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q173051" start="6743" end="6751" title="1950 Monaco Grand Prix" label="The race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="6793" end="6811" title="Juan Manuel Fangio" label="Juan Manuel Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="7174" end="7185" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="7219" end="7229" title="sports car racing" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q171438" start="7588" end="7607" title="Maurice Trintignant" label="Maurice Trintignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q417760" start="7769" end="7773" title="1957 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="7902" end="7915" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q417784" start="7980" end="7984" title="1958 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="7995" end="8001" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q417860" start="8007" end="8016" title="1961 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1961 race"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="8047" end="8054" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172686" start="8055" end="8059" title="Ferrari 156 F1" label="156s"/>
<link wikidata="Q780447" start="8084" end="8106" title="Rob Walker Racing Team" label="Rob Walker Racing Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q172700" start="8107" end="8115" title="Lotus 18" label="Lotus 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8181" end="8195" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128" start="8196" end="8207" title="Graham Hill" label="Graham Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q418027" start="8382" end="8391" title="1965 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1965 race"/>
<link wikidata="Q898844" start="8675" end="8695" title="1965 Indianapolis 500" label="the Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q172342" start="8706" end="8725" title="Paul Hawkins (racing driver)" label="Paul Hawkins&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188" start="8787" end="8801" title="Jackie Stewart" label="Jackie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166" start="8833" end="8844" title="Denny Hulme" label="Denny Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q171929" start="9215" end="9225" title="1969 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1969 event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344551" start="9227" end="9241" title="Traffic barrier" label="Armco barriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="9853" end="9866" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q13385309" start="10337" end="10365" title="Rainier III Nautical Stadium" label="Rainier III Nautical Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="10799" end="10806" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q172724" start="10818" end="10835" title="Bernie Ecclestone" label="Bernie Ecclestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q173495" start="10894" end="10930" title="Formula One Constructors Association" label="Formula One Constructors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q171492" start="11655" end="11659" title="1982 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q173279" start="11666" end="11677" title="René Arnoux" label="René Arnoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="11717" end="11728" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q172759" start="11845" end="11861" title="Riccardo Patrese" label="Riccardo Patrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q171432" start="11935" end="11948" title="Didier Pironi" label="Didier Pironi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173153" start="11983" end="12000" title="Andrea de Cesaris" label="Andrea de Cesaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="12285" end="12330" title="Fédération Internationale du Sport Automobile" label="Fédération Internationale du Sport Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="12451" end="12454" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="12462" end="12475" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q177408" start="12573" end="12592" title="Jean-Marie Balestre" label="Jean-Marie Balestre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="13111" end="13122" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="13137" end="13149" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419193" start="13182" end="13217" title="List of Monaco Grand Prix Formula Three support race winners" label="support race for Formula Three cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q418271" start="13260" end="13269" title="1984 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1984 race"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501" start="13347" end="13360" title="Nigel Mansell" label="Nigel Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172987" start="13502" end="13509" title="Toleman" label="Toleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q57435" start="13514" end="13527" title="Stefan Bellof" label="Stefan Bellof"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="13535" end="13542" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173123" start="13800" end="13810" title="Jacky Ickx" label="Jacky Ickx"/>
<link wikidata="Q173115" start="14684" end="14699" title="Elio de Angelis" label="Elio de Angelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419312" start="14984" end="14988" title="1989 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q419393" start="14993" end="14997" title="1993 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q418323" start="15051" end="15055" title="1987 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q419295" start="15469" end="15473" title="1988 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q78502" start="15587" end="15601" title="Gerhard Berger" label="Gerhard Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q301426" start="16199" end="16209" title="1992 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1992 event"/>
<link wikidata="Q53718" start="16326" end="16339" title="Williams FW14" label="Williams FW14"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="16341" end="16348" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="16480" end="16487" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q419393" start="16917" end="16927" title="1993 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1993 event"/>
<link wikidata="Q9671" start="17021" end="17039" title="Michael Schumacher" label="Michael Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q10505" start="17309" end="17319" title="Damon Hill" label="Damon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q171552" start="17536" end="17557" title="1994 San Marino Grand Prix" label="San Marino Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q78495" start="17585" end="17604" title="Roland Ratzenberger" label="Roland Ratzenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="17609" end="17621" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q84161" start="17697" end="17712" title="Karl Wendlinger" label="Karl Wendlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q64506339" start="17736" end="17742" title="Sauber" label="Sauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q419410" start="17856" end="17873" title="1994 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1994 Monaco event"/>
<link wikidata="Q173266" start="17915" end="17924" title="1996 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1996 race"/>
<link wikidata="Q172777" start="18109" end="18119" title="Jean Alesi" label="Jean Alesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172018" start="18181" end="18194" title="Olivier Panis" label="Olivier Panis"/>
<link wikidata="Q172832" start="18315" end="18330" title="David Coulthard" label="David Coulthard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220251" start="18383" end="18389" title="Equipe Ligier" label="Ligier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="18495" end="18511" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q419648" start="18824" end="18834" title="2006 Monaco Grand Prix" label="2006 event"/>
<link wikidata="Q588596" start="18893" end="18906" title="pole position" label="pole position"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="19151" end="19154" title="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="19417" end="19431" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q61366337" start="19459" end="19481" title="2019 Monaco Grand Prix" label="2019 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="19535" end="19552" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="19944" end="19954" title="Monaco" label="Monégasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q17541912" start="19963" end="19978" title="Charles Leclerc" label="Charles Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="19982" end="19998" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q82805" start="20239" end="20251" title="Sergio Pérez" label="Sergio Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q174035" start="20776" end="20798" title="Formula One Management" label="Formula One Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q971163" start="20865" end="20881" title="Tele Monte Carlo" label="Tele Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="20990" end="21006" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="21117" end="21128" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55095" start="21133" end="21145" title="La Condamine" label="La Condamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230673" start="21179" end="21192" title="Port Hercules" label="Port Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036" start="21272" end="21290" title="Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171417" start="21315" end="21340" title="Autodromo Nazionale Monza" label="Autodromo Nazionale Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q171880" start="21388" end="21392" title="1980 Italian Grand Prix" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086" start="21988" end="22002" title="Alberto Ascari" label="Alberto Ascari"/>
<link wikidata="Q417694" start="22006" end="22010" title="1955 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22037" end="22044" title="Circuit de Monaco#Evolution of the circuit" label="changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931051" start="22389" end="22399" title="overtaking" label="overtaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="22623" end="22636" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q74231" start="23236" end="23243" title="chicane" label="chicane"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="23312" end="23326" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q61366337" start="23354" end="23376" title="2019 Monaco Grand Prix" label="2019 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173604" start="24109" end="24112" title="Drag reduction system" label="DRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="24331" end="24345" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q115910301" start="24535" end="24557" title="2024 Monaco Grand Prix" label="2024 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q28741262" start="24895" end="24908" title="Oscar Piastri" label="Oscar Piastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239218" start="25052" end="25066" title="Max Verstappen" label="Max Verstappen"/>
<link wikidata="Q725531" start="25399" end="25416" title="Monte Carlo Rally" label="Monte Carlo Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313377" start="25440" end="25462" title="Junior Monaco Kart Cup" label="Junior Monaco Kart Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q111330442" start="25723" end="25733" title="2022 Monaco Grand Prix" label="2022 event"/>
<link wikidata="Q51638" start="26247" end="26260" title="Ascension Day" label="Ascension Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q171946" start="26600" end="26622" title="1975 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1975 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q60142" start="26810" end="26816" title="podium" label="podium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008052" start="26898" end="26908" title="parc fermé" label="parc fermé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868004" start="27052" end="27061" title="royal box" label="royal box"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="27468" end="27484" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="27493" end="27512" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533221" start="27563" end="27575" title="Triple Crown of Motorsport" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128" start="27645" end="27656" title="Graham Hill" label="Graham Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="27906" end="27920" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q172744" start="28044" end="28062" title="Juan Pablo Montoya" label="Juan Pablo Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514" start="28067" end="28082" title="Fernando Alonso" label="Fernando Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q185025" start="28200" end="28218" title="Rainier III, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Rainier III"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="28224" end="28270" title="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile" label="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="28476" end="28482" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q316543" start="28504" end="28512" title="Louis II, Prince of Monaco" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q185025" start="28514" end="28525" title="Rainier III" label="Rainier III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910" start="28530" end="28539" title="Albert II, Prince of Monaco" label="Albert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="28731" end="28740" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q173226" start="28867" end="28879" title="Louis Chiron" label="Louis Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q732138" start="28881" end="28893" title="André Testut" label="André Testut"/>
<link wikidata="Q163175" start="28895" end="28910" title="Olivier Beretta" label="Olivier Beretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q17541912" start="28916" end="28931" title="Charles Leclerc" label="Charles Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="29010" end="29027" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="29032" end="29044" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q10510" start="29130" end="29143" title="Jenson Button" label="Jenson Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q172832" start="29148" end="29163" title="David Coulthard" label="David Coulthard"/>
<link wikidata="Q419295" start="29445" end="29458" title="1988 Monaco Grand Prix" label="the 1988 race"/>
<link wikidata="Q419648" start="29463" end="29476" title="2006 Monaco Grand Prix" label="the 2006 race"/>
<link wikidata="Q11192" start="29544" end="29558" title="Kimi Räikkönen" label="Kimi Räikkönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230673" start="29806" end="29818" title="Port Hercules" label="Port Hercule"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514" start="30204" end="30219" title="Fernando Alonso" label="Fernando Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="30289" end="30303" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="30826" end="30829" title="World War II" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31185" end="31188" title="World War II" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q173259" start="31251" end="31256" title="Ilmor" label="Ilmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="31290" end="31298" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31329" end="31336" title="Porsche in motorsport#Formula One" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31530" end="31533" title="World War II" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533221" start="31615" end="31627" title="Triple Crown of Motorsport" label="Triple Crown"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10947" wikidata="Q342433" url="?curid=10947" title="Fission">
<text>Fission, a splitting of something into two or more parts, may refer to:

* Fission (biology), the division of a single entity into two or more parts and the regeneration of those parts into separate entities resembling the original
* Nuclear fission, when the nucleus of an atom splits into smaller parts
* Fission (band), a Swedish death metal band
* &quot;Fission&quot; (album), by Jens Johansson

==See also==
* Fusion (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q342433" start="0" end="7" title="Fission" label="Fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q929080" start="75" end="92" title="Fission (biology)" label="Fission (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="234" end="249" title="Nuclear fission" label="Nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420952" start="307" end="321" title="Fission (band)" label="Fission (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455232" start="352" end="379" title="Fission (album)" label="&amp;quot;Fission&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q398377" start="415" end="438" title="Fusion (disambiguation)" label="Fusion (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10948" wikidata="Q398377" url="?curid=10948" title="Fusion">
<text>Fusion, or synthesis, is the process of combining two or more distinct entities into a new whole.

Fusion may also refer to:

==Science and technology==
===Physics===
*Nuclear fusion, multiple atomic nuclei combining to form one or more different atomic nuclei and subatomic particles
**Fusion power, power generation using controlled nuclear fusion reactions
**Cold fusion, a hypothesized type of nuclear reaction that would occur at or near room temperature
*Heat fusion, a welding process for joining two pieces of a thermoplastic material
*Melting, or transitioning from solid to liquid form

===Biology and medicine===
* Binaural fusion, the cognitive process of combining the auditory information received by both ears
* Binocular fusion, the cognitive process in binocular vision of combining the visual information received by both eyes
* Cell fusion, a process in which several uninuclear cells combine to form a multinuclear cell
* Gene fusion, a genetic event and molecular biology technique
* Lipid bilayer fusion, a part of several cellular processes
* Spinal fusion, a surgical technique used to combine two or more vertebrae
* Tooth fusion, a dental abnormality in which two teeth are joined

===Computing===

====Computing techniques====
* Image fusion, a process of combining relevant information from two or more images into a single image
* Loop fusion, a compiler program-optimization transformation that replaces multiple loops with a single one
* Sensor fusion, the combining of sensory data from disparate sources

====Application software====
* Fusion 360, a 3D CAD, CAM and CAE program by Autodesk
* Blackmagic Fusion, a visual effects package
* BT Fusion, a defunct UK voice-over-IP service
* Lucidworks Fusion, a search engine platform
* NetObjects Fusion, a web design program

====Middleware and operating system components====
* Compiz Fusion, a community-maintained set of plugins for the Compiz Window Manager
* IBRIX Fusion, a parallel file system
* Oracle Fusion Middleware, a portfolio of standards-based software products that spans multiple services
* VMware Fusion, a virtual machine software product

==Arts and media==
===Comics===
* &quot;Fusion&quot; (Eclipse Comics)
* Fusion (Marvel Comics), a name of two fictional supervillains
* &quot;Fusion&quot; (Marvel/Top Cow), a crossover between Marvel and Top Cow Productions

===Film and television===
*&quot;Fusion&quot; (&quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot;), a first-season episode of &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot;
*Fusion (TV channel), an American cable and satellite news channel

===Gaming===
* &quot;Dancing Stage Fusion&quot;, a 2004 music video game by Konami
* &quot;Fuzion&quot;, a merger of Interlock System and Hero System
* &quot;Metroid Fusion&quot;, a 2002 Game Boy Advance game
* Philadelphia Fusion, a E-sports gaming team
* &quot;Fusion&quot; (video game), 1988

===Magazines===
* &quot;Fusion&quot; (Kent State University)
* &quot;Fusion&quot; (music magazine), an American music magazine, 1967 to 1974
* &quot;Fusion Magazine&quot; (political magazine), founded and edited by Glenn Beck
* &quot;Fusion Magazine&quot; (scientific magazine), predecessor to &quot;21st Century Science and Technology&quot; magazine

===Music and dance===
* Jazz fusion, genre that combines rock and jazz, starting in 1960s
* Fusion dance, a type of partner dance that combines two or more dance styles
* &quot;Fusion&quot; (Jimmy Giuffre 3 album), 1961
* &quot;Fusion&quot; (Jeremy Steig album), 1972
* &quot;Fusion&quot; (Sawthis album), 2006
* Fusion Festival, a music festival in Lärz, Germany
* Guardian (band), a Christian rock band formerly called Fusion

==Businesses and organizations==
===Non-profit and political organizations===
* Fusion Party, a name for multiple political parties in American history
* Fusion Party (Australia)
* Fusion Energy Foundation, a defunct American non-profit think tank co-founded by Lyndon LaRouche in 1974
* Fusion International, an Australian-based Christian organisation
* Fusion of Haitian Social Democrats, a Haitian political party
* Fusion – Sarvodaya ICT4D Movement, Information and Communications Technology for Development, Sri Lanka

===Sports teams===
* Cleveland Fusion, a women&#x27;s American football team in the NWFA
* Fort Wayne Fusion, Arena football team
* Miami Fusion, a professional soccer club in Fort Lauderdale
* Philadelphia Fusion, an American esports team

===Other organizations===
* Fusion Academy, a private alternative school in several U.S. cities
* Fusion Media Group, a division of Univision Communications

==Law and politics==

* Fusion of powers, a feature of some parliamentary forms of government
* Fusionism (politics), the combination of libertarianism and various types of conservatism
* Electoral fusion, an arrangement where two or more political parties support a common candidate
* Fusion of law and equity, combining the rules of equity and common law into one set of rules
* Fusion of the legal profession, the elimination of the distinction between barristers and solicitors

==Products==

* AMD Fusion, a combined microprocessor and GPU design, now branded as AMD Accelerated Processing Unit
* Ford Fusion (Americas), a mid-sized car produced by Ford Motor Company
* Ford Fusion (Europe), a mini MPV produced by Ford Motor Company
* Schumacher Fusion, a radio-controlled car
* Gillette Fusion, a safety razor by Gillette
* Fusion, a brand name of computer hardware used by Arctic

==Other uses==
* Fusion (phonetics), the merger of phonological features of two speech segments into one feature
* Fusion cuisine, the combination of elements of various culinary traditions
* Fusional language or inflected language, a type of language
* Information fusion, the merging of information from disparate sources

==See also==
*Fuse (disambiguation)
*Fusing (disambiguation)
*Cold fusion (disambiguation)
*Fission (disambiguation), opposite of fusion</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q398377" start="0" end="6" title="Fusion" label="Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11" end="20" title=":wikt:synthesis" label="synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q398377" start="99" end="105" title="Fusion" label="Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="168" end="182" title="Nuclear fusion" label="Nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q641442" start="287" end="299" title="Fusion power" label="Fusion power"/>
<link wikidata="Q180381" start="362" end="373" title="Cold fusion" label="Cold fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693277" start="461" end="472" title="Heat fusion" label="Heat fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q106080" start="544" end="551" title="Melting" label="Melting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913931" start="626" end="641" title="Binaural fusion" label="Binaural fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q609543" start="770" end="786" title="binocular vision" label="binocular vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q56592403" start="847" end="858" title="Cell fusion" label="Cell fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108970" start="942" end="953" title="Gene fusion" label="Gene fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556360" start="1005" end="1025" title="Lipid bilayer fusion" label="Lipid bilayer fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q770609" start="1066" end="1079" title="Spinal fusion" label="Spinal fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847191" start="1142" end="1154" title="Tooth fusion" label="Tooth fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q860822" start="1256" end="1268" title="Image fusion" label="Image fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675821" start="1360" end="1371" title="Loop fusion" label="Loop fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q486494" start="1469" end="1482" title="Sensor fusion" label="Sensor fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q110779090" start="1569" end="1579" title="Fusion 360" label="Fusion 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027811" start="1625" end="1642" title="Blackmagic Fusion" label="Blackmagic Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836754" start="1671" end="1680" title="BT Fusion" label="BT Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696906" start="1719" end="1729" title="Lucidworks" label="Lucidworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978558" start="1765" end="1782" title="NetObjects Fusion" label="NetObjects Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q819563" start="1859" end="1865" title="Compiz" label="Compiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969224" start="1944" end="1956" title="IBRIX Fusion" label="IBRIX Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099275" start="1983" end="2007" title="Oracle Fusion Middleware" label="Oracle Fusion Middleware"/>
<link wikidata="Q935100" start="2089" end="2102" title="VMware Fusion" label="VMware Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510250" start="2174" end="2209" title="Fusion (Eclipse Comics)" label="&amp;quot;Fusion&amp;quot; (Eclipse Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589355" start="2212" end="2234" title="Fusion (Marvel Comics)" label="Fusion (Marvel Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2276" end="2311" title="List of Top Cow Productions publications#F" label="&amp;quot;Fusion&amp;quot; (Marvel/Top Cow)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2392" end="2446" title="Fusion (Star Trek: Enterprise)" label="&amp;quot;Fusion&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14645460" start="2509" end="2528" title="Fusion (TV channel)" label="Fusion (TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215497" start="2597" end="2617" title="Dancing Stage Fusion" label="Dancing Stage Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378658" start="2667" end="2673" title="Fuzion" label="Fuzion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478949" start="2734" end="2748" title="Metroid Fusion" label="Metroid Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901412" start="2787" end="2806" title="Philadelphia Fusion" label="Philadelphia Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754908" start="2833" end="2864" title="Fusion (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Fusion&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510265" start="2890" end="2932" title="Fusion (Kent State University)" label="&amp;quot;Fusion&amp;quot; (Kent State University)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39078736" start="2935" end="2970" title="Fusion (music magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Fusion&amp;quot; (music magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711621" start="3015" end="3063" title="Fusion Magazine (political magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Fusion Magazine&amp;quot; (political magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510261" start="3100" end="3149" title="Fusion Magazine (scientific magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Fusion Magazine&amp;quot; (scientific magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="3248" end="3259" title="Jazz fusion" label="Jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081177" start="3316" end="3328" title="Fusion dance" label="Fusion dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510251" start="3395" end="3437" title="Fusion (Jimmy Giuffre 3 album)" label="&amp;quot;Fusion&amp;quot; (Jimmy Giuffre 3 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612156" start="3446" end="3485" title="Fusion (Jeremy Steig album)" label="&amp;quot;Fusion&amp;quot; (Jeremy Steig album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q168081" start="3494" end="3528" title="Fusion (Sawthis album)" label="&amp;quot;Fusion&amp;quot; (Sawthis album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q879464" start="3537" end="3552" title="Fusion Festival" label="Fusion Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466608" start="3590" end="3605" title="Guardian (band)" label="Guardian (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510268" start="3733" end="3745" title="Fusion Party" label="Fusion Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029712" start="3807" end="3831" title="Fusion Party (Australia)" label="Fusion Party (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510261" start="3834" end="3858" title="Fusion Energy Foundation" label="Fusion Energy Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475363" start="3941" end="3961" title="Fusion International" label="Fusion International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366461" start="4008" end="4042" title="Fusion of Haitian Social Democrats" label="Fusion of Haitian Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510285" start="4072" end="4105" title="Fusion – Sarvodaya ICT4D Movement" label="Fusion – Sarvodaya ICT4D Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132142" start="4198" end="4214" title="Cleveland Fusion" label="Cleveland Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472287" start="4268" end="4285" title="Fort Wayne Fusion" label="Fort Wayne Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q862647" start="4309" end="4321" title="Miami Fusion" label="Miami Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901412" start="4371" end="4390" title="Philadelphia Fusion" label="Philadelphia Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510254" start="4446" end="4460" title="Fusion Academy" label="Fusion Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402718" start="4516" end="4534" title="Fusion Media Group" label="Fusion Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093159" start="4600" end="4616" title="Fusion of powers" label="Fusion of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510287" start="4672" end="4692" title="Fusionism (politics)" label="Fusionism (politics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822632" start="4764" end="4780" title="Electoral fusion" label="Electoral fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="4862" end="4886" title="Fusion of law and equity" label="Fusion of law and equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509998" start="4957" end="4987" title="Fusion of the legal profession" label="Fusion of the legal profession"/>
<link wikidata="Q294956" start="5075" end="5085" title="AMD Fusion" label="AMD Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q920675" start="5178" end="5200" title="Ford Fusion (Americas)" label="Ford Fusion (Americas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q525076" start="5251" end="5271" title="Ford Fusion (Europe)" label="Ford Fusion (Europe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433008" start="5317" end="5334" title="Schumacher Fusion" label="Schumacher Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q503592" start="5361" end="5376" title="Gillette Fusion" label="Gillette Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5407" end="5413" title="Arctic GmbH#Fusion Power Supplies and Storage Devices" label="Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593739" start="5482" end="5500" title="Fusion (phonetics)" label="Fusion (phonetics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q601763" start="5580" end="5594" title="Fusion cuisine" label="Fusion cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q318917" start="5657" end="5674" title="Fusional language" label="Fusional language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092450" start="5719" end="5737" title="Information fusion" label="Information fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475291" start="5804" end="5825" title="Fuse (disambiguation)" label="Fuse (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510055" start="5827" end="5850" title="Fusing (disambiguation)" label="Fusing (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142265" start="5852" end="5880" title="Cold fusion (disambiguation)" label="Cold fusion (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q342433" start="5882" end="5906" title="Fission (disambiguation)" label="Fission (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10949" wikidata="Q184410" url="?curid=10949" title="Four color theorem">
<text>In mathematics, the four color theorem, or the four color map theorem, states that no more than four colors are required to color the regions of any map so that no two adjacent regions have the same color. &quot;Adjacent&quot; means that two regions share a common boundary of non-zero length (i.e., not merely a corner where three or more regions meet). It was the first major theorem to be proved using a computer. Initially, this proof was not accepted by all mathematicians because the computer-assisted proof was infeasible for a human to check by hand. The proof has gained wide acceptance since then, although some doubts remain.

The theorem is a stronger version of the five color theorem, which can be shown using a significantly simpler argument. Although the weaker five color theorem was proven already in the 1800s, the four color theorem resisted until 1976 when it was proven by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken. This came after many false proofs and mistaken counterexamples in the preceding decades.

The Appel–Haken proof proceeds by analyzing a very large number of reducible configurations. This was improved upon in 1997 by Robertson, Sanders, Seymour, and Thomas, who have managed to decrease the number of such configurations to 633 – still an extremely long case analysis. In 2005, the theorem was verified by Georges Gonthier using a general-purpose theorem-proving software.

==Formulation==
In graph-theoretic terms, the theorem states that for a loopless planar graph formula_1, its chromatic number is formula_2.

The intuitive statement of the four color theorem – &quot;given any separation of a plane into contiguous regions, the regions can be colored using at most four colors so that no two adjacent regions have the same color&quot; – needs to be interpreted appropriately to be correct.

First, regions are adjacent if they share a boundary segment; two regions that share only isolated boundary points are not considered adjacent. (Otherwise, a map in a shape of a pie chart would make an arbitrarily large number of regions &#x27;adjacent&#x27; to each other at a common corner, and require arbitrarily large number of colors as a result.) Second, bizarre regions, such as those with finite area but infinitely long perimeter, are not allowed; maps with such regions can require more than four colors. (To be safe, we can restrict to regions whose boundaries consist of finitely many straight line segments. It is allowed that a region has enclaves, that is it entirely surrounds one or more other regions.) Note that the notion of &quot;contiguous region&quot; (technically: connected open subset of the plane) is not the same as that of a &quot;country&quot; on regular maps, since countries need not be contiguous (they may have exclaves; e.g., the Cabinda Province as part of Angola, Nakhchivan as part of Azerbaijan, Kaliningrad as part of Russia, France with its overseas territories, and Alaska as part of the United States are not contiguous). If we required the entire territory of a country to receive the same color, then four colors are not always sufficient. For instance, consider a simplified map:

In this map, the two regions labeled &quot;A&quot; belong to the same country. If we wanted those regions to receive the same color, then five colors would be required, since the two &quot;A&quot; regions together are adjacent to four other regions, each of which is adjacent to all the others.
A simpler statement of the theorem uses graph theory. The set of regions of a map can be represented more abstractly as an undirected graph that has a vertex for each region and an edge for every pair of regions that share a boundary segment. This graph is planar: it can be drawn in the plane without crossings by placing each vertex at an arbitrarily chosen location within the region to which it corresponds, and by drawing the edges as curves without crossings that lead from one region&#x27;s vertex, across a shared boundary segment, to an adjacent region&#x27;s vertex. Conversely any planar graph can be formed from a map in this way. In graph-theoretic terminology, the four-color theorem states that the vertices of every planar graph can be colored with at most four colors so that no two adjacent vertices receive the same color, or for short: every planar graph is four-colorable.

==History==

===Early proof attempts===

As far as is known, the conjecture was first proposed on October 23, 1852, when Francis Guthrie, while trying to color the map of counties of England, noticed that only four different colors were needed. At the time, Guthrie&#x27;s brother, Frederick, was a student of Augustus De Morgan (the former advisor of Francis) at University College London. Francis inquired with Frederick regarding it, who then took it to De Morgan. (Francis Guthrie graduated later in 1852, and later became a professor of mathematics in South Africa.) According to De Morgan:

A student of mine [Guthrie] asked me to day to give him a reason for a fact which I did not know was a fact—and do not yet. He says that if a figure be any how divided and the compartments differently colored so that figures with any portion of common boundary &quot;line&quot; are differently colored—four colors may be wanted but not more—the following is his case in which four colors &quot;are&quot; wanted. Query cannot a necessity for five or more be invented...

&quot;F.G.&quot;, perhaps one of the two Guthries, published the question in &quot;The Athenaeum&quot; in 1854, and De Morgan posed the question again in the same magazine in 1860. Another early published reference by in turn credits the conjecture to De Morgan.

There were several early failed attempts at proving the theorem. De Morgan believed that it followed from a simple fact about four regions, though he didn&#x27;t believe that fact could be derived from more elementary facts.
This arises in the following way. We never need four colours in a neighborhood unless there be four counties, each of which has boundary lines in common with each of the other three. Such a thing cannot happen with four areas unless one or more of them be inclosed by the rest; and the colour used for the inclosed county is thus set free to go on with. Now this principle, that four areas cannot each have common boundary with all the other three without inclosure, is not, we fully believe, capable of demonstration upon anything more evident and more elementary; it must stand as a postulate.

One proposed proof was given by Alfred Kempe in 1879, which was widely acclaimed; another was given by Peter Guthrie Tait in 1880. It was not until 1890 that Kempe&#x27;s proof was shown incorrect by Percy Heawood, and in 1891, Tait&#x27;s proof was shown incorrect by Julius Petersen—each false proof stood unchallenged for 11 years.

In 1890, in addition to exposing the flaw in Kempe&#x27;s proof, Heawood proved the five color theorem and generalized the four color conjecture to surfaces of arbitrary genus.

Tait, in 1880, showed that the four color theorem is equivalent to the statement that a certain type of graph (called a snark in modern terminology) must be non-planar.

In 1943, Hugo Hadwiger formulated the Hadwiger conjecture, a far-reaching generalization of the four-color problem that still remains unsolved.

===Proof by computer===
During the 1960s and 1970s, German mathematician Heinrich Heesch developed methods of using computers to search for a proof. Notably he was the first to use discharging for proving the theorem, which turned out to be important in the unavoidability portion of the subsequent Appel–Haken proof. He also expanded on the concept of reducibility and, along with Ken Durre, developed a computer test for it. Unfortunately, at this critical juncture, he was unable to procure the necessary supercomputer time to continue his work.

Others took up his methods, including his computer-assisted approach. While other teams of mathematicians were racing to complete proofs, Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken at the University of Illinois announced, on June 21, 1976, that they had proved the theorem. They were assisted in some algorithmic work by John A. Koch.

If the four-color conjecture were false, there would be at least one map with the smallest possible number of regions that requires five colors. The proof showed that such a minimal counterexample cannot exist, through the use of two technical concepts:

# An &quot;unavoidable set&quot; is a set of configurations such that every map that satisfies some necessary conditions for being a minimal non-4-colorable triangulation (such as having minimum degree 5) must have at least one configuration from this set.
# A &quot;reducible configuration&quot; is an arrangement of countries that cannot occur in a minimal counterexample. If a map contains a reducible configuration, the map can be reduced to a smaller map. This smaller map has the condition that if it can be colored with four colors, this also applies to the original map. This implies that if the original map cannot be colored with four colors the smaller map cannot either and so the original map is not minimal.

Using mathematical rules and procedures based on properties of reducible configurations, Appel and Haken found an unavoidable set of reducible configurations, thus proving that a minimal counterexample to the four-color conjecture could not exist. Their proof reduced the infinitude of possible maps to 1,834 reducible configurations (later reduced to 1,482) which had to be checked one by one by computer and took over a thousand hours. This reducibility part of the work was independently double checked with different programs and computers. However, the unavoidability part of the proof was verified in over 400 pages of microfiche, which had to be checked by hand with the assistance of Haken&#x27;s daughter Dorothea Blostein.

Appel and Haken&#x27;s announcement was widely reported by the news media around the world, and the math department at the University of Illinois used a postmark stating &quot;Four colors suffice.&quot; At the same time the unusual nature of the proof—it was the first major theorem to be proved with extensive computer assistance—and the complexity of the human-verifiable portion aroused considerable controversy.

In the early 1980s, rumors spread of a flaw in the Appel–Haken proof. Ulrich Schmidt at RWTH Aachen had examined Appel and Haken&#x27;s proof for his master&#x27;s thesis that was published in 1981. He had checked about 40% of the unavoidability portion and found a significant error in the discharging procedure . In 1986, Appel and Haken were asked by the editor of &quot;Mathematical Intelligencer&quot; to write an article addressing the rumors of flaws in their proof. They replied that the rumors were due to a &quot;misinterpretation of [Schmidt&#x27;s] results&quot; and obliged with a detailed article. Their magnum opus, &quot;Every Planar Map is Four-Colorable&quot;, a book claiming a complete and detailed proof (with a microfiche supplement of over 400 pages), appeared in 1989; it explained and corrected the error discovered by Schmidt as well as several further errors found by others.

===Simplification and verification===
Since the proving of the theorem, a new approach has led to both a shorter proof and a more efficient algorithm for 4-coloring maps. In 1996, Neil Robertson, Daniel P. Sanders, Paul Seymour, and Robin Thomas created a quadratic-time algorithm (requiring only O(&quot;n&quot;2) time, where &quot;n&quot; is the number of vertices), improving on a quartic-time algorithm based on Appel and Haken&#x27;s proof. The new proof, based on the same ideas, is similar to Appel and Haken&#x27;s but more efficient because it reduces the complexity of the problem and requires checking only 633 reducible configurations. Both the unavoidability and reducibility parts of this new proof must be executed by a computer and are impractical to check by hand. In 2001, the same authors announced an alternative proof, by proving the snark conjecture. This proof remains unpublished, however.

In 2005, Benjamin Werner and Georges Gonthier formalized a proof of the theorem inside the Coq proof assistant. This removed the need to trust the various computer programs used to verify particular cases; it is only necessary to trust the Coq kernel.

==Summary of proof ideas==
The following discussion is a summary based on the introduction to &quot;Every Planar Map is Four Colorable&quot; . Although flawed, Kempe&#x27;s original purported proof of the four color theorem provided some of the basic tools later used to prove it. The explanation here is reworded in terms of the modern graph theory formulation above.

Kempe&#x27;s argument goes as follows. First, if planar regions separated by the graph are not &quot;triangulated&quot; (i.e., do not have exactly three edges in their boundaries), we can add edges without introducing new vertices in order to make every region triangular, including the unbounded outer region. If this triangulated graph is colorable using four colors or fewer, so is the original graph since the same coloring is valid if edges are removed. So it suffices to prove the four color theorem for triangulated graphs to prove it for all planar graphs, and without loss of generality we assume the graph is triangulated.

Suppose &quot;v&quot;, &quot;e&quot;, and &quot;f&quot; are the number of vertices, edges, and regions (faces). Since each region is triangular and each edge is shared by two regions, we have that 2&quot;e&quot; = 3&quot;f&quot;. This together with Euler&#x27;s formula, &quot;v&quot; − &quot;e&quot; + &quot;f&quot; = 2, can be used to show that 6&quot;v&quot; − 2&quot;e&quot; = 12. Now, the &quot;degree&quot; of a vertex is the number of edges abutting it. If &quot;v&quot;&quot;n&quot; is the number of vertices of degree &quot;n&quot; and &quot;D&quot; is the maximum degree of any vertex,
: formula_3
But since 12 &gt; 0 and 6 − &quot;i&quot; ≤ 0 for all &quot;i&quot; ≥ 6, this demonstrates that there is at least one vertex of degree 5 or less.

If there is a graph requiring 5 colors, then there is a &quot;minimal&quot; such graph, where removing any vertex makes it four-colorable. Call this graph &quot;G&quot;. Then &quot;G&quot; cannot have a vertex of degree 3 or less, because if &quot;d&quot;(&quot;v&quot;) ≤ 3, we can remove &quot;v&quot; from &quot;G&quot;, four-color the smaller graph, then add back &quot;v&quot; and extend the four-coloring to it by choosing a color different from its neighbors.
Kempe also showed correctly that &quot;G&quot; can have no vertex of degree 4. As before we remove the vertex &quot;v&quot; and four-color the remaining vertices. If all four neighbors of &quot;v&quot; are different colors, say red, green, blue, and yellow in clockwise order, we look for an alternating path of vertices colored red and blue joining the red and blue neighbors. Such a path is called a Kempe chain. There may be a Kempe chain joining the red and blue neighbors, and there may be a Kempe chain joining the green and yellow neighbors, but not both, since these two paths would necessarily intersect, and the vertex where they intersect cannot be colored. Suppose it is the red and blue neighbors that are not chained together. Explore all vertices attached to the red neighbor by red-blue alternating paths, and then reverse the colors red and blue on all these vertices. The result is still a valid four-coloring, and &quot;v&quot; can now be added back and colored red.

This leaves only the case where &quot;G&quot; has a vertex of degree 5; but Kempe&#x27;s argument was flawed for this case. Heawood noticed Kempe&#x27;s mistake and also observed that if one was satisfied with proving only five colors are needed, one could run through the above argument (changing only that the minimal counterexample requires 6 colors) and use Kempe chains in the degree 5 situation to prove the five color theorem.

In any case, to deal with this degree 5 vertex case requires a more complicated notion than removing a vertex. Rather the form of the argument is generalized to considering &quot;configurations&quot;, which are connected subgraphs of &quot;G&quot; with the degree of each vertex (in G) specified. For example, the case described in degree 4 vertex situation is the configuration consisting of a single vertex labelled as having degree 4 in &quot;G&quot;. As above, it suffices to demonstrate that if the configuration is removed and the remaining graph four-colored, then the coloring can be modified in such a way that when the configuration is re-added, the four-coloring can be extended to it as well. A configuration for which this is possible is called a &quot;reducible configuration&quot;. If at least one of a set of configurations must occur somewhere in G, that set is called &quot;unavoidable&quot;. The argument above began by giving an unavoidable set of five configurations (a single vertex with degree 1, a single vertex with degree 2, ..., a single vertex with degree 5) and then proceeded to show that the first 4 are reducible; to exhibit an unavoidable set of configurations where every configuration in the set is reducible would prove the theorem.

Because &quot;G&quot; is triangular, the degree of each vertex in a configuration is known, and all edges internal to the configuration are known, the number of vertices in &quot;G&quot; adjacent to a given configuration is fixed, and they are joined in a cycle. These vertices form the &quot;ring&quot; of the configuration; a configuration with &quot;k&quot; vertices in its ring is a &quot;k&quot;-ring configuration, and the configuration together with its ring is called the &quot;ringed configuration&quot;. As in the simple cases above, one may enumerate all distinct four-colorings of the ring; any coloring that can be extended without modification to a coloring of the configuration is called &quot;initially good&quot;. For example, the single-vertex configuration above with 3 or fewer neighbors were initially good. In general, the surrounding graph must be systematically recolored to turn the ring&#x27;s coloring into a good one, as was done in the case above where there were 4 neighbors; for a general configuration with a larger ring, this requires more complex techniques. Because of the large number of distinct four-colorings of the ring, this is the primary step requiring computer assistance.

Finally, it remains to identify an unavoidable set of configurations amenable to reduction by this procedure. The primary method used to discover such a set is the method of discharging. The intuitive idea underlying discharging is to consider the planar graph as an electrical network. Initially positive and negative &quot;electrical charge&quot; is distributed amongst the vertices so that the total is positive.

Recall the formula above:

: formula_4

Each vertex is assigned an initial charge of 6-deg(&quot;v&quot;). Then one &quot;flows&quot; the charge by systematically redistributing the charge from a vertex to its neighboring vertices according to a set of rules, the &quot;discharging procedure&quot;. Since charge is preserved, some vertices still have positive charge. The rules restrict the possibilities for configurations of positively charged vertices, so enumerating all such possible configurations gives an unavoidable set.

As long as some member of the unavoidable set is not reducible, the discharging procedure is modified to eliminate it (while introducing other configurations). Appel and Haken&#x27;s final discharging procedure was extremely complex and, together with a description of the resulting unavoidable configuration set, filled a 400-page volume, but the configurations it generated could be checked mechanically to be reducible. Verifying the volume describing the unavoidable configuration set itself was done by peer review over a period of several years.

A technical detail not discussed here but required to complete the proof is &quot;immersion reducibility&quot;.

==False disproofs==
The four color theorem has been notorious for attracting a large number of false proofs and disproofs in its long history. At first, &quot;The New York Times&quot; refused, as a matter of policy, to report on the Appel–Haken proof, fearing that the proof would be shown false like the ones before it. Some alleged proofs, like Kempe&#x27;s and Tait&#x27;s mentioned above, stood under public scrutiny for over a decade before they were refuted. But many more, authored by amateurs, were never published at all.

Generally, the simplest, though invalid, counterexamples attempt to create one region which touches all other regions. This forces the remaining regions to be colored with only three colors. Because the four color theorem is true, this is always possible; however, because the person drawing the map is focused on the one large region, they fail to notice that the remaining regions can in fact be colored with three colors.

This trick can be generalized: there are many maps where if the colors of some regions are selected beforehand, it becomes impossible to color the remaining regions without exceeding four colors. A casual verifier of the counterexample may not think to change the colors of these regions, so that the counterexample will appear as though it is valid.

Perhaps one effect underlying this common misconception is the fact that the color restriction is not transitive: a region only has to be colored differently from regions it touches directly, not regions touching regions that it touches. If this were the restriction, planar graphs would require arbitrarily large numbers of colors.

Other false disproofs violate the assumptions of the theorem, such as using a region that consists of multiple disconnected parts, or disallowing regions of the same color from touching at a point.

==Three-coloring==

While every planar map can be colored with four colors, it is NP-complete in complexity to decide whether an arbitrary planar map can be colored with just three colors.

A cubic map can be colored with only three colors if and only if each interior region has an even number of neighboring regions. In the US states map example, landlocked Missouri (MO) has eight neighbors (an even number): it must be differently colored from all of them, but the neighbors can alternate colors, thus this part of the map needs only three colors. However, landlocked Nevada (NV) has five neighbors (an odd number): these neighbors require three colors, and it must be differently colored from them, thus four colors are needed here.

==Generalizations==
===Infinite graphs===
The four color theorem applies not only to finite planar graphs, but also to infinite graphs that can be drawn without crossings in the plane, and even more generally to infinite graphs (possibly with an uncountable number of vertices) for which every finite subgraph is planar. To prove this, one can combine a proof of the theorem for finite planar graphs with the De Bruijn–Erdős theorem stating that, if every finite subgraph of an infinite graph is &quot;k&quot;-colorable, then the whole graph is also &quot;k&quot;-colorable . This can also be seen as an immediate consequence of Kurt Gödel&#x27;s compactness theorem for first-order logic, simply by expressing the colorability of an infinite graph with a set of logical formulae.

===Higher surfaces===
One can also consider the coloring problem on surfaces other than the plane. The problem on the sphere or cylinder is equivalent to that on the plane. For closed (orientable or non-orientable) surfaces with positive genus, the maximum number &quot;p&quot; of colors needed depends on the surface&#x27;s Euler characteristic χ according to the formula
: formula_5
where the outermost brackets denote the floor function.

Alternatively, for an orientable surface the formula can be given in terms of the genus of a surface, &quot;g&quot;:
:: formula_6

This formula, the Heawood conjecture, was proposed by P. J. Heawood in 1890 and, after contributions by several people, proved by Gerhard Ringel and J. W. T. Youngs in 1968. The only exception to the formula is the Klein bottle, which has Euler characteristic 0 (hence the formula gives p = 7) but requires only 6 colors, as shown by Philip Franklin in 1934.

For example, the torus has Euler characteristic χ = 0 (and genus &quot;g&quot; = 1) and thus &quot;p&quot; = 7, so no more than 7 colors are required to color any map on a torus. This upper bound of 7 is sharp: certain toroidal polyhedra such as the Szilassi polyhedron require seven colors.

A Möbius strip requires six colors as do 1-planar graphs (graphs drawn with at most one simple crossing per edge) . If both the vertices and the faces of a planar graph are colored, in such a way that no two adjacent vertices, faces, or vertex-face pair have the same color, then again at most six colors are needed .

For graphs whose vertices are represented as pairs of points on two distinct surfaces, with edges drawn as non-crossing curves on one of the two surfaces, the chromatic number can be at least 9 and is at most 12, but more precise bounds are not known; this is Gerhard Ringel&#x27;s Earth–Moon problem.

===Solid regions===

There is no obvious extension of the coloring result to three-dimensional solid regions. By using a set of &quot;n&quot; flexible rods, one can arrange that every rod touches every other rod. The set would then require &quot;n&quot; colors, or &quot;n&quot;+1 including the empty space that also touches every rod. The number &quot;n&quot; can be taken to be any integer, as large as desired. Such examples were known to Fredrick Guthrie in 1880. Even for axis-parallel cuboids (considered to be adjacent when two cuboids share a two-dimensional boundary area), an unbounded number of colors may be necessary.
==Relation to other areas of mathematics==
Dror Bar-Natan gave a statement concerning Lie algebras and Vassiliev invariants which is equivalent to the four color theorem.

==Use outside of mathematics==
Despite the motivation from coloring political maps of countries, the theorem is not of particular interest to cartographers. According to an article by the math historian Kenneth May, &quot;Maps utilizing only four colors are rare, and those that do usually require only three. Books on cartography and the history of mapmaking do not mention the four-color property&quot;. The theorem also does not guarantee the usual cartographic requirement that non-contiguous regions of the same country (such as the exclave Alaska and the rest of the United States) be colored identically. Because the four-color theorem does not apply when the regions on the map are not contiguous, it also does not apply to the world map. On the world map, the ocean, Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, and France all border each other because the Netherlands borders France on the island of Saint Martin. This is the only counterexample.

==See also==

* Apollonian network
* Five color theorem
* Graph coloring
* Grötzsch&#x27;s theorem: triangle-free planar graphs are 3-colorable.
* Hadwiger–Nelson problem: how many colors are needed to color the plane so that no two points at unit distance apart have the same color?

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* List of generalizations of the four color theorem on MathOverflow</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184410" start="20" end="38" title="Four color theorem" label="four color theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184410" start="47" end="69" title="Four color theorem" label="four color map theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="378" end="385" title="theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="392" end="415" title="computer-assisted proof#Theorems proved with the help of computer programs" label="proved using a computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="433" end="438" title="Mathematical proof" label="proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150675" start="490" end="513" title="computer-assisted proof" label="computer-assisted proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907339" start="518" end="557" title="Non-surveyable proof" label="infeasible for a human to check by hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q105222412" start="679" end="697" title="five color theorem" label="five color theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q224787" start="895" end="908" title="Kenneth Appel" label="Kenneth Appel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082" start="913" end="927" title="Wolfgang Haken" label="Wolfgang Haken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546810" start="1335" end="1351" title="Georges Gonthier" label="Georges Gonthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387554" start="1376" end="1400" title="proof assistant" label="theorem-proving software"/>
<link wikidata="Q512604" start="1475" end="1483" title="Loop (graph theory)" label="loopless"/>
<link wikidata="Q547823" start="1484" end="1496" title="planar graph" label="planar graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q504843" start="1512" end="1528" title="chromatic number" label="chromatic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q273404" start="2004" end="2013" title="pie chart" label="pie chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="2480" end="2488" title="Enclave and exclave" label="enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="2616" end="2625" title="Connected space" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="2626" end="2630" title="Open set" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="2772" end="2780" title="Enclave and exclave" label="exclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q168787" start="2792" end="2808" title="Cabinda Province" label="Cabinda Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="2820" end="2826" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q131083" start="2828" end="2838" title="Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic" label="Nakhchivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="2850" end="2860" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749" start="2862" end="2873" title="Kaliningrad Oblast" label="Kaliningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2893" end="2899" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q203396" start="2909" end="2929" title="Overseas France" label="overseas territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="2935" end="2941" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2957" end="2970" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="3489" end="3501" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="3572" end="3588" title="undirected graph" label="undirected graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="3600" end="3606" title="vertex (graph theory)" label="vertex"/>
<link wikidata="Q166507" start="3630" end="3634" title="edge (graph theory)" label="edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q547823" start="3706" end="3712" title="planar graph" label="planar"/>
<link wikidata="Q504843" start="4327" end="4341" title="Graph coloring" label="four-colorable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441533" start="4465" end="4480" title="Francis Guthrie" label="Francis Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q903208" start="4626" end="4635" title="Frederick Guthrie (scientist)" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q208448" start="4654" end="4672" title="Augustus De Morgan" label="Augustus De Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="4708" end="4733" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q755237" start="5494" end="5507" title="Athenaeum (British magazine)" label="The Athenaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q370037" start="6529" end="6541" title="Alfred Kempe" label="Alfred Kempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q742536" start="6600" end="6618" title="Peter Guthrie Tait" label="Peter Guthrie Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384937" start="6697" end="6710" title="Percy Heawood" label="Percy Heawood"/>
<link wikidata="Q455001" start="6766" end="6781" title="Julius Petersen" label="Julius Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q105222412" start="6917" end="6935" title="five color theorem" label="five color theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470127" start="7131" end="7136" title="snark (graph theory)" label="snark"/>
<link wikidata="Q547823" start="7172" end="7178" title="planar graph" label="planar"/>
<link wikidata="Q116655" start="7190" end="7203" title="Hugo Hadwiger" label="Hugo Hadwiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128435" start="7219" end="7238" title="Hadwiger conjecture (graph theory)" label="Hadwiger conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q78102" start="7399" end="7414" title="Heinrich Heesch" label="Heinrich Heesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281445" start="7507" end="7518" title="discharging method (discrete mathematics)" label="discharging"/>
<link wikidata="Q224787" start="8014" end="8027" title="Kenneth Appel" label="Kenneth Appel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082" start="8032" end="8046" title="Wolfgang Haken" label="Wolfgang Haken"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="8054" end="8076" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8187" end="8199" title="John A. Koch" label="John A. Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q547823" start="8614" end="8627" title="maximal planar graph" label="triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q830450" start="9805" end="9815" title="microfiche" label="microfiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q30321593" start="9894" end="9911" title="Dorothea Blostein" label="Dorothea Blostein"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="10037" end="10059" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q273263" start="10419" end="10430" title="RWTH Aachen" label="RWTH Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396083" start="10705" end="10731" title="Mathematical Intelligencer" label="Mathematical Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="10949" end="10960" title="Masterpiece" label="magnum opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531456" start="11415" end="11429" title="Neil Robertson (mathematician)" label="Neil Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218370" start="11431" end="11448" title="Daniel P. Sanders" label="Daniel P. Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396427" start="11450" end="11462" title="Paul Seymour (mathematician)" label="Paul Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159915" start="11468" end="11480" title="Robin Thomas (mathematician)" label="Robin Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="11491" end="11505" title="polynomial time" label="quadratic-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="11532" end="11533" title="Big O notation" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420049" start="11619" end="11626" title="quartic function" label="quartic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470127" start="12090" end="12095" title="snark (graph theory)" label="snark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12159" end="12174" title="Benjamin Werner" label="Benjamin Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546810" start="12179" end="12195" title="Georges Gonthier" label="Georges Gonthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131652" start="12241" end="12244" title="Coq (software)" label="Coq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635635" start="12874" end="12886" title="triangulation (geometry)" label="triangulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q547823" start="13092" end="13110" title="planar graph" label="triangulated graph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13656" end="13676" title="Euler characteristic#Planar graphs" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387048" start="15031" end="15042" title="Kempe chain" label="Kempe chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q105222412" start="16030" end="16048" title="five color theorem" label="five color theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281445" start="18703" end="18724" title="discharging method (discrete mathematics)" label="method of discharging"/>
<link wikidata="Q574523" start="20122" end="20131" title="immersion (mathematics)" label="immersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="20312" end="20330" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861" start="21565" end="21575" title="transitive relation" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="22078" end="22089" title="NP-complete" label="NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="22093" end="22103" title="computational complexity theory" label="complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374495" start="22188" end="22197" title="Cubic graph" label="cubic map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="22356" end="22364" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="22568" end="22574" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q166507" start="22854" end="22868" title="infinite graph" label="infinite graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527054" start="23144" end="23167" title="De Bruijn–Erdős theorem (graph theory)" label="De Bruijn–Erdős theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="23364" end="23374" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149458" start="23382" end="23401" title="compactness theorem" label="compactness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="23406" end="23423" title="first-order logic" label="first-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="23635" end="23641" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="23645" end="23653" title="cylinder" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q28517129" start="23755" end="23760" title="genus (mathematics)" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q852973" start="23842" end="23862" title="Euler characteristic" label="Euler characteristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="23942" end="23956" title="floor function" label="floor function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748415" start="23981" end="23991" title="orientable" label="orientable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799491" start="24108" end="24126" title="Heawood conjecture" label="Heawood conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384937" start="24144" end="24157" title="P. J. Heawood" label="P. J. Heawood"/>
<link wikidata="Q113731" start="24220" end="24234" title="Gerhard Ringel" label="Gerhard Ringel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386725" start="24239" end="24254" title="John William Theodore Youngs" label="J. W. T. Youngs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23638" start="24305" end="24317" title="Klein bottle" label="Klein bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183563" start="24424" end="24439" title="Philip Franklin" label="Philip Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="24467" end="24472" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24654" end="24659" title="Glossary of mathematical jargon#sharp" label="sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11597584" start="24669" end="24687" title="toroidal polyhedron" label="toroidal polyhedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q838442" start="24700" end="24719" title="Szilassi polyhedron" label="Szilassi polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q226843" start="24745" end="24757" title="Möbius strip" label="Möbius strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545823" start="24784" end="24798" title="1-planar graph" label="1-planar graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q113731" start="25322" end="25336" title="Gerhard Ringel" label="Gerhard Ringel"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275606" start="25344" end="25362" title="Earth–Moon problem" label="Earth–Moon problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q55450691" start="25856" end="25862" title="cuboid" label="cuboid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260333" start="26039" end="26053" title="Dror Bar-Natan" label="Dror Bar-Natan"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="26082" end="26094" title="Lie algebras" label="Lie algebras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443624" start="26099" end="26118" title="Vassiliev invariant" label="Vassiliev invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712345" start="26227" end="26263" title="map coloring" label="coloring political maps of countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="26310" end="26323" title="cartographers" label="cartographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398929" start="26371" end="26382" title="Kenneth May" label="Kenneth May"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="26714" end="26720" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="26741" end="26754" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q25596" start="27068" end="27080" title="Saint Martin (island)" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780395" start="27132" end="27150" title="Apollonian network" label="Apollonian network"/>
<link wikidata="Q105222412" start="27153" end="27171" title="Five color theorem" label="Five color theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q504843" start="27174" end="27188" title="Graph coloring" label="Graph coloring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612871" start="27191" end="27214" title="Grötzsch&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Grötzsch&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840044" start="27216" end="27229" title="triangle-free graph" label="triangle-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383936" start="27263" end="27286" title="Hadwiger–Nelson problem" label="Hadwiger–Nelson problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298493" start="27560" end="27572" title="MathOverflow" label="MathOverflow"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10951" wikidata="Q202009" url="?curid=10951" title="Fahrenheit 451">
<text>Fahrenheit 451 is a 1953 dystopian novel by American writer Ray Bradbury. It presents a future American society where books have been outlawed and &quot;firemen&quot; burn any that are found. The novel follows in the viewpoint of Guy Montag, a fireman who becomes disillusioned with his role of censoring literature and destroying knowledge, eventually quitting his job and committing himself to the preservation of literary and cultural writings.

&quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; was written by Bradbury during the Second Red Scare and the McCarthy era, inspired by the book burnings in Nazi Germany and by ideological repression in the Soviet Union. Bradbury&#x27;s claimed motivation for writing the novel has changed multiple times. In a 1956 radio interview, Bradbury said that he wrote the book because of his concerns about the threat of burning books in the United States. In later years, he described the book as a commentary on how mass media reduces interest in reading literature. In a 1994 interview, Bradbury cited political correctness as an allegory for the censorship in the book, calling it &quot;the real enemy these days&quot; and labeling it as &quot;thought control and freedom of speech control&quot;.

The writing and theme within &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; was explored by Bradbury in some of his previous short stories. Between 1947 and 1948, Bradbury wrote &quot;Bright Phoenix&quot;, a short story about a librarian who confronts a &quot;Chief Censor&quot;, who burns books. An encounter Bradbury had in 1949 with the police inspired him to write the short story &quot;The Pedestrian&quot; in 1951. In &quot;The Pedestrian&quot;, a man going for a nighttime walk in his neighborhood is harassed and detained by the police. In the society of &quot;The Pedestrian&quot;, citizens are expected to watch television as a leisurely activity, a detail that would be included in &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot;. Elements of both &quot;Bright Phoenix&quot; and &quot;The Pedestrian&quot; would be combined into &quot;The Fireman&quot;, a novella published in &quot;Galaxy Science Fiction&quot; in 1951. Bradbury was urged by Stanley Kauffmann, an editor at Ballantine Books, to make &quot;The Fireman&quot; into a full novel. Bradbury finished the manuscript for &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; in 1953, and the novel was published later that year.

Upon its release, &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; was a critical success, albeit with notable dissenters; the novel&#x27;s subject matter led to its censorship in apartheid South Africa and various schools in the United States. In 1954, &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; won the American Academy of Arts and Letters Award in Literature and the Commonwealth Club of California Gold Medal. It later won the Prometheus &quot;Hall of Fame&quot; Award in 1984 and a &quot;Retro&quot; Hugo Award in 2004. Bradbury was honored with a Spoken Word Grammy nomination for his 1976 audiobook version. The novel has been adapted into films, stage plays, and video games. Film adaptations of the novel include a 1966 film directed by François Truffaut starring Oskar Werner as Guy Montag and a 2018 television film directed by Ramin Bahrani starring Michael B. Jordan as Montag, both of which received a mixed critical reception. Bradbury himself published a stage play version in 1979 and helped develop a 1984 interactive fiction video game of the same name, as well as a collection of his short stories titled &quot;A Pleasure to Burn&quot;. Two BBC Radio dramatizations were also produced.

==Historical and biographical context==

The House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), formed in 1938 to investigate American citizens and organizations suspected of having communist ties, held hearings in 1947 to investigate alleged communist influence in Hollywood movie-making. The government&#x27;s interference in the affairs of artists and creative types infuriated Bradbury; he was concerned about the workings of his government, and a late 1949 nighttime encounter with an overzealous police officer would inspire Bradbury to write &quot;The Pedestrian&quot;, a short story which would go on to become &quot;The Fireman&quot; and then &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot;. The rise of Senator Joseph McCarthy&#x27;s McCarthyism persecution of accused communists, beginning in 1950, deepened Bradbury&#x27;s contempt for government overreach.

The Golden Age of Radio occurred between the early 1920s to the late 1950s, during Bradbury&#x27;s early life, while the transition to the Golden Age of Television began right around the time he started to work on the stories that would eventually lead to &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot;. Bradbury saw these forms of media as a threat to the reading of books, indeed as a threat to society, as he believed they could act as a distraction from important affairs. This contempt for mass media and technology would express itself through Mildred and her friends and is an important theme in the book.

Bradbury&#x27;s lifelong passion for books began at an early age. After he graduated from high school, his family could not afford for him to attend college, so Bradbury began spending time at the Los Angeles Public Library where he educated himself. As a frequent visitor to his local libraries in the 1920s and 1930s, he recalls being disappointed because they did not stock popular science fiction novels, like those of H. G. Wells, because, at the time, they were not deemed literary enough. Between this and learning about the destruction of the Library of Alexandria, a great impression was made on Bradbury about the vulnerability of books to censure and destruction. 

Later, as a teenager, Bradbury was horrified by the Nazi book burnings stating, &quot;When I was fifteen years old, Hitler burned books in the streets of Berlin. And it terrified me&quot;. Bradbury was also influenced by Joseph Stalin&#x27;s campaign of political repression, the Great Purge, in which writers and poets, among many others, were arrested and often executed, stating, &quot;They burned the authors instead of the books.&quot;

==Plot summary==
===&quot;The Hearth and the Salamander&quot;===
In a distant future, Guy Montag is a fireman employed to burn outlawed books, along with the houses they are hidden in. One fall night while returning from work, he meets his new neighbor Clarisse McClellan, whose free-thinking ideals and liberating spirit cause him to question his life and perceived happiness. Montag returns home to find that his wife Mildred has overdosed on sleeping pills, and he calls for medical attention. Two EMTs pump her stomach and change her blood. After they leave to rescue another overdose victim, Montag overhears Clarisse and her family talking about their illiterate society. Shortly afterward, Montag&#x27;s mind is bombarded with Clarisse&#x27;s subversive thoughts and the memory of Mildred&#x27;s near-death. Over the next few days, Clarisse meets Montag each night as he walks home. Clarisse&#x27;s simple pleasures and interests make her an outcast among her peers, and she is forced to go to therapy for her behavior. Montag looks forward to the meetings, but one day, Clarisse goes missing.

In the following days, while he and other firemen are ransacking the book-filled house of an old woman and drenching it in kerosene, Montag steals a book. The woman refuses to leave her house and her books, choosing instead to light a match and burn herself alive. Jarred by the suicide, Montag returns home and hides the book under his pillow. Montag asks Mildred if she has heard anything about Clarisse. She reveals that Clarisse&#x27;s family moved away after Clarisse was hit by a speeding car and died four days ago. Dismayed by her failure to mention this earlier, Montag uneasily tries to fall asleep. Outside he suspects the presence of &quot;The Mechanical Hound&quot;, an eight-legged robotic dog-like creature that resides in the firehouse and aids the firemen in hunting book hoarders.

Montag awakens ill the next morning. Mildred tries to care for her husband but finds herself more involved in the &quot;parlor wall&quot; entertainment in the living room – large televisions filling the walls. Montag suggests he should take a break from being a fireman, and Mildred panics over the thought of losing the house and her parlor wall &quot;family&quot;. Captain Beatty, Montag&#x27;s fire chief, visits Montag to see how he is doing. Sensing his concerns, Beatty recounts the history of how books had lost their value and how the firemen were adapted for their current role: over decades, people began to embrace new media (like film and television), sports, and an ever-quickening pace of life. Books were abridged or degraded to accommodate shorter attention spans. At the same time, advances in technology resulted in nearly all buildings being made with fireproof materials, and firemen preventing fires were no longer necessary. The government then instead turned the firemen into officers of society&#x27;s peace of mind: instead of putting out fires, they were charged with starting them, specifically to burn books, which were condemned as sources of confusing and depressing thoughts that complicated people&#x27;s lives. After an awkward exchange between Mildred and Montag over the book hidden under his pillow, Beatty becomes suspicious and casually adds a passing threat before leaving; he says that if a fireman had a book, he would be asked to burn it within the following twenty-four hours. If he refused, the other firemen would come and burn it for him. The encounter leaves Montag shaken.

Montag reveals to Mildred that, over the last year, he has accumulated books that are hidden in their ceiling. In a panic, Mildred grabs a book and rushes to throw it in the kitchen incinerator, but Montag subdues her and says they are going to read the books to see if they have value. If they do not, he promises the books will be burned and their lives will return to normal. 

===&quot;The Sieve and the Sand&quot;===
Mildred refuses to go along with Montag&#x27;s plan, questioning why she or anyone else should care about books. Montag goes on a rant about Mildred&#x27;s suicide attempt, Clarisse&#x27;s disappearance and death, the woman who burned herself, and the imminent war that goes ignored by the masses. He suggests that perhaps the books of the past have messages that can save society from its own destruction. Mildred remains unconvinced.

Conceding that Mildred is a lost cause, Montag needs help to understand the books. He remembers an old man named Faber, an English professor before books were banned, whom he once met in a park. Montag visits Faber&#x27;s home carrying a copy of the Bible, the book he stole at the woman&#x27;s house. Once there, after multiple attempts to ask, Montag forces the scared and reluctant Faber into helping him by methodically ripping pages from the Bible. Faber concedes and gives Montag a homemade earpiece communicator so that he can offer constant guidance.

At home, Mildred&#x27;s friends, Mrs. Bowles and Mrs. Phelps, arrive to watch the &quot;parlor walls&quot;. Not interested in this entertainment, Montag turns off the walls and tries to engage the women in meaningful conversation, only for them to reveal just how indifferent, ignorant, and callous they truly are. Enraged, Montag shows them a book of poetry. This confuses the women and alarms Faber, who is listening remotely. Mildred tries to dismiss Montag&#x27;s actions as a tradition firemen act out once a year: they find an old book and read it as a way to make fun of how silly the past is. Montag proceeds to recite a poem, causing Mrs. Phelps to cry. The two women leave.

Montag hides his books in the backyard before returning to the firehouse late at night. There, Montag hands Beatty a book to cover for the one he believes Beatty knows he stole the night before, which is tossed into the trash. Beatty reveals that, despite his disillusionment, he was once an enthusiastic reader. A fire alarm sounds and Beatty picks up the address from the dispatcher system. They drive in the fire truck to the unexpected destination: Montag&#x27;s house.

===&quot;Burning Bright&quot;===
Beatty orders Montag to destroy his house with a flamethrower, rather than the more powerful &quot;salamander&quot; that is usually used by the fire team, and tells him that his wife and her friends reported him. Montag watches as Mildred walks out of the house, too traumatized about losing her parlor wall &#x27;family&#x27; to even acknowledge her husband&#x27;s existence or the situation going on around her, and catches a taxi. Montag complies, destroying the home piece by piece, but Beatty discovers his earpiece and plans to hunt down Faber. Montag threatens Beatty with the flamethrower and, after Beatty taunts him, Montag burns Beatty alive. As Montag tries to escape the scene, the Mechanical Hound attacks him, managing to inject his leg with an anesthetic. He destroys the Hound with the flamethrower and limps away. While escaping, Montag concludes that Beatty wanted to die a long time ago, having goaded him and provided him with a weapon.

Montag runs towards Faber&#x27;s house. En route, he crosses a road as a car attempts to run him over, but he manages to evade the vehicle, almost suffering the same fate as Clarisse and losing his knee. Faber urges him to make his way to the countryside and contact a group of exiled book-lovers who live there. Faber plans to leave on a bus heading to St. Louis, Missouri, where he and Montag can rendezvous later. Meanwhile, another Mechanical Hound is released to track down and kill Montag, with news helicopters following it to create a public spectacle. After wiping his scent from around the house in hopes of thwarting the Hound, Montag leaves. He escapes the manhunt by wading into a river and floating downstream, where he meets the book-lovers. They predicted Montag&#x27;s arrival while watching the TV.

The drifters are all former intellectuals. They have each memorized books should the day arrive that society comes to an end, with the survivors learning to embrace the literature of the past. Wanting to contribute to the group, Montag finds that he partially memorized the Book of Ecclesiastes, discovering that the group has a special way of unlocking photographic memory. While discussing about their learnings, Montag and the group watch helplessly as bombers fly overhead and annihilate the city with nuclear weapons: the war has begun and ended in the same night. While Faber would have left on the early bus, everyone else (possibly including Mildred) is killed. Injured and dirtied, Montag and the group manage to survive the shockwave.

When the war is over, the exiles return to the city to rebuild society.

==Characters==
*Guy Montag is the protagonist and a fireman who presents the dystopian world in which he lives first through the eyes of a worker loyal to it, then as a man in conflict about it, and eventually as someone resolved to be free of it. Throughout most of the book, Montag lacks knowledge and believes only what he hears. Clarisse McClellan inspires Montag&#x27;s change, even though they do not know each other for very long.
*Clarisse McClellan is a teenage girl one month short of her 17th birthday who is Montag&#x27;s neighbor. She walks with Montag on his trips home from work. A modern critic has described her as an example of the Manic Pixie Dream Girl, as Clarisse is an unusual sort of person compared to the others inhabiting the bookless, hedonistic society: outgoing, naturally cheerful, unorthodox, and intuitive. She is unpopular among peers and disliked by teachers for asking &quot;why&quot; instead of &quot;how&quot; and focusing on nature rather than on technology. A few days after her first meeting with Montag, she disappears without any explanation; Mildred tells Montag (and Captain Beatty confirms) that Clarisse was hit by a speeding car and that her family moved away following her death. It is implied that Beatty may have assassinated Clarisse. In the afterword of a later edition, Bradbury notes that the 1966 film adaptation changed the ending so that Clarisse (who, in the film, is now a 20-year-old schoolteacher who was fired for being unorthodox) was living with the exiles. Bradbury, far from being displeased by this, was so happy with the new ending that he wrote it into his later stage edition.
*Mildred &quot;Millie&quot; Montag is Guy Montag&#x27;s wife. She is addicted to sleeping pills, absorbed in the shallow dramas played on her &quot;parlor walls&quot; (large, flat-panel televisions), and indifferent to the oppressive society around her. She is described in the book as &quot;thin as a praying mantis from dieting, her hair burnt by chemicals to a brittle straw, and her flesh like white bacon.&quot; Despite her husband&#x27;s attempts to break her from the spell society has on her, Mildred continues to be shallow and indifferent. After Montag scares her friends away by reading &quot;Dover Beach&quot;, and finding herself unable to live with someone who has been hoarding books, Mildred betrays Montag by reporting him to the firemen and abandoning him, and presumably dies when the city is bombed.
*Captain Beatty is Montag&#x27;s boss and the book&#x27;s main antagonist. Once an avid reader, he has come to hate books due to their unpleasant content and contradicting facts and opinions. After he forces Montag to burn his own house, Montag kills him with a flamethrower. In a scene written years later by Bradbury for the &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; play, Beatty invites Montag to his house where he shows him walls of books left to molder on their shelves.
*Stoneman and Black are Montag&#x27;s coworkers at the firehouse. They do not have a large impact on the story and function only to show the reader the contrast between the firemen who obediently do as they are told and someone like Montag, who formerly took pride in his job but subsequently realizes how damaging it is to society. Black is later framed by Montag for possessing books.
*Faber is a former English professor. He has spent years regretting that he did not defend books when he saw the moves to ban them. Montag turns to him for guidance, remembering him from a chance meeting in a park sometime earlier. Faber at first refuses to help Montag and later realizes Montag is only trying to learn about books, not destroy them. He secretly communicates with Montag through an electronic earpiece and helps Montag escape the city, then gets on a bus to St. Louis and escapes the city himself before it is bombed. Bradbury notes in his afterword that Faber is part of the name of a German manufacturer of pencils, Faber-Castell; it is also the name of a publishing company, Faber and Faber.
*Mrs. Ann Bowles and Mrs. Clara Phelps are Mildred&#x27;s friends and representative of the anti-intellectual, hedonistic mainstream society presented in the novel. During a social visit to Montag&#x27;s house, they brag about ignoring the bad things in their lives and have a cavalier attitude towards the upcoming war, their husbands, their children, and politics. Mrs. Phelps&#x27; husband Pete was called in to fight in the upcoming war (and believes that he will be back in a week because of how quick the war will be) and thinks having children serves no purpose other than to ruin lives. Mrs. Bowles is a three-times-married single mother. Her first husband divorced her, her second died in a jet accident, and her third committed suicide by shooting himself in the head. She has two children who do not like or respect her due to her permissive, often negligent and abusive parenting; Mrs. Bowles brags that her kids beat her up, and she&#x27;s glad she can hit back. When Montag reads &quot;Dover Beach&quot; to them, he strikes a chord in Mrs. Phelps, who starts crying over how hollow her life is. Mrs. Bowles chastises Montag for reading &quot;silly awful hurting words&quot;.
*Granger is the leader of a group of wandering intellectual exiles who memorize books in order to preserve their contents.

==Title ==

The title page of the book explains the title as follows: &quot;Fahrenheit 451—The temperature at which book paper catches fire and burns...&quot;. On inquiring about the temperature at which paper would catch fire, Bradbury had been told that was the autoignition temperature of paper. In various studies, scientists have placed the autoignition temperature at a range of temperatures between , depending on the type of paper.

==Writing and development==

&quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; developed out of a series of ideas Bradbury had visited in previously written stories. For many years, he tended to single out &quot;The Pedestrian&quot; in interviews and lectures as sort of a proto-&quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot;. In the preface of his 2006 anthology &quot;Match to Flame: The Fictional Paths to Fahrenheit 451&quot; he states that this is an oversimplification. The full genealogy of &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; given in &quot;Match to Flame&quot; is involved. The following covers the most salient aspects.

Between 1947 and 1948, Bradbury wrote the short story &quot;Bright Phoenix&quot; (not published until the May 1963 issue of &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;) about a librarian who confronts a book-burning &quot;Chief Censor&quot; named Jonathan Barnes.

In late 1949, Bradbury was stopped and questioned by a police officer while walking late one night. When asked &quot;What are you doing?&quot;, Bradbury wisecracked, &quot;Putting one foot in front of another.&quot; This incident inspired Bradbury to write the 1951 short story &quot;The Pedestrian&quot;.

In &quot;The Pedestrian&quot;, Leonard Mead is harassed and detained by the city&#x27;s only remotely operated police cruiser for taking nighttime walks, something that has become extremely rare in this future-based setting, as everybody else stays inside and watches television (&quot;viewing screens&quot;). Alone and without an alibi, Mead is taken to the &quot;Psychiatric Center for Research on Regressive Tendencies&quot; for his peculiar habit. &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; echoed this theme of an authoritarian society distracted by broadcast media.

Bradbury expanded the book-burning premise of &quot;Bright Phoenix&quot; and the totalitarian future of &quot;The Pedestrian&quot; into &quot;The Fireman&quot;, a novella published in the February 1951 issue of &quot;Galaxy Science Fiction&quot;. &quot;The Fireman&quot; was written in the basement of UCLA&#x27;s Powell Library on a typewriter that he rented for a fee of ten cents per half hour. The first draft was 25,000 words long and was completed in nine days.

Urged by a publisher at Ballantine Books to double the length of his story to make a novel, Bradbury returned to the same typing room and made the story 25,000 words longer, again taking nine days. The title &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; came to him on January 22. The final manuscript was ready in mid-August, 1953. The resulting novel, which some considered as a fix-up (despite being an expanded rewrite of one single novella), was published by Ballantine in 1953.

===Supplementary material===

Bradbury has supplemented the novel with various front and back matter, including a 1979 coda, a 1982 afterword, a 1993 foreword, and several introductions.

==Publication history==
The first U.S. printing was a paperback version from October 1953 by The Ballantine Publishing Group. Shortly after the paperback, a hardback version was released that included a special edition of 200 signed and numbered copies bound in asbestos. These were technically collections because the novel was published with two short stories, &quot;The Playground&quot; and &quot;And the Rock Cried Out&quot;, which have been omitted from later printings. A few months later, the novel was serialized in the March, April, and May 1954 issues of nascent &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine.

===Expurgation===

Starting in January 1967, &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; was subject to expurgation by its publisher, Ballantine Books, with the release of the &quot;Bal-Hi Edition&quot; aimed at high school students. Among the changes made by the publisher were the censorship of the words &quot;hell&quot;, &quot;damn&quot;, and &quot;abortion&quot;; the modification of seventy-five passages; and the changing of two incidents.

In the first incident, a drunk man is changed to a &quot;sick man&quot;, while the second involves cleaning fluff out of a human navel, which instead becomes &quot;cleaning ears&quot; in the other. For a while, both the censored and uncensored versions were available concurrently, but by 1973, Ballantine was publishing only the censored version. That continued until 1979, when it came to Bradbury&#x27;s attention:

In 1979, one of Bradbury&#x27;s friends showed him an expurgated copy of the book. Bradbury demanded that Ballantine Books withdraw that version and replace it with the original, and in 1980 the original version once again became available. In this reinstated work, in the Author&#x27;s Afterword, Bradbury relates to the reader that it is not uncommon for a publisher to expurgate an author&#x27;s work, but he asserts that he himself will not tolerate the practice of manuscript &quot;mutilation&quot;.

The &quot;Bal-Hi&quot; editions are now referred to by the publisher as the &quot;Revised Bal-Hi&quot; editions.

===Non-print publications===

An audiobook version read by Bradbury himself was released in 1976 and received a Spoken Word Grammy nomination. Another audiobook was released in 2005 narrated by Christopher Hurt. The e-book version was released in December 2011.

==Reception==

In 1954, &quot;Galaxy Science Fiction&quot; reviewer Groff Conklin placed the novel &quot;among the great works of the imagination written in English in the last decade or more.&quot; The &quot;Chicago Sunday Tribune&quot;&#x27;s August Derleth described the book as &quot;a savage and shockingly prophetic view of one possible future way of life&quot;, calling it &quot;compelling&quot; and praising Bradbury for his &quot;brilliant imagination&quot;. Over half a century later, Sam Weller wrote, &quot;upon its publication, &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; was hailed as a visionary work of social commentary.&quot; Today, &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; is still viewed as an important cautionary tale about conformity and the evils of government censorship.

When the novel was first published, there were those who did not find merit in the tale. Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas were less enthusiastic, faulting the book for being &quot;simply padded, occasionally with startlingly ingenious gimmickry, ... often with coruscating cascades of verbal brilliance [but] too often merely with words.&quot; Reviewing the book for &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot;, P. Schuyler Miller characterized the title piece as &quot;one of Bradbury&#x27;s bitter, almost hysterical diatribes,&quot; while praising its &quot;emotional drive and compelling, nagging detail.&quot; Similarly, &quot;The New York Times&quot; was unimpressed with the novel and further accused Bradbury of developing a &quot;virulent hatred for many aspects of present-day culture, namely, such monstrosities as radio, TV, most movies, amateur and professional sports, automobiles, and other similar aberrations which he feels debase the bright simplicity of the thinking man&#x27;s existence.&quot;

&quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; was number seven on the list of &quot;Top Check Outs OF ALL TIME&quot; by the New York Public Library

===Censorship/banning incidents===

In the years since its publication, &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; has occasionally been banned, censored, or redacted in some schools at the behest of parents or teaching staff either unaware of or indifferent to the inherent irony in such censorship. Notable incidents include:
*In Apartheid South Africa, the book was burned along with thousands of banned publications between the 1950s and 1970s.
*In 1987, &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; was given &quot;third tier&quot; status by the Bay County School Board in Panama City, Florida, under superintendent Leonard Hall&#x27;s new three-tier classification system. Third tier was meant for books to be removed from the classroom for &quot;a lot of vulgarity&quot;. After a resident class-action lawsuit, a media stir, and student protests, the school board abandoned their tier-based censorship system and approved all the currently used books.
*In 1992, Venado Middle School in Irvine, California, gave copies of &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; to students with all &quot;obscene&quot; words blacked out. Parents contacted the local media and succeeded in reinstalling the uncensored copies.
*In 2006, parents of a 10th-grade high school student in Montgomery County, Texas, demanded the book be banned from their daughter&#x27;s English class reading list. Their daughter was assigned the book during Banned Books Week, but stopped reading several pages in due to what she considered the offensive language and description of the burning of the Bible. In addition, the parents protested the violence, portrayal of Christians, and depictions of firemen in the novel.

==Themes==

Discussions about &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; often center on its story foremost as a warning against state-based censorship. Indeed, when Bradbury wrote the novel during the McCarthy era, he was concerned about censorship in the United States. During a radio interview in 1956, Bradbury said

I wrote this book at a time when I was worried about the way things were going in this country four years ago. Too many people were afraid of their shadows; there was a threat of book burning. Many of the books were being taken off the shelves at that time. And of course, things have changed a lot in four years. Things are going back in a very healthy direction. But at the time I wanted to do some sort of story where I could comment on what would happen to a country if we let ourselves go too far in this direction, where then all thinking stops, and the dragon swallows his tail, and we sort of vanish into a limbo and we destroy ourselves by this sort of action.

As time went by, Bradbury tended to dismiss censorship as a chief motivating factor for writing the story. Instead he usually claimed that the real messages of &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; were about the dangers of an illiterate society infatuated with mass media and the threat of minority and special interest groups to books. In the late 1950s, Bradbury recounted

In writing the short novel &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot;, I thought I was describing a world that might evolve in four or five decades. But only a few weeks ago, in Beverly Hills one night, a husband and wife passed me, walking their dog. I stood staring after them, absolutely stunned. The woman held in one hand a small cigarette-package-sized radio, its antenna quivering. From this sprang tiny copper wires which ended in a dainty cone plugged into her right ear. There she was, oblivious to man and dog, listening to far winds and whispers and soap-opera cries, sleep-walking, helped up and down curbs by a husband who might just as well not have been there. This was &quot;not&quot; fiction.

This story echoes Mildred&#x27;s &quot;Seashell ear-thimbles&quot; (i.e., a brand of in-ear headphones) that act as an emotional barrier between her and Montag. In a 2007 interview, Bradbury maintained that people misinterpret his book and that &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; is really a statement on how mass media like television marginalizes the reading of literature. Regarding minorities, he wrote in his 1979 Coda

&#x27;There is more than one way to burn a book. And the world is full of people running about with lit matches. Every minority, be it Baptist/Unitarian, Irish/Italian/Octogenarian/Zen Buddhist, Zionist/Seventh-day Adventist, Women&#x27;s Lib/Republican, Mattachine/Four Square Gospel feels it has the will, the right, the duty to douse the kerosene, light the fuse. [...] Fire-Captain Beatty, in my novel &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot;, described how the books were burned first by minorities, each ripping a page or a paragraph from this book, then that, until the day came when the books were empty and the minds shut and the libraries closed forever. [...] Only six weeks ago, I discovered that, over the years, some cubby-hole editors at Ballantine Books, fearful of contaminating the young, had, bit by bit, censored some seventy-five separate sections from the novel. Students, reading the novel, which, after all, deals with censorship and book-burning in the future, wrote to tell me of this exquisite irony. Judy-Lynn del Rey, one of the new Ballantine editors, is having the entire book reset and republished this summer with all the damns and hells back in place.

Book-burning censorship, Bradbury would argue, was a side-effect of these two primary factors; this is consistent with Captain Beatty&#x27;s speech to Montag about the history of the firemen. According to Bradbury, it is the people, not the state, who are the culprit in &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot;. Fahrenheit&#x27;s censorship is not the result of an authoritarian program to retain power, but the result of a fragmented society seeking to accommodate its challenges by deploying the power of entertainment and technology. As Captain Beatty explains (p. 55)

...The bigger your market, Montag, the less you handle controversy, remember that! All the minor minorities with their navels to be kept clean.&quot;[...] &quot;It didn&#x27;t come from the Government down. There was no dictum, no declaration, no censorship, to start with, no! Technology, mass exploitation, and minority pressure carried the trick, thank God.

A variety of other themes in the novel besides censorship have been suggested. Two major themes are resistance to conformity and control of individuals via technology and mass media. Bradbury explores how the government is able to use mass media to influence society and suppress individualism through book burning. The characters Beatty and Faber point out that the American population is to blame. Due to their constant desire for a simplistic, positive image, books must be suppressed. Beatty blames the minority groups, who would take offense to published works that displayed them in an unfavorable light. Faber went further to state that, rather than the government banning books, the American population simply stopped reading on their own. He notes that the book burnings themselves became a form of entertainment for the general public.

In a 1994 interview, Bradbury stated that &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; was more relevant during this time than in any other, stating that, &quot;it works even better because we have political correctness now. Political correctness is the real enemy these days. The black groups want to control our thinking and you can&#x27;t say certain things. The homosexual groups don&#x27;t want you to criticize them. It&#x27;s thought control and freedom of speech control.&quot;

==Predictions for the future==

&quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; is set in an unspecified city and time, though it is written as if set in a distant future. The earliest editions make clear that it takes place no earlier than the year 2022 due to a reference to an atomic war taking place during that year.

Bradbury described himself as &quot;a &quot;preventer&quot; of futures, not a predictor of them.&quot; He did not believe that book burning was an inevitable part of the future; he wanted to warn against its development. In a later interview, when asked if he believes that teaching &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; in schools will prevent his totalitarian vision of the future, Bradbury replied in the negative. Rather, he states that education must be at the kindergarten and first-grade level. If students are unable to read then, they will be unable to read &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot;.

As to technology, Sam Weller notes that Bradbury &quot;predicted everything from flat-panel televisions to earbud headphones and twenty-four-hour banking machines.&quot;

==Adaptations==
===Television===

&quot;Playhouse 90&quot; broadcast &quot;A Sound of Different Drummers&quot; on CBS in 1957, written by Robert Alan Aurthur. The play combined plot ideas from &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; and &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;. Bradbury sued and eventually won on appeal.

===Film===
A film adaptation written and directed by François Truffaut and starring Oskar Werner and Julie Christie was released in 1966.

A film adaptation directed by Ramin Bahrani and starring Michael B. Jordan, Michael Shannon, Sofia Boutella, and Lilly Singh was released in 2018 for HBO.

===Theater===

In the late 1970s Bradbury adapted his book into a play. At least part of it was performed at the Colony Theatre in Los Angeles in 1979, but it was not in print until 1986 and the official world premiere was only in November 1988 by the Fort Wayne, Indiana Civic Theatre. The stage adaptation diverges considerably from the book and seems influenced by Truffaut&#x27;s movie. For example, fire chief Beatty&#x27;s character is fleshed out and is the wordiest role in the play. As in the movie, Clarisse does not simply disappear but in the finale meets up with Montag as a book character (she as Robert Louis Stevenson, he as Edgar Allan Poe).

The UK premiere of Bradbury&#x27;s stage adaptation was not until 2003 in Nottingham, while it took until 2006 before the Godlight Theatre Company produced and performed its New York City premiere at 59E59 Theaters. After the completion of the New York run, the production then transferred to the Edinburgh Festival where it was a 2006 Edinburgh Festival &quot;Pick of the Fringe&quot;.

The Off-Broadway theatre The American Place Theatre presented a one man show adaptation of &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; as a part of their 2008–2009 Literature to Life season.

&quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot; inspired the Birmingham Repertory Theatre production &quot;Time Has Fallen Asleep in the Afternoon Sunshine&quot;, which was performed at the Birmingham Central Library in April 2012.

===Radio===
In 1982, Gregory Evans&#x27; radio dramatization of the novel was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 starring Michael Pennington as Montag. It was broadcast eight more times on BBC Radio 4 Extra, twice each in 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2015.

BBC Radio&#x27;s second dramatization, by David Calcutt, was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in 2003, starring Stephen Tomlin in the same role.

===Music===
In 1984 the new wave band &quot;Scortilla&quot; released the song Fahrenheit 451 inspired by the book by R. Bradbury and the film by F. Truffaut.

===Computer games===

In 1984, the novel was adapted into a computer text adventure game of the same name by the software company Trillium, serving as a sequel to the events of the novel, and co-written by Len Neufeld and Bradbury himself.

===Comics===

In June 2009, a graphic novel edition of the book was published. Entitled &quot;Ray Bradbury&#x27;s Fahrenheit 451: The Authorized Adaptation&quot;, the paperback graphic adaptation was illustrated by Tim Hamilton. The introduction in the novel is written by Bradbury himself.

==Cultural references==
Michael Moore&#x27;s 2004 documentary &quot;Fahrenheit 9/11&quot; refers to Bradbury&#x27;s novel and the September 11 attacks, emphasized by the film&#x27;s tagline &quot;The temperature where freedom burns&quot;. The film takes a critical look at the presidency of George W. Bush, the War on Terror, and its coverage in the news media, and became the highest grossing documentary of all time. Bradbury was upset by what he considered the appropriation of his title, and wanted the film renamed. He really didn&#x27;t want to be associated in any way. Moore filmed a subsequent documentary about the election of Donald Trump called &quot;Fahrenheit 11/9&quot; in 2018, but compared to the earlier documentary, there was a complete shift in interest by the general audience.

In 2015, the Internet Engineering Steering Group approved the publication of &quot;An HTTP Status Code to Report Legal Obstacles&quot;, now &quot;RFC 7725&quot;, which specifies that websites forced to block resources for legal reasons should return a status code of 451 when users request those resources.

Guy Montag (as Gui Montag) is used in the 1998 real-time strategy game &quot;StarCraft&quot; as a terran firebat hero.
==See also==
* 1953 in science fiction
* Brain rot
* &quot;Brave New World&quot;
* Burning of books and burying of scholars
* Dead Internet theory
* Dystopia
* Enshittification
* Firefighter arson
* &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;
* Radio homogenization

==Notes==
==References==
Jerrin, Neil Beeto, and G. Bhuvaneswari. &quot;Distortion of &#x27;Self-Image&#x27;: Effects of Mental Delirium in Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury.&quot; Theory &amp; Practice in Language Studies, vol. 12, no. 8, Aug. 2022, pp. 1634–40. EBSCOhost, Distortion of ‘Self-Image’: Effects of Mental Delirium in Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q358998" start="25" end="34" title="Utopian and dystopian fiction" label="dystopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="35" end="40" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="60" end="72" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="118" end="122" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q22702" start="167" end="190" title="Book burning" label="burn any that are found"/>
<link wikidata="Q581138" start="230" end="240" title="Guy Montag" label="Guy Montag"/>
<link wikidata="Q830393" start="400" end="412" title="Preservation (library and archive)" label="preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="416" end="424" title="Literature" label="literary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="429" end="437" title="Culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="511" end="527" title="Second Red Scare" label="Second Red Scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="536" end="548" title="McCarthy era" label="McCarthy era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927614" start="566" end="595" title="book burnings in Nazi Germany" label="book burnings in Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988496" start="603" end="645" title="ideological repression in the Soviet Union" label="ideological repression in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028541" start="840" end="874" title="Censorship in the United States" label="burning books in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="937" end="947" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="1024" end="1045" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="1167" end="1182" title="thought control" label="thought control"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="1187" end="1204" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145481" start="1592" end="1606" title="The Pedestrian" label="The Pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="2047" end="2054" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="2074" end="2096" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599719" start="2134" end="2151" title="Stanley Kauffmann" label="Stanley Kauffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881141" start="2166" end="2182" title="Ballantine Books" label="Ballantine Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2512" end="2521" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2522" end="2534" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="2621" end="2657" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153714" start="2686" end="2717" title="Commonwealth Club of California" label="Commonwealth Club of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q142392" start="2747" end="2788" title="Prometheus Award" label="Prometheus &amp;quot;Hall of Fame&amp;quot; Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2803" end="2831" title="Hugo Awards#Retro-Hugos" label="&amp;quot;Retro&amp;quot; Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593890" start="2869" end="2880" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album" label="Spoken Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525886" start="2881" end="2898" title="19th Annual Grammy Awards" label="Grammy nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="2912" end="2921" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="2970" end="2981" title="Play (theatre)" label="stage plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="2987" end="2997" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q261546" start="3040" end="3049" title="Fahrenheit 451 (1966 film)" label="1966 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q53002" start="3062" end="3079" title="François Truffaut" label="François Truffaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q84489" start="3089" end="3101" title="Oskar Werner" label="Oskar Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q39069893" start="3122" end="3142" title="Fahrenheit 451 (2018 film)" label="2018 television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418487" start="3155" end="3168" title="Ramin Bahrani" label="Ramin Bahrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308007" start="3178" end="3195" title="Michael B. Jordan" label="Michael B. Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="3340" end="3359" title="interactive fiction" label="interactive fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392326" start="3360" end="3387" title="Fahrenheit 451 (video game)" label="video game of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="3420" end="3433" title="Short story" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658926" start="3447" end="3465" title="A Pleasure to Burn" label="A Pleasure to Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="3477" end="3486" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="3487" end="3492" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="3568" end="3606" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145481" start="4074" end="4088" title="The Pedestrian" label="The Pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="4219" end="4234" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="4242" end="4253" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353903" start="4373" end="4392" title="Golden Age of Radio" label="Golden Age of Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579123" start="4508" end="4532" title="Golden Age of Television" label="Golden Age of Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="4844" end="4854" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817385" start="5160" end="5186" title="Los Angeles Public Library" label="Los Angeles Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="5386" end="5397" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="5514" end="5535" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927614" start="5692" end="5710" title="Nazi book burnings" label="Nazi book burnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="5861" end="5874" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="5920" end="5931" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q581138" start="6168" end="6178" title="Guy Montag" label="Guy Montag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497094" start="6583" end="6587" title="Emergency medical technician" label="EMTs"/>
<link wikidata="Q621076" start="7429" end="7447" title="self-immolation" label="burn herself alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115119" start="8748" end="8762" title="attention span" label="attention span"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="10715" end="10720" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q45183" start="12267" end="12279" title="flamethrower" label="flamethrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q214719" start="13462" end="13473" title="Bibliophiles" label="book-lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="13531" end="13540" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="13542" end="13550" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q131072" start="14269" end="14289" title="Ecclesiastes" label="Book of Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="14729" end="14738" title="Shock wave" label="shockwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q581138" start="14830" end="14840" title="Guy Montag" label="Guy Montag"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="14848" end="14859" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q958161" start="15464" end="15486" title="Manic Pixie Dream Girl" label="Manic Pixie Dream Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q261546" start="16162" end="16182" title="Fahrenheit 451 (1966 film)" label="1966 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131250" start="16764" end="16778" title="praying mantis" label="praying mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="17345" end="17355" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="18606" end="18615" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q455476" start="18766" end="18779" title="Faber-Castell" label="Faber-Castell"/>
<link wikidata="Q898097" start="18826" end="18841" title="Faber and Faber" label="Faber and Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302469" start="19843" end="19854" title="Dover Beach" label="Dover Beach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20420" end="20444" title="Autoignition temperature#Autoignition point of selected substances" label="autoignition temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="21306" end="21351" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q468947" start="22093" end="22098" title="alibi" label="alibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="22265" end="22278" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="22301" end="22316" title="broadcast media" label="broadcast media"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="22400" end="22412" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="22482" end="22489" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="22536" end="22558" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="22621" end="22625" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405663" start="22633" end="22647" title="Powell Library" label="Powell Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881141" start="22812" end="22828" title="Ballantine Books" label="Ballantine Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456296" start="23150" end="23156" title="fix-up" label="fix-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q686831" start="23333" end="23338" title="Front matter" label="front"/>
<link wikidata="Q686831" start="23343" end="23354" title="back matter" label="back matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q677297" start="23386" end="23395" title="afterword" label="afterword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358138" start="23404" end="23412" title="foreword" label="foreword"/>
<link wikidata="Q305178" start="23426" end="23439" title="introduction (essay)" label="introductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="23704" end="23712" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="24021" end="24028" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421766" start="24133" end="24144" title="expurgation" label="expurgation"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="24312" end="24322" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24585" end="24590" title="Lint (material)#Navel lint" label="fluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q43801" start="24606" end="24611" title="navel" label="navel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593890" start="25628" end="25639" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album" label="Spoken Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525886" start="25640" end="25657" title="19th Annual Grammy Awards" label="Grammy nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="25732" end="25738" title="e-book" label="e-book"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610108" start="25847" end="25860" title="Groff Conklin" label="Groff Conklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="25988" end="26010" title="Chicago Sunday Tribune" label="Chicago Sunday Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q509002" start="26024" end="26038" title="August Derleth" label="August Derleth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408317" start="26274" end="26284" title="Sam Weller (journalist)" label="Sam Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054705" start="26472" end="26487" title="cautionary tale" label="cautionary tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="26494" end="26504" title="conformity" label="conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q246303" start="26635" end="26650" title="Anthony Boucher" label="Anthony Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923872" start="26655" end="26673" title="J. Francis McComas" label="J. Francis McComas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="26925" end="26951" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900938" start="26959" end="26977" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="27667" end="27690" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="28008" end="28017" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="28018" end="28030" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873985" start="28209" end="28232" title="Bay District Schools" label="Bay County School Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q852591" start="28236" end="28247" title="Panama City, Florida" label="Panama City"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="28249" end="28256" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q8560658" start="28627" end="28647" title="Venado Middle School" label="Venado Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="28651" end="28657" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="28659" end="28669" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q26756" start="28917" end="28934" title="Montgomery County, Texas" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="28936" end="28941" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q647183" start="29070" end="29087" title="Banned Books Week" label="Banned Books Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="29214" end="29219" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028541" start="29559" end="29590" title="censorship in the United States" label="censorship in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="30840" end="30853" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637438" start="32046" end="32056" title="Mattachine" label="Mattachine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163218" start="32057" end="32075" title="Four Square Gospel" label="Four Square Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304303" start="32805" end="32822" title="Judy-Lynn del Rey" label="Judy-Lynn del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="34913" end="34934" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="35148" end="35163" title="thought control" label="thought control"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="35168" end="35185" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248532" start="36300" end="36312" title="Playhouse 90" label="Playhouse 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="36374" end="36377" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519933" start="36398" end="36417" title="Robert Alan Aurthur" label="Robert Alan Aurthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="36490" end="36510" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q261546" start="36576" end="36591" title="Fahrenheit 451 (1966 film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53002" start="36616" end="36633" title="François Truffaut" label="François Truffaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q84489" start="36647" end="36659" title="Oskar Werner" label="Oskar Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q181413" start="36664" end="36678" title="Julie Christie" label="Julie Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q39069893" start="36704" end="36719" title="Fahrenheit 451 (2018 film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418487" start="36732" end="36745" title="Ramin Bahrani" label="Ramin Bahrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308007" start="36759" end="36776" title="Michael B. Jordan" label="Michael B. Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41449" start="36778" end="36793" title="Michael Shannon" label="Michael Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q258777" start="36795" end="36809" title="Sofia Boutella" label="Sofia Boutella"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403226" start="36815" end="36826" title="Lilly Singh" label="Lilly Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="36852" end="36855" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="36989" end="37000" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q49268" start="37110" end="37143" title="Fort Wayne, Indiana" label="Fort Wayne, Indiana Civic Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="37469" end="37491" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="37499" end="37514" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="37592" end="37602" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="37692" end="37705" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640970" start="37718" end="37732" title="59E59 Theaters" label="59E59 Theaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q829363" start="37815" end="37833" title="Edinburgh Festival" label="Edinburgh Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="37910" end="37922" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q130375231" start="37931" end="37957" title="The American Place Theatre" label="The American Place Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319401" start="37970" end="37982" title="one man show" label="one man show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916786" start="38121" end="38149" title="Birmingham Repertory Theatre" label="Birmingham Repertory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640335" start="38250" end="38276" title="Birmingham Central Library" label="Birmingham Central Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210823" start="38314" end="38327" title="Gregory Evans (dramatist)" label="Gregory Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="38384" end="38395" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176702" start="38405" end="38423" title="Michael Pennington" label="Michael Pennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q795579" start="38472" end="38489" title="BBC Radio 4 Extra" label="BBC Radio 4 Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912360" start="38638" end="38652" title="Stephen Tomlin" label="Stephen Tomlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="38696" end="38704" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="38900" end="38914" title="text adventure" label="text adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392326" start="38915" end="38936" title="Fahrenheit 451 (video game)" label="game of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401222" start="38961" end="38969" title="Telarium" label="Trillium"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="38984" end="38990" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="39102" end="39115" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="39388" end="39401" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q221852" start="39432" end="39447" title="Fahrenheit 9/11" label="Fahrenheit 9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="39494" end="39514" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="39655" end="39669" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="39675" end="39688" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="39989" end="40013" title="election of Donald Trump" label="election of Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q30000531" start="40027" end="40042" title="Fahrenheit 11/9" label="Fahrenheit 11/9"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="40177" end="40212" title="Internet Engineering Steering Group" label="Internet Engineering Steering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123288" start="40416" end="40427" title="list of HTTP status codes" label="status code"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055519" start="40431" end="40434" title="HTTP 451" label="451"/>
<link wikidata="Q165929" start="40549" end="40558" title="StarCraft (video game)" label="StarCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16023664" start="40606" end="40629" title="1953 in science fiction" label="1953 in science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q129981458" start="40632" end="40641" title="Brain rot" label="Brain rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="40650" end="40665" title="Brave New World" label="Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147887" start="40674" end="40714" title="Burning of books and burying of scholars" label="Burning of books and burying of scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q108370415" start="40717" end="40737" title="Dead Internet theory" label="Dead Internet theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="40740" end="40748" title="Dystopia" label="Dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122584861" start="40751" end="40767" title="Enshittification" label="Enshittification"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895267" start="40770" end="40787" title="Firefighter arson" label="Firefighter arson"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="40796" end="40816" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963102" start="40825" end="40845" title="Radio homogenization" label="Radio homogenization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10957" wikidata="Q163900" url="?curid=10957" title="Francis Xavier">
<text>Francis Xavier, SJ (born Francisco de Jasso y Azpilicueta; ; ; ; ; ; 7 April 15063 December 1552), venerated as Saint Francis Xavier, was a Spanish cleric. He was a Catholic missionary and saint who co-founded the Society of Jesus and, as a representative of the Portuguese Empire, led the first Christian mission to Japan.

Born in the town of Xavier, Kingdom of Navarre, he was a companion of Ignatius of Loyola and one of the first seven Jesuits who took vows of poverty and chastity at Montmartre, Paris in 1534. He led an extensive mission into Asia, mainly the Portuguese Empire in the East, and was influential in evangelization work, most notably in early modern India. He was extensively involved in the missionary activity in Portuguese India. In 1546, Francis Xavier proposed the establishment of the Goan Inquisition in a letter addressed to King John III of Portugal. While some sources claim that he actually asked for a special minister whose sole office would be to further Christianity in Goa, others disagree with this assertion. As a representative of the king of Portugal, he was also the first major Christian missionary to venture into Borneo, the Maluku Islands, Japan, and other areas. In those areas, struggling to learn the local languages and in the face of opposition, he had less success than he had enjoyed in India. Xavier was about to extend his mission to Ming China, when he died on Shangchuan Island.

He was beatified by Pope Paul V on 25 October 1619 and canonized by Pope Gregory XV on 12 March 1622. In 1624, he was made co-patron of Navarre. Known as the &quot;Apostle of the Indies&quot;, &quot;Apostle of the Far East&quot;, &quot;Apostle of China&quot; and &quot;Apostle of Japan&quot;, he is considered to be one of the greatest missionaries since Paul the Apostle. In 1927, Pope Pius XI published the decree &quot;Apostolicorum in Missionibus&quot; naming Francis Xavier, along with Thérèse of Lisieux, co-patron of all foreign missions. He is now co-patron saint of Navarre, with Fermin. The Day of Navarre in Navarre, Spain, marks the anniversary of Francis Xavier&#x27;s death, on 3 December.

==Early life==

Francis Xavier was born in the Castle of Xavier, in the Kingdom of Navarre, on 7 April 1506 into an influential noble family. He was the youngest son of Don Juan de Jasso y Atondo, Lord of Idocín, president of the Royal Council of the Kingdom of Navarre, and seneschal of the Castle of Xavier (a doctor in law by the University of Bologna, belonging to a prosperous noble family of Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port, later privy counsellor and finance minister to King John III of Navarre) and Doña María de Azpilcueta y Aznárez, sole heiress to the Castle of Xavier (related to the theologian and philosopher Martín de Azpilcueta). His brother Miguel de Jasso (later known as Miguel de Javier) became Lord of Xavier and Idocín at the death of his parents (a direct ancestor of the Counts of Javier). Basque and Romance were his two mother tongues.

In 1512, Ferdinand, King of Aragon and regent of Castile, invaded Navarre, initiating a war that lasted over 18 years. Three years later, Francis&#x27;s father died when Francis was only nine years old. In 1516, Francis&#x27;s brothers participated in a failed Navarrese-French attempt to expel the Spanish invaders from the kingdom. The Spanish Governor, Cardinal Cisneros, confiscated the family lands, demolished the outer wall, the gates, and two towers of the family castle, and filled in the moat. In addition, the height of the keep was reduced by half. Only the family residence inside the castle was left. In 1522, one of Francis&#x27;s brothers participated with 200 Navarrese nobles in dogged but failed resistance against the Castilian Count of Miranda in Amaiur, Baztan, the last Navarrese territorial position south of the Pyrenees.

In 1525, Francis went to study in Paris at the Collège Sainte-Barbe, University of Paris, where he spent the next eleven years. In the early days he acquired some reputation as an athlete and a high-jumper.

In 1529, Francis shared lodgings with his friend Pierre Favre. A new student, Ignatius of Loyola, came to room with them. At 38, Ignatius was much older than Pierre and Francis, who were both 23 at the time. Ignatius convinced Pierre to become a priest, but was unable to convince Francis, who had aspirations of worldly advancement. At first, Francis regarded the new lodger as a joke and was sarcastic about his efforts to convert students. When Pierre left their lodgings to visit his family and Ignatius was alone with Francis, he was able to slowly break down Francis&#x27;s resistance. According to most biographies Ignatius is said to have posed the question: &quot;What will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?&quot; However, according to James Broderick such method is not characteristic of Ignatius and there is no evidence that he employed it at all.

In 1530, Francis received the degree of Master of Arts, and afterwards taught Aristotelian philosophy at the Collège de Beauvais, University of Paris.

==Missionary work==

On 15 August 1534, seven students met in a crypt beneath the Church of Saint Denis (now Saint Pierre de Montmartre), on the hill of Montmartre, overlooking Paris. They were Francis, Ignatius of Loyola, Alfonso Salmeron, Diego Laínez, Nicolás Bobadilla from Spain, Peter Faber from Savoy, and Simão Rodrigues from Portugal. They made private vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience to the Pope, and also vowed to go to the Holy Land to convert infidels. Francis began his study of theology in 1534 and was ordained on 24 June 1537.

In 1539, after long discussions, Ignatius drew up a formula for a new religious order, the Society of Jesus (the Jesuits). Ignatius&#x27;s plan for the order was approved by Pope Paul III in 1540.

In 1540, King John III of Portugal had Pedro Mascarenhas, Portuguese ambassador to the Holy See, request Jesuit missionaries to spread the faith in his new possessions in India, where the king believed that Christian values were eroding among the Portuguese. After successive appeals to the Pope asking for missionaries for the East Indies under the Padroado agreement, John III was encouraged by Diogo de Gouveia, rector of the Collège Sainte-Barbe, to recruit the newly graduated students who had established the Society of Jesus.
Ignatius promptly appointed Nicholas Bobadilla and Simão Rodrigues. At the last moment, however, Bobadilla became seriously ill. With some hesitance and uneasiness, Ignatius asked Francis to go in Bobadilla&#x27;s place. Thus, Francis Xavier began his life as the first Jesuit missionary almost accidentally.

Leaving Rome on 15 March 1540, in the Ambassador&#x27;s train, Francis took with him a breviary, a catechism, and (Instructions for a Virtuous Life According to the Examples of the Saints) by Croatian humanist Marko Marulić, a Latin book that had become popular in the Counter-Reformation. According to a 1549 letter of F. Balthasar Gago from Goa, it was the only book that Francis read or studied. Francis reached Lisbon in June 1540 and, four days after his arrival, he and Rodrigues were summoned to a private audience with King John and Queen Catherine.

Francis Xavier devoted much of his life to missions in Asia, mainly in four centres: Malacca, Amboina and Ternate (in the Maluku Islands of Indonesia), Japan, and off-shore China. His growing information about new places indicated to him that he had to go to what he understood were centres of influence for the whole region. China loomed large from his days in India. Japan was particularly attractive because of its culture. For him, these areas were interconnected; they could not be evangelised separately.

===Goa and India===

Francis Xavier left Lisbon on 7 April 1541, his thirty-fifth birthday, along with two other Jesuits and the new viceroy Martim Afonso de Sousa, on board the &quot;Santiago&quot;. As he departed, Francis was given a brief from the pope appointing him apostolic nuncio to the East. From August until March 1542 he remained in Portuguese Mozambique, and arrived in Goa, then the capital of Portuguese India, on 6 May 1542, thirteen months after leaving Lisbon.

The Portuguese, following quickly on the great voyages of discovery, had established themselves at Goa thirty years earlier. Francis&#x27;s primary mission, as ordered by King John III, was to restore Christianity among the Portuguese settlers. According to Teotonio R. DeSouza, recent critical accounts indicate that apart from the posted civil servants, &quot;the great majority of those who were dispatched as &#x27;discoverers&#x27; were the riff-raff of Portuguese society, picked up from Portuguese jails.&quot; Nor did the soldiers, sailors, or merchants come to do missionary work, and Imperial policy permitted the outflow of disaffected nobility. Many of the arrivals formed liaisons with local women and adopted Indian culture. Missionaries often wrote against the &quot;scandalous and undisciplined&quot; behaviour of their fellow Christians.

The Christian population had churches, clergy, and a bishop, but there were few preachers and no priests beyond the walls of Goa. Xavier decided that he must begin by instructing the Portuguese themselves, and gave much of his time to the teaching of children. The first five months he spent in preaching and ministering to the sick in the hospitals. After that, he walked through the streets ringing a bell to summon the children and servants to catechism. He was invited to head Saint Paul&#x27;s College, a pioneer seminary for the education of secular priests, which became the first Jesuit headquarters in Asia.

Conversion efforts

Xavier soon learned that along the Pearl Fishery Coast, which extends from Cape Comorin on the southern tip of India to the island of Mannar, off Ceylon (Sri Lanka), there was a Jāti of people called Paravas. Many of them had been baptised ten years before, merely to please the Portuguese who had helped them against the Moors, but remained uninstructed in the faith. Accompanied by several native clerics from the seminary at Goa, he set sail for Cape Comorin in October 1542. He taught those who had already been baptised and preached to those who weren&#x27;t. His efforts with the high-caste Brahmins remained unavailing. The Brahmin and Muslim authorities in Travancore opposed Xavier with violence; time and again his hut was burned down over his head, and once he saved his life only by hiding among the branches of a large tree.

He devoted almost three years to the work of preaching to the people of southern India and Ceylon, converting many. He built nearly 40 churches along the coast, including St. Stephen&#x27;s Church, Kombuthurai, mentioned in his letters dated 1544.

During this time, he was able to visit the tomb of Thomas the Apostle in Mylapore (now part of Madras/Chennai then in Portuguese India). He set his sights eastward in 1545 and planned a missionary journey to Makassar on the island of Celebes (today&#x27;s Indonesia).

As the first Jesuit in India, Francis had difficulty achieving much success in his missionary trips. His successors, such as Roberto de Nobili, Matteo Ricci, and Constanzo Beschi, attempted to convert the noblemen first as a means to influence more people, while Francis had initially interacted most with the lower classes; (later though, in Japan, Francis changed tack by paying tribute to the Emperor and seeking an audience with him).
===Southeast Asia===

In the spring of 1545, Xavier started for Portuguese Malacca. He laboured there for the last months of that year. About January 1546, Xavier left Malacca for the Maluku Islands, where the Portuguese had some settlements. For a year and a half, he preached the Gospel there. He went first to Ambon Island, where he stayed until mid-June. He then visited the other Maluku Islands, including Ternate, Baranura, and Morotai. Shortly after Easter 1547, he returned to Ambon Island; a few months later he returned to Malacca. While there, Malacca was attacked by the Acehnese from Sumatra, and through preaching Xavier inspired the Portuguese to seek battle, achieving a victory at the Battle of Perlis River, despite being heavily outnumbered.

===Japan===
In Malacca in December 1547, Francis Xavier met a Japanese man named Anjirō. Anjirō had heard of Francis in 1545 and had travelled from Kagoshima to Malacca to meet him. Having been charged with murder, Anjirō had fled Japan. He told Francis extensively about his former life, and the customs and culture of his homeland. Anjirō became the first Japanese Christian and adopted the name &#x27;Paulo de Santa Fe&#x27;. He later helped Xavier as a mediator and interpreter for the mission to Japan that now seemed much more possible.

In January 1548 Francis returned to Goa to attend to his responsibilities as superior of the mission there. The next 15 months were occupied with various journeys and administrative measures. He left Goa on 15 April 1549, stopped at Malacca, and visited Canton. He was accompanied by Anjirō, two other Japanese men, Father Cosme de Torres and Brother Juan Fernández. He had taken with him presents for the &quot;King of Japan&quot; since he intended to introduce himself as the Apostolic Nuncio.

Europeans had already come to Japan; the Portuguese had landed in 1543 on the island of Tanegashima, where they introduced matchlock firearms to Japan.

From Amboina, he wrote to his companions in Europe: &quot;I asked a Portuguese merchant, ... who had been for many days in Anjirō&#x27;s country of Japan, to give me ... some information on that land and its people from what he had seen and heard. ...All the Portuguese merchants coming from Japan tell me that if I go there I shall do great service for God our Lord, more than with the pagans of India, for they are a very reasonable people.&quot; (To His Companions Residing in Rome, From Cochin, 20 January 1548, no. 18, p. 178).

Francis Xavier reached Japan on 27 July 1549, with Anjirō and three other Jesuits, but he was not permitted to enter any port his ship arrived at until 15 August, when he went ashore at Kagoshima, the principal port of Satsuma Province on the island of Kyūshū. As a representative of the Portuguese king, he was received in a friendly manner. Shimazu Takahisa (1514–1571), &quot;daimyō&quot; of Satsuma, gave a friendly reception to Francis on 29 September 1549, but in the following year he forbade the conversion of his subjects to Christianity under penalty of death; Christians in Kagoshima could not be given any catechism in the following years. The Portuguese missionary Pedro de Alcáçova would later write in 1554:

Francis was the first Jesuit to go to Japan as a missionary. He brought with him paintings of the Madonna and the Madonna and Child. These paintings were used to help teach the Japanese about Christianity. There was a huge language barrier as Japanese was unlike other languages the missionaries had previously encountered. For a long time, Francis struggled to learn the language. He was hosted by Anjirō&#x27;s family until October 1550. From October to December 1550, he resided in Yamaguchi. Shortly before Christmas, he left for Kyoto but failed to meet with Emperor Go-Nara. He returned to Yamaguchi in March 1551, where the daimyō of the province gave him permission to preach.

Having learned that evangelical poverty did not have the appeal in Japan that it had in Europe and in India, he decided to change his approach. Hearing after a time that a Portuguese ship had arrived at a port in the province of Bungo in Kyushu and that the prince there would like to see him, Xavier now set out southward. The Jesuit, in a fine cassock, surplice, and stole, was attended by thirty gentlemen and as many servants, all in their best clothes. Five of them bore on cushions valuable articles, including a portrait of Our Lady and a pair of velvet slippers, these not gifts for the prince, but solemn offerings to Xavier, to impress the onlookers with his eminence. Handsomely dressed, with his companions acting as attendants, he presented himself before Oshindono, the ruler of Nagate, and as a representative of the great Kingdom of Portugal, offered him letters and presents: a musical instrument, a watch, and other attractive objects which had been given him by the authorities in India for the emperor.

For forty-five years the Jesuits were the only missionaries in Asia, but the Franciscans began proselytizing in Asia, as well. Christian missionaries were later forced into exile, along with their assistants. However, some were able to stay behind. Christianity was then kept underground so as to not be persecuted.

The Japanese people were not easily converted; many of the people were already Buddhist or Shinto. Francis tried to combat the reservations of some of the Japanese. Many mistakenly interpreted Catholic doctrine as teaching that demons had been created evil, and they thus concluded the God who had created them could not be good. Much of Francis&#x27; preaching was devoted to providing answers to this and other such challenges. In the course of these discussions, Francis grew to respect the rationality and general literacy of those Japanese people whom he encountered. He expressed optimism at the prospect of converting the country.

Xavier was welcomed by the Shingon monks since he used the word &quot;Dainichi&quot; for the Christian God; attempting to adapt the concept to local traditions. As Xavier learned more about the religious nuances of the word, he changed to &quot;Deusu&quot; from the Latin and Portuguese &quot;Deus&quot;. The monks later realised that Xavier was preaching a rival religion and grew more resistant towards his attempts at conversion.
With the passage of time, his sojourn in Japan could be considered somewhat fruitful as attested by congregations established in Hirado, Yamaguchi, and Bungo. Xavier worked for more than two years in Japan and saw his successor-Jesuits established. He then decided to return to India. Historians debate the exact path by which he returned, but from evidence attributed to the captain of his ship, he may have travelled through Tanegeshima and Minato, and avoided Kagoshima because of the hostility of the daimyo.

===China===
During his trip from Japan back to India, a tempest forced him to stop on an island near Guangzhou, Guangdong, China, where he met Diogo Pereira, a rich merchant and an old friend from Cochin. Pereira showed him a letter from Portuguese prisoners in Guangzhou, asking for a Portuguese ambassador to speak to the Jiajing Emperor on their behalf. Later during the voyage, he stopped at Malacca on 27 December 1551 and was back in Goa by January 1552.

On 17 April he set sail with Diogo Pereira on the &quot;Santa Cruz&quot; for China. He planned to introduce himself as Apostolic Nuncio and Pereira as the ambassador of the king of Portugal. But then he realized that he had forgotten his testimonial letters as an Apostolic Nuncio. Back in Malacca, he was confronted by the captain Álvaro de Ataíde da Gama who now had total control over the harbour. The captain refused to recognize his title of Nuncio, asked Pereira to resign from his title of ambassador, named a new crew for the ship, and demanded the gifts for the Chinese Emperor be left in Malacca.

In late August 1552, the &quot;Santa Cruz&quot; reached the Chinese island of Shangchuan, 14 km away from the southern coast of mainland China, near Taishan, Guangdong, 200 km south-west of what later became Hong Kong. At this time, he was accompanied only by a Jesuit student, Álvaro Ferreira, a Chinese man called António, and a Malabar servant called Christopher. Around mid-November, he sent a letter saying that a man had agreed to take him to the mainland in exchange for a large sum of money. Having sent back Álvaro Ferreira, he remained alone with António. He died from a fever at Shangchuan, Taishan, China, on 3 December 1552, while he was waiting for a boat that would take him to mainland China.

==Burials and relics==

Xavier was first buried on a beach at Shangchuan Island, Taishan, Guangdong. His body was taken from the island in February 1553 and temporarily buried in St. Paul&#x27;s Church in Portuguese Malacca on 22 March 1553. An open grave in the church now marks the place of Xavier&#x27;s burial. Pereira came back from Goa, removed the corpse shortly after 15 April 1553, and moved it to his house. On 11 December 1553, Xavier&#x27;s body was shipped to Goa.

The mostly-incorruptible body is now in the Basilica of Bom Jesus in Goa, where it was placed in a glass container encased in a silver casket on 2 December 1637. This casket, constructed by Goan silversmiths between 1636 and 1637, was an exemplary blend of Italian and Indian aesthetic sensibilities. There are 32 silver plates on all four sides of the casket, depicting different episodes from the life of Xavier:

*Francis lies on the ground with his arms and legs tied, but the cords break miraculously.
*Francis kisses the ulcer of a patient in a Venetian hospital.
*He is visited by Jerom as he lies ailing in the hospital of Vicenza.
*A vision about his future apostolate.
*A vision about his sister&#x27;s prophecy about his fate.
*He saves the secretary of the Portuguese Ambassador while crossing the Alps.
*He lifts a sick man who dies after receiving communion but is freed from fever.
*He baptises in Travancore.
*He resuscitates a boy who died in a well at Cape Comorin.
*He cures miraculously a man full of sores.
*He drives away the Badagas in Travancore.
*He resuscitates three persons: a man who was buried at Coulao; a boy about to be buried at Multao; and a child.
*He takes money from his empty pockets and gives it to a Portuguese at Malyapore.
*A miraculous cure.
*A crab restores his crucifix which had fallen into the sea. 
*He preaches in the island of Moro.
*He preaches in the sea of Malacca and announces the victory against the enemies.
*He converts a Portuguese soldier.
*He helps the dying Vicar of Malacca.
*Francis kneels down and on his shoulders there rests a child whom he restores to health.
*He goes from Amanguchi to Macao walking.
*He cures a mute or unable to speak and paralytic man in Amanguchi.
*He cures a deaf Japanese person.
*He prays in the ship during a storm.
*He baptises three kings in Cochin.
*He cures a religious in the college of St. Paul.
*Due to the lack of water, he sweetens the seawater during a voyage.
*The agony of Francis at Sancian.
*After his death, he is seen by a lady according to his promise.
*The body dressed in sacerdotal vestments is exposed for public veneration.
*Francis levitates as he distributes communion in the College of St. Paul.
*The body is placed in a niche at Chaul with lighted candles. On the top of this casket, there is a cross with two angels. One is holding a burning heart and the other a legend which says, &quot;Satis est Domine, satis est.&quot; (&quot;It&#x27;s enough Lord, it&#x27;s enough&quot;)

The right forearm, which Xavier used to bless and baptise his converts, was detached by Superior General Claudio Acquaviva in 1614. It has been displayed since in a silver reliquary at the main Jesuit church in Rome, Il Gesù.

Another of Xavier&#x27;s arm bones was brought to Macau where it was kept in a silver reliquary. The relic was destined for Japan but religious persecution there persuaded the church to keep it in Macau&#x27;s Cathedral of St. Paul. It was subsequently moved to St. Joseph&#x27;s and in 1978 to the Chapel of St. Francis Xavier on Coloane Island. More recently the relic was moved to St. Joseph&#x27;s Church.

A relic from the right hand of St Francis Xavier is on display at St Mary&#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney.

In 2006, on the 500th anniversary of his birth, the Xavier Tomb Monument and Chapel on Shangchuan Island, in ruins after years of neglect under communist rule in China, was restored with support from the alumni of Wah Yan College, a Jesuit high school in Hong Kong.

From December 2017 to February 2018, Catholic Christian Outreach (CCO) in cooperation with the Jesuits, and the Archdiocese of Ottawa (Canada) brought Xavier&#x27;s right forearm to tour throughout Canada. The faithful, especially university students participating with CCO at Rise Up 2017 in Ottawa, venerated the relics. The tour continued to every city where CCO and/or the Jesuits are present in Canada: Quebec City, St. John&#x27;s, Halifax, St. Francis Xavier University in Antigonish (neither CCO nor the Jesuits are present here), Kingston, Toronto, Winnipeg, Saskatoon, Regina, Calgary, Vancouver, Victoria, and Montreal before returning to Ottawa. The relic was then returned to Rome with a Mass of Thanksgiving celebrated by Archbishop Terrence Prendergast at the Church of the Gesù.

==Veneration==

===Beatification and canonization===
Francis Xavier was beatified by Pope Paul V on 25 October 1619, and was canonized by Pope Gregory XV on 12 March 1622, at the same time as Ignatius Loyola. Pope Pius XI proclaimed him the &quot;Patron of Catholic Missions&quot;. His feast day is 3 December.

===Pilgrimage centres===
====Goa====
Saint Francis Xavier&#x27;s relics are kept in a silver casket, elevated inside the Bom Jesus Basilica and are exposed (being brought to ground level) generally every ten years, but this is discretionary. The sacred relics went on display starting on 22 November 2014 at the XVII Solemn Exposition. The display closed on 4 January 2015. The previous exposition, the sixteenth, was held from 21 November 2004 to 2 January 2005.

Relics of Saint Francis Xavier are also found in the Espirito Santo (Holy Spirit) Church, Margão, in Sanv Fransiku Xavierachi Igorz (Church of St. Francis Xavier), Batpal, Canacona, Goa, and at St. Francis Xavier Chapel, Portais, Panjim.

====Other places====
Other pilgrimage centres include Xavier&#x27;s birthplace in Navarre; the Church of the Gesù, Rome; Malacca (where he was buried for two years, before being brought to Goa); and Sancian (place of death).

Xavier is a major venerated saint in both Sonora and the neighbouring U.S. state of Arizona. In Magdalena de Kino in Sonora, Mexico, in the Church of Santa María Magdalena, there is a reclining statue of San Francisco Xavier brought by pioneer Jesuit missionary Padre Eusebio Kino in the early 18th century. The statue is said to be miraculous and is the object of pilgrimage for many in the region. Also the Mission San Xavier del Bac is a pilgrimage site. The mission is an active parish church ministering to the people of the San Xavier District, Tohono O&#x27;odham Nation, and nearby Tucson, Arizona.

Francis Xavier is honored in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 3 December.

===Novena of Grace===
The Novena of Grace is a popular devotion to Francis Xavier, typically prayed either on the nine days before 3 December or on 4 March through 12 March (the anniversary of Pope Gregory XV&#x27;s canonisation of Xavier in 1622). It began with the Italian Jesuit missionary Marcello Mastrilli. Before he could travel to the Far East, Mastrilli was gravely injured in a freak accident after a festive celebration dedicated to the Immaculate Conception in Naples. Delirious and on the verge of death, Mastrilli saw Xavier, who he later said asked him to choose between travelling or death by holding the respective symbols, to which Mastrilli answered, &quot;I choose that which God wills&quot;. Upon regaining his health, Mastrilli made his way via Goa and the Philippines to Satsuma, Japan. The Tokugawa shogunate beheaded the missionary in October 1637, after undergoing three days of tortures involving the volcanic sulphurous fumes from Mount Unzen, known as the &quot;Hell mouth&quot; or &quot;pit&quot; that had supposedly caused an earlier missionary to renounce his faith.

==Legacy==

Francis Xavier became widely noteworthy for his missionary work, both as an organiser and as a pioneer; he reputedly converted more people than anyone else had done since Paul the Apostle. In 2006 Pope Benedict XVI said of both Ignatius of Loyola and Francis Xavier: &quot;not only their history which was interwoven for many years from Paris and Rome, but a unique desire – a unique passion, it could be said – moved and sustained them through different human events: the passion to give to God-Trinity a glory always greater and to work for the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ to the peoples who had been ignored.&quot; His personal efforts most affected religious practice in India and in the East Indies (Indonesia, Malaysia, Timor). India still has numerous Jesuit missions and many more schools. Xavier also worked to propagate Christianity in China and Japan. However, following the persecutions (1587 onwards) instituted by Toyotomi Hideyoshi and the subsequent closing of Japan to foreigners (1633 onwards), the Christians of Japan had to go underground to preserve an independent Christian culture. Likewise, while Xavier inspired many missionaries to China, Chinese Christians also were forced underground there and developed their own Christian culture.

A small chapel designed by Achille-Antoine Hermitte was completed in 1869 over Xavier&#x27;s death-place on Shangchuan Island, Canton. It was damaged and restored several times; the most recent restoration in 2006 marked the 500th anniversary of the saint&#x27;s birth.

Francis Xavier is the patron saint of his native Navarre, which celebrates his feast day on 3 December as a government holiday. In addition to Roman Catholic Masses remembering Xavier on that day (now known as the Day of Navarre), celebrations in the surrounding weeks honour the region&#x27;s cultural heritage. Furthermore, in the 1940s, devoted Catholics instituted the Javierada, an annual day-long pilgrimage (often on foot) from the capital at Pamplona to Xavier, where the Jesuits built a basilica and museum and restored Francis Xavier&#x27;s family&#x27;s castle.

=== Personal names ===

As the foremost saint from Navarre and one of the main Jesuit saints, Francis Xavier is much venerated in Spain and the Hispanic countries where &quot;Francisco Javier&quot; or &quot;Javier&quot; are common male given names. The alternative spelling &quot;Xavier&quot; is also popular in the Basque Country, Portugal, Catalonia, Brazil, France, Belgium, and southern Italy. In India, the spelling &quot;Xavier&quot; is almost always used, and the name is quite common among Christians, especially in Goa and in the southern states of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and Karnataka. The names &quot;Francisco Xavier&quot;, &quot;António Xavier&quot;, &quot;João Xavier&quot;, &quot;Caetano Xavier&quot;, &quot;Domingos Xavier&quot; and so forth, were very common till quite recently in Goa. &quot;Fransiskus Xaverius&quot; is commonly used as a name for Indonesian Catholics, usually abbreviated as FX. In Austria and Bavaria the name is spelt as &quot;Xaver&quot; (pronounced ) and often used in addition to Francis as &quot;Franz-Xaver&quot; (). In Polish the name becomes &quot;Ksawery&quot;. Many Catalan men are named after him, often using the two-name combination &quot;Francesc Xavier&quot;. In English-speaking countries, &quot;Xavier&quot; until recently was likely to follow &quot;Francis&quot;; in the 2000s, however, &quot;Xavier&quot; by itself became more popular than &quot;Francis&quot;, and after 2001 featured as one of the hundred most common male baby names in the US. Furthermore, the Sevier family name, possibly most famous in the United States for John Sevier (1745–1815), originated from the name &quot;Xavier&quot;.

=== Church dedications ===
Many churches all over the world, often founded by Jesuits, have been named in honour of Xavier. The many in the United States include the historic St. Francis Xavier Shrine at Warwick, Maryland (founded 1720), and the Basilica of St. Francis Xavier in Dyersville, Iowa. Note also the American educational teaching order, the Xaverian Brothers, and the Mission San Xavier del Bac in Tucson, Arizona (founded in 1692, and known for its Spanish Colonial architecture). 

===In art===
* Rubens (1577–1640) painted &quot;Miracles of St.Francis Xavier&quot; for the Jesuit St. Charles Borromeo Church, Antwerp, in which he depicted one of St Francis&#x27;s many miracles.
* The Charles Bridge in Prague, Czech Republic, features a statue of Francis Xavier.
* In front of Oita Station of Oita City, in Oita Prefecture (previously known as Bungo Province) in Japan, there stands a statue of Francis Xavier.
* The monument Padrão dos Descobrimentos in Belém (Lisbon), Portugal, features a Francis Xavier image.

=== Music ===

* Marc-Antoine Charpentier, &quot;In honorem Sancti Xaverij canticum&quot; H. 355, for soloists, chorus, flutes, strings and continuo (1688 ?)
* Marc-Antoine Charpentier, &quot;Canticum de Sto Xavierio&quot; H. 355a, for soloists, chorus, flutes, oboes, strings and continuo (1690).

=== Missions ===
Shortly before leaving for the East, Xavier issued a famous instruction to Father Gaspar Barazeuz who was leaving to go to Ormus (a Portuguese vassal kingdom on an island in the Persian Gulf, now part of Iran), that he should mix with sinners:

Modern scholars assess the number of people converted to Christianity by Francis Xavier at around 30,000. While some of Xavier&#x27;s methods have subsequently come under criticism, he has also earned praise. He insisted that missionaries adapt to many of the customs, and most certainly to the language, of the culture they wish to evangelise. And unlike later missionaries, Xavier supported an educated native clergy. Though for a time it seemed that persecution had subsequently destroyed his work in Japan, Protestant missionaries three centuries later discovered that approximately 100,000 Christians still practised the faith in the Nagasaki area.

Francis Xavier&#x27;s work initiated permanent change in eastern Indonesia, and he became known as the &quot;Apostle of the Indies&quot; – in 1546–1547 he worked in the Maluku Islands among the people of Ambon, Ternate, and Morotai (or Moro), and laid the foundations for a permanent mission. After he left the Maluku Islands, others carried on his work, and by the 1560s there were 10,000 Roman Catholics in the area, mostly on Ambon. By the 1590s, there were 50,000 to 60,000.

===Role in the Goa Inquisition===
In 1546, Francis Xavier proposed the establishment of the Goa Inquisition in a letter addressed to the Portuguese King, John III. Xavier addresses the King as the &#x27;Vicar of Christ&#x27;, owing to his royal patronage over Christianity in the East Indies. In a letter dated 20 January 1548, he requests the king to be tough on the Portuguese governor in India so that he may be active in propagating the faith. Xavier also wrote to the Portuguese king asking for protection in regards to new converts who were being harassed by Portuguese commandants. Francis Xavier died in 1552 without ever living to see the commencement of the Goa Inquisition.

===Educational institutions===

A number of educational institutions are named after him, including:
* Xavier University – Cincinnati, Ohio
* St. Xavier&#x27;s High School, Fort
* St. Xavier&#x27;s College, Mumbai
* Xaverian College, Manchester, England
* Xavier High School (New York City)
* Xavier High School (Middletown, Connecticut)
* Xavier School — San Juan City, Philippines
* Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan, Cagayan de Oro City, Philippines
* St. Francis Xavier University – Antigonish, Nova Scotia
* St. Francis Xavier Catholic Secondary School – Milton, Ontario
* St. Francis Xavier Catholic Secondary School – Mississauga, Ontario, Canada 
* St. Xavier&#x27;s Institution – Georgetown, Penang, Malaysia
* Xavier College – Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
* Xavier Catholic College, Llandilo – Penrith, New South Wales, Australia
* St. Francis Xavier&#x27;s College, Hong Kong
* St. Xavier&#x27;s College, Kolkata
* St. Xavier&#x27;s School, Kolkata
* St. Francis Xavier Catholic School – South Weymouth, Massachusett]
* St. Francis Xavier Convent School – Bangkok, Thailand
* St. Francis Xavier&#x27;s College, Liverpool
* SD/SMP Xaverius Kuala Tungkal, Tanjung Jabung Barat, Indonesia

==See also==

* Catholicism in China
* Catholicism in Japan 
* Catholicism in India 
* Catholicism in Indonesia
* Christianity in China
* Christianity in Japan 
* Christianity in India 
* Christianity in Indonesia
* Goa Inquisition
* History of Roman Catholicism in Japan
* Jesuit China missions
* List of Westerners who visited Japan before 1868
* Mission San Xavier del Bac — San Xavier District, Tohono O&#x27;odham Nation, Arizona 
* Xaverian Brothers — religious order in America

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===

* This article incorporates material from the &quot;Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religion&quot;
* 
* 
* 
* 
* George M. Moraes (1952): &quot;St. Francis Xavier, Apostolic Nuncio (1542-52)&quot;, Bombay, Konkan Institute of Arts and Science, 35p.
* Jou, Albert (1984). &quot;The Saint on a Mission&quot;. Anand Press, Anand, India.
* 
* Pinch, William R., &quot;The Corpse and Cult of St. Francis Xavier, 1552–1623&quot;, in Mathew N. Schmalz and Peter Gottschalk ed. &quot;Engaging South Asian Religions: Boundaries, Appropriations, and Resistances&quot; (New York, State University of New York Press, 2011)
* 
===Further reading===
* 
* Andrew Dickson White (1896 first edition. A classic work constantly reprinted) &quot;A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom&quot;, See chapter 13, part 2, &quot;Growth of Legends of Healing: the life of Saint Francis Xavier as a typical example&quot;.

==External links==

*Official website of Basilica of Bom Jesus, Old Goa The Shrine of Saint Francis Xavier
*Basilica of Bom Jesus, Old Goa The Shrine of Saint Francis Xavier
*&quot;The Life of St. Francis Xavier&quot;
*&quot;The life and letters of St. Francis Xavier&quot; Francis Xavier, Saint, 1506–1552 Coleridge, Henry James, 1822–1893 London: Burns and Oates, (1872)
*&quot;Saint François Xavier&quot; 
*Picture of Shangchuan island. The chapel marks the location of his death
*The Miracles of St Francis Xavier by John Hardon, SJ
*Brief History of Saint Francis Xavier 
*Colonnade Statue St Peter&#x27;s Square
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="0" end="14" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="16" end="18" title="Jesuits" label="SJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="25" end="57" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francisco de Jasso y Azpilicueta"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="112" end="132" title="Francis Xavier" label="Saint Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="140" end="147" title="Spaniards" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="148" end="154" title="Clergy" label="cleric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="165" end="173" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="174" end="184" title="Christian missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="189" end="194" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="214" end="230" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="263" end="280" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="317" end="322" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773006" start="345" end="351" title="Xavier, Spain" label="Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="353" end="371" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Kingdom of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="395" end="413" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="441" end="448" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q186115" start="490" end="500" title="Montmartre" label="Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="567" end="596" title="Portuguese Empire in the East" label="Portuguese Empire in the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="621" end="635" title="evangelization" label="evangelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="658" end="676" title="early modern India" label="early modern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="736" end="752" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903110" start="812" end="828" title="Goan Inquisition" label="Goan Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="859" end="879" title="John III of Portugal" label="John III of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501465" start="990" end="1009" title="Christianity in Goa" label="Christianity in Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="1121" end="1141" title="Christian missionary" label="Christian missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="1158" end="1164" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="1170" end="1184" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1186" end="1191" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="1389" end="1399" title="Ming China" label="Ming China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397551" start="1417" end="1434" title="Shangchuan Island" label="Shangchuan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="1457" end="1468" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="1492" end="1501" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q132692" start="1505" end="1520" title="Pope Gregory XV" label="Pope Gregory XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="1573" end="1580" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="1616" end="1622" title="Indies" label="Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="1647" end="1659" title="the Far East" label="the Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="1792" end="1808" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="1819" end="1831" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q181715" start="1928" end="1946" title="Thérèse of Lisieux" label="Thérèse of Lisieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q468206" start="2026" end="2032" title="Fermin" label="Fermin"/>
<link wikidata="Q112738" start="2189" end="2205" title="Castle of Xavier" label="Castle of Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="2214" end="2232" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Kingdom of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="2475" end="2496" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q270294" start="2540" end="2563" title="Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port" label="Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q371100" start="2617" end="2636" title="John III of Navarre" label="John III of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q112738" start="2698" end="2714" title="Castle of Xavier" label="Castle of Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340260" start="2758" end="2778" title="Martín de Azpilcueta" label="Martín de Azpilcueta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="2949" end="2955" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736184" start="2960" end="2967" title="Navarro-Aragonese" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="2981" end="2994" title="mother tongue" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="3007" end="3016" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="3026" end="3032" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="3047" end="3054" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312328" start="3086" end="3115" title="Spanish conquest of Iberian Navarre" label="war that lasted over 18 years"/>
<link wikidata="Q342392" start="3354" end="3371" title="Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros" label="Cardinal Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875240" start="3774" end="3780" title="Baztan (valley)" label="Baztan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110002" start="3893" end="3913" title="Collège Sainte-Barbe" label="Collège Sainte-Barbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="3915" end="3934" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q454814" start="4103" end="4115" title="Pierre Favre" label="Pierre Favre"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="4132" end="4150" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141014" start="4829" end="4844" title="James Patrick Broderick" label="James Broderick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110005" start="5054" end="5073" title="Collège de Beauvais" label="Collège de Beauvais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300245" start="5206" end="5232" title="Saint Pierre de Montmartre" label="Saint Pierre de Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q186115" start="5250" end="5260" title="Montmartre" label="Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="5300" end="5318" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383735" start="5320" end="5336" title="Alfonso Salmeron" label="Alfonso Salmeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q301664" start="5338" end="5350" title="Diego Laynez" label="Diego Laínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711040" start="5352" end="5369" title="Nicholas Bobadilla" label="Nicolás Bobadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="5375" end="5380" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q454814" start="5382" end="5393" title="Peter Faber" label="Peter Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q426025" start="5399" end="5404" title="Duchy of Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321140" start="5410" end="5425" title="Simão Rodrigues" label="Simão Rodrigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="5431" end="5439" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q541943" start="5467" end="5499" title="poverty, chastity, and obedience" label="poverty, chastity, and obedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="5742" end="5758" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="5825" end="5838" title="Pope Paul III" label="Pope Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="5863" end="5883" title="John III of Portugal" label="John III of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q527755" start="5888" end="5905" title="Pedro Mascarenhas" label="Pedro Mascarenhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="5936" end="5944" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="6005" end="6025" title="Portuguese India" label="possessions in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="6177" end="6188" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046027" start="6199" end="6207" title="Padroado" label="Padroado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279229" start="6246" end="6262" title="Diogo de Gouveia" label="Diogo de Gouveia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110002" start="6278" end="6298" title="Collège Sainte-Barbe" label="Collège Sainte-Barbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711040" start="6410" end="6428" title="Nicholas Bobadilla" label="Nicholas Bobadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321140" start="6433" end="6448" title="Simão Rodrigues" label="Simão Rodrigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q225672" start="6779" end="6787" title="breviary" label="breviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q189279" start="6791" end="6800" title="catechism" label="catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="6884" end="6891" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q336571" start="6902" end="6915" title="Marko Marulić" label="Marko Marulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="6961" end="6980" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q157834" start="7239" end="7248" title="Catherine of Austria, Queen of Portugal" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="7577" end="7582" title="Ming dynasty" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="7804" end="7810" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="7896" end="7903" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q704141" start="7904" end="7926" title="Martim Afonso de Sousa" label="Martim Afonso de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="8034" end="8050" title="apostolic nuncio" label="apostolic nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="8108" end="8129" title="Portuguese Mozambique" label="Portuguese Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="8146" end="8149" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="8171" end="8187" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983675" start="9580" end="9605" title="Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s College, Goa" label="Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="9617" end="9625" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q222267" start="9812" end="9824" title="Cape Comorin" label="Cape Comorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280127" start="9871" end="9877" title="Mannar, Sri Lanka" label="Mannar"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="9891" end="9900" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915083" start="9915" end="9919" title="Jāti" label="Jāti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518671" start="9937" end="9944" title="Paravar" label="Paravas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591740" start="10747" end="10785" title="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s Church, Kombuthurai" label="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s Church, Kombuthurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="10876" end="10894" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Thomas the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889483" start="10898" end="10906" title="São Tomé de Meliapore" label="Mylapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="10927" end="10934" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634" start="11033" end="11041" title="Makassar" label="Makassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="11059" end="11066" title="Sulawesi" label="Celebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="11081" end="11090" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q560066" start="11219" end="11236" title="Roberto de Nobili" label="Roberto de Nobili"/>
<link wikidata="Q233340" start="11238" end="11250" title="Matteo Ricci" label="Matteo Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q246260" start="11256" end="11272" title="Constanzo Beschi" label="Constanzo Beschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988343" start="11597" end="11615" title="Portuguese Malacca" label="Portuguese Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="11717" end="11731" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q219608" start="11846" end="11858" title="Ambon Island" label="Ambon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q19151" start="11944" end="11951" title="Ternate" label="Ternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053892" start="11967" end="11974" title="Morotai" label="Morotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061057" start="12116" end="12124" title="Aceh Sultanate" label="Acehnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="12130" end="12137" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q119883763" start="12235" end="12257" title="Battle of Perlis River" label="Battle of Perlis River"/>
<link wikidata="Q705860" start="12376" end="12382" title="Anjirō" label="Anjirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q15674" start="12443" end="12452" title="Kagoshima" label="Kagoshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="13093" end="13099" title="Guangzhou" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q948131" start="13162" end="13177" title="Cosme de Torres" label="Cosme de Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920480" start="13190" end="13204" title="Juan Fernández (missionary)" label="Juan Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="13251" end="13264" title="Emperor of Japan" label="King of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="13317" end="13333" title="Apostolic Nuncio" label="Apostolic Nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q696228" start="13424" end="13435" title="Tanegashima" label="Tanegashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q358057" start="13459" end="13477" title="Tanegashima (gun)" label="matchlock firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q15674" start="14209" end="14218" title="Kagoshima" label="Kagoshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q667475" start="14242" end="14258" title="Satsuma Province" label="Satsuma Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13987" start="14276" end="14282" title="Kyūshū" label="Kyūshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367308" start="14366" end="14382" title="Shimazu Takahisa" label="Shimazu Takahisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="14402" end="14408" title="daimyō" label="daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728394" start="14845" end="14878" title="Madonna and Child (Duccio, Metropolitan)" label="Madonna and the Madonna and Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="14990" end="14998" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q207876" start="15232" end="15241" title="Yamaguchi, Yamaguchi" label="Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="15281" end="15286" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q349467" start="15311" end="15326" title="Emperor Go-Nara" label="Emperor Go-Nara"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="16534" end="16545" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="16853" end="16861" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="16865" end="16871" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q550182" start="17440" end="17447" title="Shingon" label="Shingon"/>
<link wikidata="Q239847" start="17483" end="17491" title="Vairocana" label="Dainichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q328601" start="17975" end="17981" title="Hirado" label="Hirado"/>
<link wikidata="Q864148" start="17998" end="18003" title="Bungo Province" label="Bungo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="18461" end="18470" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="18472" end="18481" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="18557" end="18563" title="Kochi" label="Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10011" start="18684" end="18699" title="Jiajing Emperor" label="Jiajing Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397551" start="19508" end="19518" title="Shangchuan" label="Shangchuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q164904" start="19579" end="19586" title="Taishan, Guangdong" label="Taishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="19638" end="19647" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740768" start="19761" end="19768" title="Malabars" label="Malabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397551" start="20202" end="20219" title="Shangchuan Island" label="Shangchuan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q164904" start="20221" end="20228" title="Taishan, Guangdong" label="Taishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591055" start="20319" end="20341" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Church, Melaka" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988343" start="20345" end="20363" title="Portuguese Malacca" label="Portuguese Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q752380" start="20623" end="20643" title="Incorruptibility" label="mostly-incorruptible"/>
<link wikidata="Q391123" start="20663" end="20684" title="Basilica of Bom Jesus" label="Basilica of Bom Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q228537" start="23130" end="23137" title="forearm" label="forearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515704" start="23208" end="23224" title="Superior General of the Society of Jesus" label="Superior General"/>
<link wikidata="Q681779" start="23225" end="23242" title="Claudio Acquaviva" label="Claudio Acquaviva"/>
<link wikidata="Q719794" start="23337" end="23344" title="Il Gesù" label="Il Gesù"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916279" start="23397" end="23402" title="Colonial Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q722604" start="23433" end="23442" title="reliquary" label="reliquary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551411" start="23557" end="23578" title="Ruins of St. Paul" label="Cathedral of St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579079" start="23609" end="23626" title="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s Seminary and Church" label="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11610891" start="23646" end="23674" title="Chapel of St. Francis Xavier" label="Chapel of St. Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="23678" end="23692" title="Coloane" label="Coloane Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q971514" start="23824" end="23856" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959717" start="24073" end="24088" title="Wah Yan College, Hong Kong" label="Wah Yan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053108" start="24163" end="24190" title="Catholic Christian Outreach" label="Catholic Christian Outreach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365203" start="24238" end="24259" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Ottawa–Cornwall" label="Archdiocese of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168348" start="24403" end="24415" title="Rise Up (conference)" label="Rise Up 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038889" start="24573" end="24602" title="St. Francis Xavier University" label="St. Francis Xavier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q575483" start="24606" end="24616" title="Antigonish, Nova Scotia" label="Antigonish"/>
<link wikidata="Q202685" start="24873" end="24893" title="Terrence Prendergast" label="Terrence Prendergast"/>
<link wikidata="Q719794" start="24901" end="24919" title="Church of the Gesù" label="Church of the Gesù"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="25007" end="25018" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="25047" end="25056" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q132692" start="25060" end="25075" title="Pope Gregory XV" label="Pope Gregory XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="25114" end="25129" title="Ignatius Loyola" label="Ignatius Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="25131" end="25143" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="25208" end="25217" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q391123" start="25355" end="25373" title="Bom Jesus Basilica" label="Bom Jesus Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q515117" start="25789" end="25795" title="Margão" label="Margão"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25863" end="25869" title="Batpal" label="Batpal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029212" start="25871" end="25879" title="Canacona" label="Canacona"/>
<link wikidata="Q112738" start="25992" end="26016" title="Castle of Xavier" label="Xavier&amp;#x27;s birthplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q719794" start="26033" end="26051" title="Church of the Gesù" label="Church of the Gesù"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="26248" end="26255" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572516" start="26260" end="26277" title="Magdalena de Kino" label="Magdalena de Kino"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="26281" end="26287" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q45185" start="26432" end="26444" title="Eusebio Kino" label="Eusebio Kino"/>
<link wikidata="Q489984" start="26573" end="26599" title="Mission San Xavier del Bac" label="Mission San Xavier del Bac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="26805" end="26822" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="26834" end="26850" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064807" start="26893" end="26908" title="Novena of Grace" label="Novena of Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756420" start="27160" end="27178" title="Marcello Mastrilli" label="Marcello Mastrilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="27315" end="27336" title="Immaculate Conception" label="Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="27681" end="27699" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q620860" start="27826" end="27837" title="Mount Unzen" label="Mount Unzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="28027" end="28042" title="missionary work" label="missionary work"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="28150" end="28166" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="28176" end="28193" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="28207" end="28225" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="28316" end="28321" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="28680" end="28691" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="28693" end="28702" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="28704" end="28712" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83067" start="28714" end="28719" title="Timor" label="Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q908467" start="28834" end="28839" title="Christianity in China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q427945" start="28844" end="28849" title="Christianity in Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="28916" end="28934" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q332075" start="28954" end="28984" title="Sakoku" label="closing of Japan to foreigners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524983" start="29005" end="29046" title="Kakure Kirishitan" label="Christians of Japan had to go underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639107" start="29278" end="29302" title="Achille-Antoine Hermitte" label="Achille-Antoine Hermitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="29571" end="29578" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29895" end="29904" title="Javierada" label="Javierada"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="29972" end="29980" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="30332" end="30343" title="given names" label="given names"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="30412" end="30426" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="30428" end="30436" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="30438" end="30447" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="30449" end="30455" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="30457" end="30463" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="30465" end="30472" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="30487" end="30492" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="30620" end="30623" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="30654" end="30664" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="30666" end="30672" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="30678" end="30687" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="30960" end="30969" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="31024" end="31031" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="31157" end="31163" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q888391" start="31679" end="31690" title="John Sevier" label="John Sevier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588023" start="31925" end="31950" title="St. Francis Xavier Church (Warwick, Maryland)" label="St. Francis Xavier Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971091" start="31954" end="31971" title="Warwick, Maryland" label="Warwick, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886995" start="31996" end="32026" title="Basilica of St. Francis Xavier" label="Basilica of St. Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q986193" start="32030" end="32046" title="Dyersville, Iowa" label="Dyersville, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349936" start="32103" end="32120" title="Xaverian Brothers" label="Xaverian Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q489984" start="32130" end="32156" title="Mission San Xavier del Bac" label="Mission San Xavier del Bac"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="32160" end="32175" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q12069738" start="32212" end="32241" title="Spanish Colonial architecture" label="Spanish Colonial architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="32261" end="32267" title="Rubens" label="Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q27979751" start="32294" end="32323" title="Miracles of St. Francis Xavier (Rubens)" label="Miracles of St.Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415440" start="32345" end="32381" title="St. Charles Borromeo Church, Antwerp" label="St. Charles Borromeo Church, Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q204871" start="32450" end="32464" title="Charles Bridge" label="Charles Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q24971497" start="32503" end="32527" title="Statue of Francis Xavier, Charles Bridge" label="statue of Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q861542" start="32543" end="32555" title="Oita Station" label="Oita Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q199609" start="32559" end="32568" title="Ōita (city)" label="Oita City"/>
<link wikidata="Q133924" start="32573" end="32588" title="Oita Prefecture" label="Oita Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q864148" start="32610" end="32624" title="Bungo Province" label="Bungo Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133712" start="32692" end="32717" title="Padrão dos Descobrimentos" label="Padrão dos Descobrimentos"/>
<link wikidata="Q18500330" start="32721" end="32735" title="Belém (Lisbon)" label="Belém (Lisbon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55524" start="32798" end="32822" title="Marc-Antoine Charpentier" label="Marc-Antoine Charpentier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33179" end="33194" title="Gaspar Barazeuz" label="Gaspar Barazeuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478280" start="33220" end="33225" title="Ormus" label="Ormus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="33275" end="33287" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="33301" end="33305" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="33846" end="33851" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="33853" end="33863" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="33981" end="33989" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="34062" end="34071" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="34166" end="34180" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q219608" start="34201" end="34206" title="Ambon Island" label="Ambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19151" start="34208" end="34215" title="Ternate" label="Ternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053892" start="34221" end="34228" title="Morotai" label="Morotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903110" start="34569" end="34584" title="Goa Inquisition" label="Goa Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="34631" end="34639" title="John III of Portugal" label="John III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631210" start="34680" end="34695" title="Vicar of Christ" label="Vicar of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046027" start="34716" end="34731" title="Padroado" label="royal patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="34757" end="34768" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849843" start="35266" end="35283" title="Xavier University" label="Xavier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592184" start="35305" end="35340" title="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s High School, Fort" label="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s High School, Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592174" start="35343" end="35376" title="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s College, Mumbai" label="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s College, Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043180" start="35379" end="35395" title="Xaverian College" label="Xaverian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043254" start="35419" end="35453" title="Xavier High School (New York City)" label="Xavier High School (New York City)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043255" start="35456" end="35500" title="Xavier High School (Middletown, Connecticut)" label="Xavier High School (Middletown, Connecticut)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707276" start="35503" end="35516" title="Xavier School" label="Xavier School"/>
<link wikidata="Q749283" start="35519" end="35532" title="San Juan, Metro Manila" label="San Juan City"/>
<link wikidata="Q43337" start="35548" end="35585" title="Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan" label="Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038889" start="35622" end="35651" title="St. Francis Xavier University" label="St. Francis Xavier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q65070312" start="35680" end="35724" title="St. Francis Xavier Catholic Secondary School" label="St. Francis Xavier Catholic Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588031" start="35745" end="35789" title="St. Francis Xavier Secondary School (Mississauga)" label="St. Francis Xavier Catholic Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q12708186" start="35824" end="35853" title="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s Institution" label="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043217" start="35887" end="35901" title="Xavier College" label="Xavier College"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623578" start="35937" end="35970" title="Xavier Catholic College, Llandilo" label="Xavier Catholic College, Llandilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588009" start="36011" end="36044" title="St. Francis Xavier&amp;#x27;s College, Tai Kok Tsui" label="St. Francis Xavier&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592175" start="36058" end="36092" title="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s College, Kolkata" label="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s College, Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983685" start="36095" end="36128" title="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s Collegiate School" label="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s School, Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36131" end="36165" title="St. Francis Xavier Catholic School" label="St. Francis Xavier Catholic School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36200" end="36233" title="St. Francis Xavier Convent School" label="St. Francis Xavier Convent School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588008" start="36256" end="36300" title="St. Francis Xavier&amp;#x27;s College, Liverpool" label="St. Francis Xavier&amp;#x27;s College, Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36303" end="36365" title="SD/SMP Xaverius Kuala Tungkal, Tanjung Jabung Barat, Indonesia" label="SD/SMP Xaverius Kuala Tungkal, Tanjung Jabung Barat, Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191842" start="36383" end="36403" title="Catholicism in China" label="Catholicism in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205621" start="36406" end="36426" title="Catholicism in Japan" label="Catholicism in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335300" start="36430" end="36450" title="Catholicism in India" label="Catholicism in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061558" start="36454" end="36478" title="Catholicism in Indonesia" label="Catholicism in Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q908467" start="36481" end="36502" title="Christianity in China" label="Christianity in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q427945" start="36505" end="36526" title="Christianity in Japan" label="Christianity in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q530005" start="36530" end="36551" title="Christianity in India" label="Christianity in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q952416" start="36555" end="36580" title="Christianity in Indonesia" label="Christianity in Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903110" start="36583" end="36598" title="Goa Inquisition" label="Goa Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378280" start="36601" end="36638" title="History of Roman Catholicism in Japan" label="History of Roman Catholicism in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="36641" end="36662" title="Jesuit China missions" label="Jesuit China missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210818" start="36665" end="36713" title="List of Westerners who visited Japan before 1868" label="List of Westerners who visited Japan before 1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q489984" start="36716" end="36742" title="Mission San Xavier del Bac" label="Mission San Xavier del Bac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349936" start="36805" end="36822" title="Xaverian Brothers" label="Xaverian Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q632762" start="36963" end="37001" title="Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religion" label="Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q114562148" start="37022" end="37038" title="George M. Moraes" label="George M. Moraes"/>
<link wikidata="Q504489" start="37550" end="37570" title="Andrew Dickson White" label="Andrew Dickson White"/>
<link wikidata="Q16514362" start="37635" end="37699" title="A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom" label="A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="37779" end="37799" title="Saint Francis Xavier" label="Saint Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283759" start="38350" end="38365" title="John Hardon" label="John Hardon, SJ"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10958" wikidata="Q40614" url="?curid=10958" title="Fossil">
<text>A fossil (from Classical Latin , ) is any preserved remains, impression, or trace of any once-living thing from a past geological age. Examples include bones, shells, exoskeletons, stone imprints of animals or microbes, objects preserved in amber, hair, petrified wood and DNA remnants. The totality of fossils is known as the &quot;fossil record&quot;. Though the fossil record is incomplete, numerous studies have demonstrated that there is enough information available to give a good understanding of the pattern of diversification of life on Earth. In addition, the record can predict and fill gaps such as the discovery of &quot;Tiktaalik&quot; in the arctic of Canada.

Paleontology includes the study of fossils: their age, method of formation, and evolutionary significance. Specimens are sometimes considered to be fossils if they are over 10,000 years old. The oldest fossils are around 3.48 billion years to 4.1 billion years old. The observation in the 19th century that certain fossils were associated with certain rock strata led to the recognition of a geological timescale and the relative ages of different fossils. The development of radiometric dating techniques in the early 20th century allowed scientists to quantitatively measure the absolute ages of rocks and the fossils they host.

There are many processes that lead to , including permineralization, casts and molds, authigenic mineralization, replacement and recrystallization, adpression, carbonization, and bioimmuration.

Fossils vary in size from one-micrometre (1 μm) bacteria to dinosaurs and trees, many meters long and weighing many tons. A fossil normally preserves only a portion of the deceased organism, usually that portion that was partially mineralized during life, such as the bones and teeth of vertebrates, or the chitinous or calcareous exoskeletons of invertebrates. Fossils may also consist of the marks left behind by the organism while it was alive, such as animal tracks or feces (coprolites). These types of fossil are called trace fossils or &quot;ichnofossils&quot;, as opposed to &quot;body fossils&quot;. Some fossils are biochemical and are called &quot;chemofossils&quot; or biosignatures.


== History of study ==

Gathering fossils dates at least to the beginning of recorded history. The fossils themselves are referred to as the fossil record. The fossil record was one of the early sources of data underlying the study of evolution and continues to be relevant to the history of life on Earth. Paleontologists examine the fossil record to understand the process of evolution and the way particular species have evolved.

=== Ancient civilizations ===

Fossils have been visible and common throughout most of natural history, and so documented human interaction with them goes back as far as recorded history, or earlier.

There are many examples of paleolithic stone knives in Europe, with fossil echinoderms set precisely at the hand grip, dating back to &quot;Homo heidelbergensis&quot; and Neanderthals. These ancient peoples also drilled holes through the center of those round fossil shells, apparently using them as beads for necklaces.

The ancient Egyptians gathered fossils of species that resembled the bones of modern species they worshipped. The god Set was associated with the hippopotamus, therefore fossilized bones of hippo-like species were kept in that deity&#x27;s temples. Five-rayed fossil sea urchin shells were associated with the deity Sopdu, the Morning Star, equivalent of Venus in Roman mythology.
Fossils appear to have directly contributed to the mythology of many civilizations, including the ancient Greeks. Classical Greek historian Herodotos wrote of an area near Hyperborea where gryphons protected golden treasure. There was indeed gold mining in that approximate region, where beaked &quot;Protoceratops&quot; skulls were common as fossils.

A later Greek scholar, Aristotle, eventually realized that fossil seashells from rocks were similar to those found on the beach, indicating the fossils were once living animals. He had previously explained them in terms of vaporous exhalations, which Persian polymath Avicenna modified into the theory of petrifying fluids (). Recognition of fossil seashells as originating in the sea was built upon in the 14th century by Albert of Saxony, and accepted in some form by most naturalists by the 16th century.

Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder wrote of &quot;tongue stones&quot;, which he called glossopetra. These were fossil shark teeth, thought by some classical cultures to look like the tongues of people or snakes. He also wrote about the horns of Ammon, which are fossil ammonites, whence the group of shelled octopus-cousins ultimately draws its modern name. Pliny also makes one of the earlier known references to toadstones, thought until the 18th century to be a magical cure for poison originating in the heads of toads, but which are fossil teeth from &quot;Lepidotes&quot;, a Cretaceous ray-finned fish.

The Plains tribes of North America are thought to have similarly associated fossils, such as the many intact pterosaur fossils naturally exposed in the region, with their own mythology of the thunderbird.

There is no such direct mythological connection known from prehistoric Africa, but there is considerable evidence of tribes there excavating and moving fossils to ceremonial sites, apparently treating them with some reverence.

In Japan, fossil shark teeth were associated with the mythical tengu, thought to be the razor-sharp claws of the creature, documented some time after the 8th century AD.

In medieval China, the fossil bones of ancient mammals including &quot;Homo erectus&quot; were often mistaken for &quot;dragon bones&quot; and used as medicine and aphrodisiacs. In addition, some of these fossil bones are collected as &quot;art&quot; by scholars, who left scripts on various artifacts, indicating the time they were added to a collection. One good example is the famous scholar Huang Tingjian of the Song dynasty during the 11th century, who kept a specific seashell fossil with his own poem engraved on it. In his &quot;Dream Pool Essays&quot; published in 1088, Song dynasty Chinese scholar-official Shen Kuo hypothesized that marine fossils found in a geological stratum of mountains located hundreds of miles from the Pacific Ocean was evidence that a prehistoric seashore had once existed there and shifted over centuries of time. His observation of petrified bamboos in the dry northern climate zone of what is now Yan&#x27;an, Shaanxi province, China, led him to advance early ideas of gradual climate change due to bamboo naturally growing in wetter climate areas.

In medieval Christendom, fossilized sea creatures on mountainsides were seen as proof of the biblical deluge of Noah&#x27;s Ark. After observing the existence of seashells in mountains, the ancient Greek philosopher Xenophanes (c. 570 – 478 BC) speculated that the world was once inundated in a great flood that buried living creatures in drying mud.

In 1027, the Persian Avicenna explained fossils&#x27; stoniness in &quot;The Book of Healing&quot;:

From the 13th century to the present day, scholars pointed out that the fossil skulls of Deinotherium giganteum, found in Crete and Greece, might have been interpreted as being the skulls of the Cyclopes of Greek mythology, and are possibly the origin of that Greek myth. Their skulls appear to have a single eye-hole in the front, just like their modern elephant cousins, though in fact it&#x27;s actually the opening for their trunk.

In Norse mythology, echinoderm shells (the round five-part button left over from a sea urchin) were associated with the god Thor, not only being incorporated in thunderstones, representations of Thor&#x27;s hammer and subsequent hammer-shaped crosses as Christianity was adopted, but also kept in houses to garner Thor&#x27;s protection.

These grew into the shepherd&#x27;s crowns of English folklore, used for decoration and as good luck charms, placed by the doorway of homes and churches. In Suffolk, a different species was used as a good-luck charm by bakers, who referred to them as fairy loaves, associating them with the similarly shaped loaves of bread they baked.

=== Early modern explanations ===

More scientific views of fossils emerged during the Renaissance. Leonardo da Vinci concurred with Aristotle&#x27;s view that fossils were the remains of ancient life. For example, Leonardo noticed discrepancies with the biblical flood narrative as an explanation for fossil origins:


In 1666, Nicholas Steno examined a shark, and made the association of its teeth with the &quot;tongue stones&quot; of ancient Greco-Roman mythology, concluding that those were not in fact the tongues of venomous snakes, but the teeth of some long-extinct species of shark.

Robert Hooke (1635–1703) included micrographs of fossils in his &quot;Micrographia&quot; and was among the first to observe fossil forams. His observations on fossils, which he stated to be the petrified remains of creatures some of which no longer existed, were published posthumously in 1705.

William Smith (1769–1839), an English canal engineer, observed that rocks of different ages (based on the law of superposition) preserved different assemblages of fossils, and that these assemblages succeeded one another in a regular and determinable order. He observed that rocks from distant locations could be correlated based on the fossils they contained. He termed this the principle of &quot;faunal succession&quot;. This principle became one of Darwin&#x27;s chief pieces of evidence that biological evolution was real.

Georges Cuvier came to believe that most if not all the animal fossils he examined were remains of extinct species. This led Cuvier to become an active proponent of the geological school of thought called catastrophism. Near the end of his 1796 paper on living and fossil elephants he said:

Interest in fossils, and geology more generally, expanded during the early nineteenth century. In Britain, Mary Anning&#x27;s discoveries of fossils, including the first complete ichthyosaur and a complete plesiosaurus skeleton, sparked both public and scholarly interest.

=== Linnaeus and Darwin ===
Early naturalists well understood the similarities and differences of living species leading Linnaeus to develop a hierarchical classification system still in use today. Darwin and his contemporaries first linked the hierarchical structure of the tree of life with the then very sparse fossil record. Darwin eloquently described a process of descent with modification, or evolution, whereby organisms either adapt to natural and changing environmental pressures, or they perish.

When Darwin wrote &quot;On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life&quot;, the oldest animal fossils were those from the Cambrian Period, now known to be about 540 million years old. He worried about the absence of older fossils because of the implications on the validity of his theories, but he expressed hope that such fossils would be found, noting that: &quot;only a small portion of the world is known with accuracy.&quot; Darwin also pondered the sudden appearance of many groups (i.e. phyla) in the oldest known Cambrian fossiliferous strata.

=== After Darwin ===
Since Darwin&#x27;s time, the fossil record has been extended to between 2.3 and 3.5 billion years. Most of these Precambrian fossils are microscopic bacteria or microfossils. However, macroscopic fossils are now known from the late Proterozoic. The Ediacara biota (also called Vendian biota) dating from 575 million years ago collectively constitutes a richly diverse assembly of early multicellular eukaryotes.

The fossil record and faunal succession form the basis of the science of biostratigraphy or determining the age of rocks based on embedded fossils. For the first 150 years of geology, biostratigraphy and superposition were the only means for determining the relative age of rocks. The geologic time scale was developed based on the relative ages of rock strata as determined by the early paleontologists and stratigraphers.

Since the early years of the twentieth century, absolute dating methods, such as radiometric dating (including potassium/argon, argon/argon, uranium series, and, for very recent fossils, radiocarbon dating) have been used to verify the relative ages obtained by fossils and to provide absolute ages for many fossils. Radiometric dating has shown that the earliest known stromatolites are over 3.4 billion years old.

=== Modern era ===
Paleontology has joined with evolutionary biology to share the interdisciplinary task of outlining the tree of life, which inevitably leads backwards in time to Precambrian microscopic life when cell structure and functions evolved. Earth&#x27;s deep time in the Proterozoic and deeper still in the Archean is only &quot;recounted by microscopic fossils and subtle chemical signals.&quot; Molecular biologists, using phylogenetics, can compare protein amino acid or nucleotide sequence homology (i.e., similarity) to evaluate taxonomy and evolutionary distances among organisms, with limited statistical confidence. The study of fossils, on the other hand, can more specifically pinpoint when and in what organism a mutation first appeared. Phylogenetics and paleontology work together in the clarification of science&#x27;s still dim view of the appearance of life and its evolution.

Niles Eldredge&#x27;s study of the &quot;Phacops&quot; trilobite genus supported the hypothesis that modifications to the arrangement of the trilobite&#x27;s eye lenses proceeded by fits and starts over millions of years during the Devonian. Eldredge&#x27;s interpretation of the &quot;Phacops&quot; fossil record was that the aftermaths of the lens changes, but not the rapidly occurring evolutionary process, were fossilized. This and other data led Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge to publish their seminal paper on punctuated equilibrium in 1971.

Synchrotron X-ray tomographic analysis of early Cambrian bilaterian embryonic microfossils yielded new insights of metazoan evolution at its earliest stages. The tomography technique provides previously unattainable three-dimensional resolution at the limits of fossilization. Fossils of two enigmatic bilaterians, the worm-like &quot;Markuelia&quot; and a putative, primitive protostome, &quot;Pseudooides&quot;, provide a peek at germ layer embryonic development. These 543-million-year-old embryos support the emergence of some aspects of arthropod development earlier than previously thought in the late Proterozoic. The preserved embryos from China and Siberia underwent rapid diagenetic phosphatization resulting in exquisite preservation, including cell structures. This research is a notable example of how knowledge encoded by the fossil record continues to contribute otherwise unattainable information on the emergence and development of life on Earth. For example, the research suggests &quot;Markuelia&quot; has closest affinity to priapulid worms, and is adjacent to the evolutionary branching of Priapulida, Nematoda and Arthropoda.

Despite significant advances in uncovering and identifying paleontological specimens, it is generally accepted that the fossil record is vastly incomplete. Approaches for measuring the completeness of the fossil record have been developed for numerous subsets of species, including those grouped taxonomically, temporally, environmentally/geographically, or in sum. This encompasses the subfield of taphonomy and the study of biases in the paleontological record.

== Dating/Age ==

=== Stratigraphy and estimations ===
Paleontology seeks to map out how life evolved across geologic time. A substantial hurdle is the difficulty of working out fossil ages. Beds that preserve fossils typically lack the radioactive elements needed for radiometric dating. This technique is our only means of giving rocks greater than about 50 million years old an absolute age, and can be accurate to within 0.5% or better. Although radiometric dating requires careful laboratory work, its basic principle is simple: the rates at which various radioactive elements decay are known, and so the ratio of the radioactive element to its decay products shows how long ago the radioactive element was incorporated into the rock. Radioactive elements are common only in rocks with a volcanic origin, and so the only fossil-bearing rocks that can be dated radiometrically are volcanic ash layers, which may provide termini for the intervening sediments.

Consequently, palaeontologists rely on stratigraphy to date fossils. Stratigraphy is the science of deciphering the &quot;layer-cake&quot; that is the sedimentary record. Rocks normally form relatively horizontal layers, with each layer younger than the one underneath it. If a fossil is found between two layers whose ages are known, the fossil&#x27;s age is claimed to lie between the two known ages. Because rock sequences are not continuous, but may be broken up by faults or periods of erosion, it is very difficult to match up rock beds that are not directly adjacent. However, fossils of species that survived for a relatively short time can be used to match isolated rocks: this technique is called &quot;biostratigraphy&quot;. For instance, the conodont &quot;Eoplacognathus pseudoplanus&quot; has a short range in the Middle Ordovician period. If rocks of unknown age have traces of &quot;E. pseudoplanus&quot;, they have a mid-Ordovician age. Such index fossils must be distinctive, be globally distributed and occupy a short time range to be useful. Misleading results are produced if the index fossils are incorrectly dated. Stratigraphy and biostratigraphy can in general provide only relative dating (&quot;A&quot; was before &quot;B&quot;), which is often sufficient for studying evolution. However, this is difficult for some time periods, because of the problems involved in matching rocks of the same age across continents. Family-tree relationships also help to narrow down the date when lineages first appeared. For instance, if fossils of B or C date to X million years ago and the calculated &quot;family tree&quot; says A was an ancestor of B and C, then A must have evolved earlier.

It is also possible to estimate how long ago two living clades diverged, in other words approximately how long ago their last common ancestor must have lived, by assuming that DNA mutations accumulate at a constant rate. These &quot;molecular clocks&quot;, however, are fallible, and provide only approximate timing: for example, they are not sufficiently precise and reliable for estimating when the groups that feature in the Cambrian explosion first evolved, and estimates produced by different techniques may vary by a factor of two.

=== Limitations ===

Organisms are only rarely preserved as fossils in the best of circumstances, and only a fraction of such fossils have been discovered. This is illustrated by the fact that the number of species known through the fossil record is less than 5% of the number of known living species, suggesting that the number of species known through fossils must be far less than 1% of all the species that have ever lived. Because of the specialized and rare circumstances required for a biological structure to fossilize, only a small percentage of life-forms can be expected to be represented in discoveries, and each discovery represents only a snapshot of the process of evolution. The transition itself can only be illustrated and corroborated by transitional fossils, which will never demonstrate an exact half-way point.

The fossil record is strongly biased toward organisms with hard-parts, leaving most groups of soft-bodied organisms with little to no role. It is replete with the mollusks, the vertebrates, the echinoderms, the brachiopods and some groups of arthropods.

== Sites ==
=== Lagerstätten ===

Fossil sites with exceptional preservation—sometimes including preserved soft tissues—are known as Lagerstätten—German for &quot;storage places&quot;. These formations may have resulted from carcass burial in an anoxic environment with minimal bacteria, thus slowing decomposition. Lagerstätten span geological time from the Cambrian period to the present. Worldwide, some of the best examples of near-perfect fossilization are the Cambrian Maotianshan Shales and Burgess Shale, the Devonian Hunsrück Slates, the Jurassic Solnhofen Limestone, and the Carboniferous Mazon Creek localities.

== Fossilization processes ==
=== Recrystallization ===
A fossil is said to be &quot;recrystallized&quot; when the original skeletal compounds are still present but in a different crystal form, such as from aragonite to calcite.
=== Replacement ===

Replacement occurs when the shell, bone, or other tissue is replaced with another mineral. In some cases mineral replacement of the original shell occurs so gradually and at such fine scales that microstructural features are preserved despite the total loss of original material. Scientists can use such fossils when researching the anatomical structure of ancient species. Several species of saurids have been identified from mineralized dinosaur fossils.

==== Permineralization ====
Permineralization is a process of fossilization that occurs when an organism is buried. The empty spaces within an organism (spaces filled with liquid or gas during life) become filled with mineral-rich groundwater. Minerals precipitate from the groundwater, occupying the empty spaces. This process can occur in very small spaces, such as within the cell wall of a plant cell. Small scale permineralization can produce very detailed fossils. For permineralization to occur, the organism must become covered by sediment soon after death, otherwise the remains are destroyed by scavengers or decomposition. The degree to which the remains are decayed when covered determines the later details of the fossil. Some fossils consist only of skeletal remains or teeth; other fossils contain traces of skin, feathers or even soft tissues. This is a form of diagenesis.

====Phosphatization====
It involves the process of fossilization where organic matter is replaced by abundant calcium-phosphate minerals. The produced fossils tend to be particularly dense and have a dark coloration that ranges from dark orange to black.

====Pyritization====
This fossil preservation involves the elements sulfur and iron. Organisms may become pyritized when they are in marine sediments saturated with iron sulfides. As organic matter decays it releases sulfide which reacts with dissolved iron in the surrounding waters, forming pyrite. Pyrite replaces carbonate shell material due to an undersaturation of carbonate in the surrounding waters. Some plants become pyritized when they are in a clay terrain, but to a lesser extent than in a marine environment. Some pyritized fossils include Precambrian microfossils, marine arthropods and plants.
====Silicification====
In silicification, the precipitation of silica from saturated water bodies is crucial for the fossil preservation. The mineral-laden water permeates the pores and cells of some dead organism, where it becomes a gel. Over time, the gel will dehydrate, forming a silica-rich crystal structure, which can be expressed in the form of quartz, chalcedony, agate, opal, among others, with the shape of the original remain.
=== Casts and molds ===
In some cases, the original remains of the organism completely dissolve or are otherwise destroyed. The remaining organism-shaped hole in the rock is called an &quot;external mold&quot;. If this void is later filled with sediment, the resulting &quot;cast&quot; resembles what the organism looked like. An endocast, or &quot;internal mold&quot;, is the result of sediments filling an organism&#x27;s interior, such as the inside of a bivalve or snail or the hollow of a skull. Endocasts are sometimes termed , especially when bivalves are preserved this way.
==== Authigenic mineralization ====
This is a special form of cast and mold formation. If the chemistry is right, the organism (or fragment of organism) can act as a nucleus for the precipitation of minerals such as siderite, resulting in a nodule forming around it. If this happens rapidly before significant decay to the organic tissue, very fine three-dimensional morphological detail can be preserved. Nodules from the Carboniferous Mazon Creek fossil beds of Illinois, US, are among the best documented examples of such mineralization.

=== Adpression (compression-impression) ===
Compression fossils, such as those of fossil ferns, are the result of chemical reduction of the complex organic molecules composing the organism&#x27;s tissues. In this case the fossil consists of original material, albeit in a geochemically altered state. This chemical change is an expression of diagenesis. Often what remains is a carbonaceous film known as a phytoleim, in which case the fossil is known as a compression. Often, however, the phytoleim is lost and all that remains is an impression of the organism in the rock—an impression fossil. In many cases, however, compressions and impressions occur together. For instance, when the rock is broken open, the phytoleim will often be attached to one part (compression), whereas the counterpart will just be an impression. For this reason, one term covers the two modes of preservation: &quot;adpression&quot;.

==== Carbonization and coalification ====
Fossils that are carbonized or coalified consist of the organic remains which have been reduced primarily to the chemical element carbon. Carbonized fossils consist of a thin film which forms a silhouette of the original organism, and the original organic remains were typically soft tissues. Coalified fossils consist primarily of coal, and the original organic remains were typically woody in composition.

=== Soft tissue, cell and molecular preservation ===
Because of their antiquity, an unexpected exception to the alteration of an organism&#x27;s tissues by chemical reduction of the complex organic molecules during fossilization has been the discovery of soft tissue in dinosaur fossils, including blood vessels, and the isolation of proteins and evidence for DNA fragments. In 2014, Mary Schweitzer and her colleagues reported the presence of iron particles (goethite-aFeO(OH)) associated with soft tissues recovered from dinosaur fossils. Based on various experiments that studied the interaction of iron in haemoglobin with blood vessel tissue they proposed that solution hypoxia coupled with iron chelation enhances the stability and preservation of soft tissue and provides the basis for an explanation for the unforeseen preservation of fossil soft tissues. However, a slightly older study based on eight taxa ranging in time from the Devonian to the Jurassic found that reasonably well-preserved fibrils that probably represent collagen were preserved in all these fossils and that the quality of preservation depended mostly on the arrangement of the collagen fibers, with tight packing favoring good preservation. There seemed to be no correlation between geological age and quality of preservation, within that timeframe.

=== Bioimmuration ===
Bioimmuration occurs when a skeletal organism overgrows or otherwise subsumes another organism, preserving the latter, or an impression of it, within the skeleton. Usually it is a sessile skeletal organism, such as a bryozoan or an oyster, which grows along a substrate, covering other sessile sclerobionts. Sometimes the bioimmured organism is soft-bodied and is then preserved in negative relief as a kind of external mold. There are also cases where an organism settles on top of a living skeletal organism that grows upwards, preserving the settler in its skeleton. Bioimmuration is known in the fossil record from the Ordovician to the Recent.

== Types ==
=== Index ===
Index fossils (also known as guide fossils, indicator fossils or zone fossils) are fossils used to define and identify geologic periods (or faunal stages). They work on the premise that, although different sediments may look different depending on the conditions under which they were deposited, they may include the remains of the same species of fossil. The shorter the species&#x27; time range, the more precisely different sediments can be correlated, and so rapidly evolving species&#x27; fossils are particularly valuable. The best index fossils are common, easy to identify at species level and have a broad distribution—otherwise the likelihood of finding and recognizing one in the two sediments is poor.

=== Trace ===
Trace fossils consist mainly of tracks and burrows, but also include coprolites (fossil feces) and marks left by feeding. Trace fossils are particularly significant because they represent a data source that is not limited to animals with easily fossilized hard parts, and they reflect animal behaviours. Many traces date from significantly earlier than the body fossils of animals that are thought to have been capable of making them. Whilst exact assignment of trace fossils to their makers is generally impossible, traces may for example provide the earliest physical evidence of the appearance of moderately complex animals (comparable to earthworms).

Coprolites are classified as trace fossils as opposed to body fossils, as they give evidence for the animal&#x27;s behaviour (in this case, diet) rather than morphology. They were first described by William Buckland in 1829. Prior to this they were known as &quot;fossil fir cones&quot; and &quot;bezoar stones.&quot; They serve a valuable purpose in paleontology because they provide direct evidence of the predation and diet of extinct organisms. Coprolites may range in size from a few millimetres to over 60 centimetres.

=== Transitional ===

A &quot;transitional fossil&quot; is any fossilized remains of a life form that exhibits traits common to both an ancestral group and its derived descendant group. This is especially important where the descendant group is sharply differentiated by gross anatomy and mode of living from the ancestral group. Because of the incompleteness of the fossil record, there is usually no way to know exactly how close a transitional fossil is to the point of divergence. These fossils serve as a reminder that taxonomic divisions are human constructs that have been imposed in hindsight on a continuum of variation.

=== Microfossils ===


Microfossil is a descriptive term applied to fossilized plants and animals whose size is just at or below the level at which the fossil can be analyzed by the naked eye. A commonly applied cutoff point between &quot;micro&quot; and &quot;macro&quot; fossils is 1 mm. Microfossils may either be complete (or near-complete) organisms in themselves (such as the marine plankters foraminifera and coccolithophores) or component parts (such as small teeth or spores) of larger animals or plants. Microfossils are of critical importance as a reservoir of paleoclimate information, and are also commonly used by biostratigraphers to assist in the correlation of rock units.

=== Resin ===


Fossil resin (colloquially called amber) is a natural polymer found in many types of strata throughout the world, even the Arctic. The oldest fossil resin dates to the Triassic, though most dates to the Cenozoic. The excretion of the resin by certain plants is thought to be an evolutionary adaptation for protection from insects and to seal wounds. Fossil resin often contains other fossils called inclusions that were captured by the sticky resin. These include bacteria, fungi, other plants, and animals. Animal inclusions are usually small invertebrates, predominantly arthropods such as insects and spiders, and only extremely rarely a vertebrate such as a small lizard. Preservation of inclusions can be exquisite, including small fragments of DNA.

=== Derived or reworked ===


A &quot;derived&quot;, &quot;reworked&quot; or is a fossil found in rock that accumulated significantly later than when the fossilized animal or plant died. Reworked fossils are created by erosion exhuming (freeing) fossils from the rock formation in which they were originally deposited and their redeposition in a younger sedimentary deposit.

=== Wood ===
Fossil wood is wood that is preserved in the fossil record. Wood is usually the part of a plant that is best preserved (and most easily found). Fossil wood may or may not be petrified. The fossil wood may be the only part of the plant that has been preserved; therefore such wood may get a special kind of botanical name. This will usually include &quot;xylon&quot; and a term indicating its presumed affinity, such as &quot;Araucarioxylon&quot; (wood of &quot;Araucaria&quot; or some related genus), &quot;Palmoxylon&quot; (wood of an indeterminate palm), or &quot;Castanoxylon&quot; (wood of an indeterminate chinkapin).

=== Subfossil ===

The term subfossil can be used to refer to remains, such as bones, nests, or fecal deposits, whose fossilization process is not complete, either because the length of time since the animal involved was living is too short or because the conditions in which the remains were buried were not optimal for fossilization. Subfossils are often found in caves or other shelters where they can be preserved for thousands of years. The main importance of subfossil vs. fossil remains is that the former contain organic material, which can be used for radiocarbon dating or extraction and sequencing of DNA, protein, or other biomolecules. Additionally, isotope ratios can provide much information about the ecological conditions under which extinct animals lived. Subfossils are useful for studying the evolutionary history of an environment and can be important to studies in paleoclimatology.

Subfossils are often found in depositionary environments, such as lake sediments, oceanic sediments, and soils. Once deposited, physical and chemical weathering can alter the state of preservation, and small subfossils can also be ingested by living organisms. Subfossil remains that date from the Mesozoic are exceptionally rare, are usually in an advanced state of decay, and are consequently much disputed. The vast bulk of subfossil material comes from Quaternary sediments, including many subfossilized chironomid head capsules, ostracod carapaces, diatoms, and foraminifera.

For remains such as molluscan seashells, which frequently do not change their chemical composition over geological time, and may occasionally even retain such features as the original color markings for millions of years, the label &#x27;subfossil&#x27; is applied to shells that are understood to be thousands of years old, but are of Holocene age, and therefore are not old enough to be from the Pleistocene epoch.

=== Chemical fossils ===

Chemical fossils, or chemofossils, are chemicals found in rocks and fossil fuels (petroleum, coal, and natural gas) that provide an organic signature for ancient life. Molecular fossils and isotope ratios represent two types of chemical fossils. The oldest traces of life on Earth are fossils of this type, including carbon isotope anomalies found in zircons that imply the existence of life as early as 4.1 billion years ago.

== Stromatolites ==


Stromatolites are layered accretionary structures formed in shallow water by the trapping, binding and cementation of sedimentary grains by biofilms of microorganisms, especially cyanobacteria. Stromatolites provide some of the most ancient fossil records of life on Earth, dating back more than 3.5 billion years ago.

Stromatolites were much more abundant in Precambrian times. While older, Archean fossil remains are presumed to be colonies of cyanobacteria, younger (that is, Proterozoic) fossils may be primordial forms of the eukaryote chlorophytes (that is, green algae). One genus of stromatolite very common in the geologic record is &quot;Collenia&quot;. The earliest stromatolite of confirmed microbial origin dates to 2.724 billion years ago.

A 2009 discovery provides strong evidence of microbial stromatolites extending as far back as 3.45 billion years ago.

Stromatolites are a major constituent of the fossil record for life&#x27;s first 3.5 billion years, peaking about 1.25 billion years ago. They subsequently declined in abundance and diversity, which by the start of the Cambrian had fallen to 20% of their peak. The most widely supported explanation is that stromatolite builders fell victims to grazing creatures (the Cambrian substrate revolution), implying that sufficiently complex organisms were common over 1 billion years ago.

The connection between grazer and stromatolite abundance is well documented in the younger Ordovician evolutionary radiation; stromatolite abundance also increased after the end-Ordovician and end-Permian extinctions decimated marine animals, falling back to earlier levels as marine animals recovered. Fluctuations in metazoan population and diversity may not have been the only factor in the reduction in stromatolite abundance. Factors such as the chemistry of the environment may have been responsible for changes.

While prokaryotic cyanobacteria themselves reproduce asexually through cell division, they were instrumental in priming the environment for the evolutionary development of more complex eukaryotic organisms. Cyanobacteria (as well as extremophile Gammaproteobacteria) are thought to be largely responsible for increasing the amount of oxygen in the primeval Earth&#x27;s atmosphere through their continuing photosynthesis. Cyanobacteria use water, carbon dioxide and sunlight to create their food. A layer of mucus often forms over mats of cyanobacterial cells. In modern microbial mats, debris from the surrounding habitat can become trapped within the mucus, which can be cemented by the calcium carbonate to grow thin laminations of limestone. These laminations can accrete over time, resulting in the banded pattern common to stromatolites. The domal morphology of biological stromatolites is the result of the vertical growth necessary for the continued infiltration of sunlight to the organisms for photosynthesis. Layered spherical growth structures termed oncolites are similar to stromatolites and are also known from the fossil record. Thrombolites are poorly laminated or non-laminated clotted structures formed by cyanobacteria common in the fossil record and in modern sediments.

The Zebra River Canyon area of the Kubis platform in the deeply dissected Zaris Mountains of southwestern Namibia provides an extremely well exposed example of the thrombolite-stromatolite-metazoan reefs that developed during the Proterozoic period, the stromatolites here being better developed in updip locations under conditions of higher current velocities and greater sediment influx.

== Pseudofossils ==


&quot;Pseudofossils&quot; are visual patterns in rocks that are produced by geologic processes rather than biologic processes. They can easily be mistaken for real fossils. Some pseudofossils, such as geological dendrite crystals, are formed by naturally occurring fissures in the rock that get filled up by percolating minerals. Other types of pseudofossils are kidney ore (round shapes in iron ore) and moss agates, which look like moss or plant leaves. Concretions, spherical or ovoid-shaped nodules found in some sedimentary strata, were once thought to be dinosaur eggs, and are often mistaken for fossils as well.

== Astrobiology ==
It has been suggested that biominerals could be important indicators of extraterrestrial life and thus could play an important role in the search for past or present life on the planet Mars. Furthermore, organic components (biosignatures) that are often associated with biominerals are believed to play crucial roles in both pre-biotic and biotic reactions.

On 24 January 2014, NASA reported that current studies by the &quot;Curiosity&quot; and &quot;Opportunity&quot; rovers on Mars will now be searching for evidence of ancient life, including a biosphere based on autotrophic, chemotrophic and/or chemolithoautotrophic microorganisms, as well as ancient water, including fluvio-lacustrine environments (plains related to ancient rivers or lakes) that may have been habitable. The search for evidence of habitability, taphonomy (related to fossils), and organic carbon on the planet Mars is now a primary NASA objective.

== Art ==
According to one hypothesis, a Corinthian vase from the 6th century BCE is the oldest artistic record of a vertebrate fossil, perhaps a Miocene giraffe combined with elements from other species. However, a subsequent study using artificial intelligence and expert evaluations reject this idea, because mammals do not have the eye bones shown in the painted monster. Morphologically, the vase painting correspond to a carnivorous reptile of the Varanidae family that still lives in regions occupied by the ancient Greek.

== Trading and collecting ==
Fossil trading is the practice of buying and selling fossils. This is many times done illegally with artifacts stolen from research sites, costing many important scientific specimens each year. The problem is quite pronounced in China, where many specimens have been stolen.

Fossil collecting (sometimes, in a non-scientific sense, fossil hunting) is the collection of fossils for scientific study, hobby, or profit. Fossil collecting, as practiced by amateurs, is the predecessor of modern paleontology and many still collect fossils and study fossils as amateurs. Professionals and amateurs alike collect fossils for their scientific value.

== As medicine ==
The use of fossils to address health issues is rooted in traditional medicine and include the use of fossils as talismans. The specific fossil to use to alleviate or cure an illness is often based on its resemblance to the symptoms or affected organ. The usefulness of fossils as medicine is almost entirely a placebo effect, though fossil material might conceivably have some antacid activity or supply some essential minerals. The use of dinosaur bones as &quot;dragon bones&quot; has persisted in Traditional Chinese medicine into modern times, with mid-Cretaceous dinosaur bones being used for the purpose in Ruyang County during the early 21st century.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== References ==
== Further reading ==
* &quot;Grand Canyon cliff collapse reveals 313 million-year-old fossil footprints&quot; 21 August 2020, &quot;CNN&quot;
* &quot;Hints of fossil DNA discovered in dinosaur skull&quot; by Michael Greshko, 3 March 2020, &quot;National Geographic&quot;
* &quot;Fossils for Kids | Learn all about how fossils are formed, the types of fossils and more!&quot; Video (2:23), 27 January 2020, &quot;Clarendon Learning&quot;
* &quot;Fossil &amp; their formation&quot; Video (9:55), 15 November 2019, &quot;Khan Academy&quot;
* &quot;How are dinosaur fossils formed? by Lisa Hendry, &quot;Natural History Museum, London&quot;
* &quot;Fossils 101&quot; Video (4:27), 22 August 2019, &quot;National Geographic&quot;
* &quot;How to Spot the Fossils Hiding in Plain Sight&quot; by Jessica Leigh Hester, 23 February 2018, &quot;Atlas Obscura&quot;
* &quot;It&#x27;s extremely hard to become a fossil&quot; , by Olivia Judson, 30 December 2008, &quot;The New York Times&quot;
* &quot;Bones Are Not the Only Fossils&quot; , by Olivia Judson, 4 March 2008, &quot;The New York Times&quot;

== External links ==

* 
* The Virtual Fossil Museum throughout Time and Evolution
* Paleoportal, geology and fossils of the United States 
* The Fossil Record, a complete listing of the families, orders, class and phyla found in the fossil record (archived 3 May 2012)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2" end="8" title="Fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="15" end="30" title="Classical Latin" label="Classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="119" end="133" title="geological age" label="geological age"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="152" end="156" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213096" start="159" end="165" title="seashell" label="shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="167" end="178" title="exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="210" end="217" title="microbe" label="microbe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="241" end="246" title="#Resin" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q28472" start="248" end="252" title="hair" label="hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q837117" start="254" end="268" title="petrified wood" label="petrified wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="273" end="276" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q131481" start="634" end="643" title="Tiktaalik" label="Tiktaalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="667" end="673" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="676" end="688" title="Paleontology" label="Paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="756" end="765" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="1033" end="1039" title="stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="1068" end="1088" title="geological timescale" label="geological timescale"/>
<link wikidata="Q265619" start="1097" end="1110" title="relative dating" label="relative ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="1152" end="1170" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q332423" start="1257" end="1270" title="absolute dating" label="absolute ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="1346" end="1346" title="Fossil" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3136650" start="1358" end="1375" title="permineralization" label="permineralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q784609" start="1394" end="1419" title="authigenesis" label="authigenic mineralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630655" start="1468" end="1481" title="carbonization" label="carbonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="1533" end="1543" title="micrometre" label="micrometre"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="1563" end="1571" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q610457" start="1734" end="1745" title="Mineralization (biology)" label="mineralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="1790" end="1800" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q161219" start="1810" end="1816" title="chitin" label="chitin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005941" start="1823" end="1833" title="calcareous" label="calcareous"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="1850" end="1862" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q135790" start="1959" end="1971" title="animal track" label="animal track"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="1976" end="1981" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q544041" start="1983" end="1992" title="coprolite" label="coprolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q853800" start="2029" end="2041" title="trace fossil" label="trace fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="2129" end="2140" title="biochemistry" label="biochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912794" start="2184" end="2196" title="biosignature" label="biosignature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="2436" end="2445" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138223" start="2482" end="2506" title="Timeline of evolution" label="history of life on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="2508" end="2522" title="Paleontologist" label="Paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="2612" end="2619" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="2863" end="2874" title="paleolithic" label="paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="2911" end="2921" title="echinoderm" label="echinoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q105784" start="2976" end="2996" title="Homo heidelbergensis" label="Homo heidelbergensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="3007" end="3018" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131795" start="3276" end="3279" title="Set (deity)" label="Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="3304" end="3316" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195229" start="3474" end="3479" title="Sopdu" label="Sopdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="3513" end="3518" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="3679" end="3688" title="Herodotos" label="Herodotos"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="3711" end="3721" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223" start="3728" end="3735" title="gryphon" label="gryphon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3793" end="3819" title="Dzungarian Gate#Hyperborean connection" label="in that approximate region"/>
<link wikidata="Q14506" start="3840" end="3853" title="Protoceratops" label="Protoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3900" end="3905" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3915" end="3924" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q255722" start="4115" end="4120" title="vapor" label="vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197000" start="4124" end="4134" title="exhalation" label="exhalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4143" end="4149" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="4160" end="4168" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572797" start="4197" end="4207" title="Petrifaction" label="petrifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="4208" end="4213" title="fluid" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q61044" start="4315" end="4331" title="Albert of Saxony (philosopher)" label="Albert of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="4367" end="4377" title="naturalist" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="4418" end="4433" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q626192" start="4449" end="4461" title="tongue stone" label="tongue stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q626192" start="4486" end="4497" title="glossopetra" label="glossopetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q85767287" start="4635" end="4649" title="horns of Ammon" label="horns of Ammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q228002" start="4668" end="4676" title="ammonite" label="ammonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002139" start="4813" end="4822" title="toadstone" label="toadstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q134482" start="4961" end="4970" title="Lepidotes" label="Lepidotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="4980" end="4990" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="5013" end="5026" title="Plains tribes" label="Plains tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q264471" start="5201" end="5212" title="thunderbird (mythology)" label="thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q742360" start="5506" end="5511" title="tengu" label="tengu"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="5685" end="5697" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559" start="5734" end="5740" title="dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211420" start="5778" end="5789" title="aphrodisiac" label="aphrodisiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q709460" start="6009" end="6023" title="Huang Tingjian" label="Huang Tingjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="6031" end="6043" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069875" start="6152" end="6169" title="Dream Pool Essays" label="Dream Pool Essays"/>
<link wikidata="Q708299" start="6216" end="6232" title="scholar-official" label="scholar-official"/>
<link wikidata="Q270085" start="6233" end="6241" title="Shen Kuo" label="Shen Kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="6286" end="6304" title="stratum" label="geological stratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="6353" end="6366" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="6435" end="6465" title="Geomorphology" label="shifted over centuries of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572797" start="6486" end="6495" title="petrified" label="petrified"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="6496" end="6502" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q515388" start="6552" end="6563" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="6565" end="6572" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="6632" end="6646" title="climate change (general concept)" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="6717" end="6728" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q126553" start="6817" end="6832" title="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark" label="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605826" start="6895" end="6920" title="List of ancient Greek philosophers" label="ancient Greek philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q131671" start="6921" end="6931" title="Xenophanes" label="Xenophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="7070" end="7077" title="Persian people" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="7078" end="7086" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030940" start="7130" end="7149" title="The Book of Healing" label="The Book of Healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q376401" start="7247" end="7269" title="Deinotherium giganteum" label="Deinotherium giganteum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="7280" end="7285" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="7353" end="7361" title="Cyclopes" label="Cyclopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="7365" end="7380" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="7513" end="7521" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="7598" end="7613" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="7719" end="7723" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7756" end="7769" title="Thunderstone (folklore)#Fossils as thunderstones" label="thunderstones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7954" end="7975" title="shepherd&amp;#x27;s crown" label="shepherd&amp;#x27;s crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="8091" end="8098" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8185" end="8197" title="fairy loaf" label="fairy loaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="8358" end="8369" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="8371" end="8388" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q151722" start="8600" end="8614" title="Nicholas Steno" label="Nicholas Steno"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="8865" end="8877" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q124816516" start="8899" end="8909" title="micrograph" label="micrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469465" start="8935" end="8947" title="Micrographia" label="Micrographia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107027" start="8996" end="9001" title="foram" label="foram"/>
<link wikidata="Q313533" start="9161" end="9186" title="William Smith (geologist)" label="William Smith (1769–1839)"/>
<link wikidata="Q842427" start="9267" end="9287" title="law of superposition" label="law of superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="9690" end="9704" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q826716" start="9895" end="9908" title="catastrophism" label="catastrophism"/>
<link wikidata="Q230491" start="10089" end="10100" title="Mary Anning" label="Mary Anning"/>
<link wikidata="Q194515" start="10161" end="10172" title="ichthyosaur" label="ichthyosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q857081" start="10188" end="10200" title="plesiosaurus" label="plesiosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="10290" end="10301" title="natural science" label="naturalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="10377" end="10385" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="10788" end="10906" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="10960" end="10968" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="11332" end="11337" title="phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142548" start="11574" end="11586" title="micropaleontology" label="microfossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q723846" start="11662" end="11676" title="Ediacara biota" label="Ediacara biota"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="11813" end="11822" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q864826" start="11899" end="11914" title="biostratigraphy" label="biostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="12001" end="12008" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q265619" start="12084" end="12096" title="relative dating" label="relative age"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="12111" end="12130" title="geologic time scale" label="geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="12234" end="12248" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphers"/>
<link wikidata="Q332423" start="12299" end="12314" title="absolute dating" label="absolute dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="12332" end="12350" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068405" start="12362" end="12377" title="K–Ar dating" label="potassium/argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789695" start="12379" end="12390" title="Argon–argon dating" label="argon/argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930710" start="12392" end="12406" title="uranium–lead dating" label="uranium series"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="12438" end="12456" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q840400" start="12716" end="12736" title="evolutionary biology" label="evolutionary biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="13104" end="13117" title="phylogenetics" label="phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="13139" end="13149" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="13153" end="13163" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q451437" start="13573" end="13587" title="Niles Eldredge" label="Niles Eldredge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44129" start="13614" end="13621" title="Phacops" label="Phacops"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="13628" end="13637" title="trilobite" label="trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="13805" end="13813" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="14025" end="14042" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q582558" start="14096" end="14118" title="punctuated equilibrium" label="punctuated equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q689863" start="14129" end="14140" title="Synchrotron" label="Synchrotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="14141" end="14146" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q841267" start="14147" end="14158" title="Tomography" label="tomographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="14197" end="14203" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="14244" end="14252" title="Animal" label="metazoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148504" start="14464" end="14473" title="Markuelia" label="Markuelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171" start="14506" end="14516" title="protostome" label="protostome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14524" end="14535" title="Pseudooides" label="Pseudooides"/>
<link wikidata="Q660498" start="14561" end="14571" title="germ layer" label="germ layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="14671" end="14680" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="14777" end="14782" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="14787" end="14794" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="14811" end="14821" title="Diagenesis" label="diagenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184" start="15240" end="15250" title="Priapulida" label="Priapulida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="15252" end="15260" title="Nematode" label="Nematoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="15265" end="15274" title="Arthropod" label="Arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q596086" start="15677" end="15686" title="taphonomy" label="taphonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="16012" end="16030" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="16325" end="16330" title="radioactive decay" label="decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="16746" end="16758" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="16858" end="16866" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="17177" end="17183" title="fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="17198" end="17205" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q864826" start="17666" end="17678" title="index fossil" label="index fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="18138" end="18147" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="18596" end="18604" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q827541" start="18649" end="18664" title="molecular clock" label="molecular clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q32919" start="18844" end="18862" title="Cambrian explosion" label="Cambrian explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501479" start="19883" end="19903" title="soft-bodied organism" label="soft-bodied organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="19952" end="19960" title="Mollusca" label="mollusks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="19966" end="19976" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="19983" end="19993" title="echinoderm" label="echinoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q178272" start="20000" end="20010" title="brachiopod" label="brachiopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="20031" end="20040" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122699" start="20177" end="20188" title="Lagerstätte" label="Lagerstätte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="20290" end="20296" title="hypoxia (environmental)" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="20403" end="20411" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="20426" end="20433" title="Holocene" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="20510" end="20518" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811179" start="20519" end="20537" title="Maotianshan Shales" label="Maotianshan Shales"/>
<link wikidata="Q852085" start="20542" end="20555" title="Burgess Shale" label="Burgess Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="20561" end="20569" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027010" start="20570" end="20584" title="Hunsrück Slate" label="Hunsrück Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="20591" end="20599" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q388368" start="20600" end="20619" title="Solnhofen Limestone" label="Solnhofen Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="20629" end="20642" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564342" start="20643" end="20654" title="Mazon Creek" label="Mazon Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="20875" end="20884" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="20888" end="20895" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136650" start="21404" end="21421" title="Permineralization" label="Permineralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="21607" end="21618" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q128700" start="21755" end="21764" title="cell wall" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056194" start="21770" end="21780" title="plant cell" label="plant cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="22199" end="22203" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="22205" end="22212" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="22254" end="22264" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="22377" end="22384" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="22385" end="22394" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="22395" end="22402" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="22591" end="22597" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="22602" end="22606" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="22816" end="22822" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="23077" end="23088" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="23110" end="23120" title="arthropods" label="arthropods"/>
<link wikidata="Q16709851" start="23159" end="23173" title="silicification" label="silicification"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="23196" end="23202" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q185744" start="23367" end="23370" title="gel" label="gel"/>
<link wikidata="Q278061" start="23396" end="23405" title="drying" label="dehydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="23417" end="23423" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="23486" end="23492" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170448" start="23494" end="23504" title="chalcedony" label="chalcedony"/>
<link wikidata="Q123314" start="23506" end="23511" title="agate" label="agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q171058" start="23513" end="23517" title="opal" label="opal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258192" start="23902" end="23910" title="endocast" label="endocast"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="24030" end="24037" title="bivalve" label="bivalve"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="24041" end="24046" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="24066" end="24071" title="skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q192669" start="24371" end="24379" title="siderite" label="siderite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564342" start="24592" end="24615" title="Mazon Creek fossil beds" label="Mazon Creek fossil beds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157040" start="24741" end="24759" title="Compression fossil" label="Compression fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="25039" end="25049" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038004" start="25075" end="25092" title="carbonaceous film" label="carbonaceous film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505525" start="26446" end="26461" title="Mary Higby Schweitzer" label="Mary Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189703" start="26522" end="26530" title="goethite" label="goethite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="26672" end="26683" title="haemoglobin" label="haemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="26763" end="26772" title="chelation" label="chelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="26973" end="26977" title="taxa" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="27003" end="27011" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="27019" end="27027" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="27097" end="27105" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759860" start="27597" end="27604" title="Sessility (zoology)" label="sessile"/>
<link wikidata="Q148134" start="27634" end="27642" title="bryozoan" label="bryozoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="27649" end="27655" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5824490" start="27677" end="27686" title="Substrate (biology)" label="substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434143" start="27711" end="27722" title="sclerobiont" label="sclerobiont"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="28040" end="28050" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="28212" end="28228" title="geologic column" label="geologic periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="28299" end="28307" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="28430" end="28437" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q853800" start="28822" end="28834" title="Trace fossil" label="Trace fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q544041" start="28891" end="28900" title="coprolite" label="coprolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="28910" end="28915" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q124378" start="29464" end="29473" title="earthworm" label="earthworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q312389" start="29677" end="29693" title="William Buckland" label="William Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29749" end="29758" title="conifer cone#Pinaceae cones" label="fir cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q851415" start="29775" end="29781" title="bezoar" label="bezoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761786" start="30658" end="30669" title="Microfossil" label="Microfossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163945" start="30890" end="30915" title="macrofossil" label="&amp;quot;macro&amp;quot; fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q107027" start="31034" end="31046" title="foraminifera" label="foraminifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647990" start="31051" end="31066" title="coccolithophore" label="coccolithophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212919" start="31112" end="31118" title="palynology" label="spores"/>
<link wikidata="Q191069" start="31207" end="31219" title="Paleoclimatology" label="paleoclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q864826" start="31263" end="31280" title="biostratigraphy" label="biostratigraphers"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="31376" end="31381" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="31396" end="31403" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="31465" end="31471" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="31510" end="31518" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="31545" end="31553" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="31633" end="31643" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="31886" end="31898" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="31915" end="31924" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="31983" end="31993" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="32092" end="32095" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q837117" start="32661" end="32670" title="petrified wood" label="petrified"/>
<link wikidata="Q281801" start="32793" end="32807" title="botanical name" label="botanical name"/>
<link wikidata="Q135480" start="32912" end="32926" title="Araucarioxylon arizonicum" label="Araucarioxylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157214" start="32948" end="32957" title="Araucaria" label="Araucaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128439" start="32994" end="33004" title="Palmoxylon" label="Palmoxylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="33037" end="33041" title="Arecaceae" label="palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065400" start="33098" end="33107" title="Castanopsis" label="chinkapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q544041" start="33207" end="33221" title="coprolite" label="fecal deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="33672" end="33690" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="33709" end="33726" title="DNA sequencing" label="sequencing of DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142557" start="33728" end="33735" title="protein sequencing" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="33774" end="33781" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q191069" start="33998" end="34014" title="paleoclimatology" label="paleoclimatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="34167" end="34177" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="34267" end="34275" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="34315" end="34323" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="34474" end="34484" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q228145" start="34525" end="34535" title="chironomid" label="chironomid"/>
<link wikidata="Q276412" start="34551" end="34559" title="ostracod" label="ostracod"/>
<link wikidata="Q666115" start="34560" end="34568" title="carapace" label="carapace"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="34571" end="34577" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q107027" start="34584" end="34596" title="foraminifera" label="foraminifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q213096" start="34629" end="34637" title="seashell" label="seashell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="34935" end="34943" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="34997" end="35008" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="35111" end="35122" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912794" start="35211" end="35227" title="Molecular fossil" label="Molecular fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q178928" start="35394" end="35400" title="zircon" label="zircon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553430" start="35519" end="35531" title="Accretion (geology)" label="accretionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671777" start="35532" end="35541" title="structure" label="structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q467410" start="35633" end="35640" title="biofilm" label="biofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="35645" end="35658" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="35672" end="35685" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="35886" end="35893" title="Archean" label="Archean"/>
<link wikidata="Q354341" start="35928" end="35936" title="colony (biology)" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="35940" end="35953" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="35973" end="35984" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="36001" end="36011" title="prehistoric" label="primordial"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="36025" end="36034" title="Eukaryota" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q264543" start="36035" end="36047" title="Chlorophyta" label="chlorophytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q271844" start="36058" end="36069" title="green algae" label="green algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="36076" end="36081" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="36117" end="36132" title="geologic time scale" label="geologic record"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147044" start="36142" end="36150" title="Collenia" label="Collenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025316" start="36736" end="36765" title="Cambrian substrate revolution" label="Cambrian substrate revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="36943" end="36953" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q946437" start="36954" end="36976" title="evolutionary radiation" label="evolutionary radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065985" start="37026" end="37040" title="Ordovician-Silurian extinction events" label="end-Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="37045" end="37068" title="Permian extinction" label="end-Permian extinctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="37171" end="37179" title="metazoan" label="metazoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="37378" end="37389" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138223" start="37516" end="37540" title="timeline of evolution" label="evolutionary development"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="37557" end="37567" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206912" start="37605" end="37617" title="extremophile" label="extremophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q134668" start="37618" end="37637" title="Gammaproteobacteria" label="Gammaproteobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="37706" end="37712" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="37742" end="37752" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="37778" end="37792" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="37812" end="37817" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="37819" end="37833" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="37838" end="37846" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649349" start="37880" end="37885" title="mucus" label="mucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="38107" end="38116" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194827" start="38435" end="38443" title="oncolite" label="oncolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="38502" end="38515" title="fossil record" label="fossil record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798340" start="38517" end="38528" title="Thrombolite" label="Thrombolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="38771" end="38778" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190136" start="39290" end="39298" title="Dendrite (crystal)" label="dendrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413388" start="39483" end="39493" title="moss agate" label="moss agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093379" start="39534" end="39544" title="Concretion" label="Concretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="39639" end="39647" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q610457" start="39745" end="39756" title="biomineralization" label="biominerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="39790" end="39811" title="extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="39903" end="39907" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335792" start="39922" end="39940" title="organic compounds (minerals)" label="organic components"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912794" start="39942" end="39954" title="biosignature" label="biosignature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915356" start="40058" end="40064" title="biotic material" label="biotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48485" start="40139" end="40160" title="Curiosity (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Curiosity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193538" start="40165" end="40188" title="Opportunity (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Opportunity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q389459" start="40189" end="40195" title="Mars rover" label="rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="40268" end="40277" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="40287" end="40296" title="autotroph" label="autotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q747472" start="40300" end="40310" title="chemotroph" label="chemotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q901900" start="40320" end="40341" title="Chemolithotrophs" label="chemolithoautotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="40342" end="40355" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469154" start="40394" end="40424" title="Lacustrine plain" label="fluvio-lacustrine environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="40426" end="40431" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="40452" end="40457" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="40462" end="40466" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q846030" start="40488" end="40497" title="Planetary habitability" label="habitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q846030" start="40526" end="40538" title="Planetary habitability" label="habitability"/>
<link wikidata="Q596086" start="40540" end="40549" title="taphonomy" label="taphonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q900291" start="40576" end="40590" title="organic carbon" label="organic carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="40605" end="40609" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="40627" end="40631" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="41924" end="41944" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44506" start="41979" end="41987" title="talisman" label="talisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="42177" end="42191" title="placebo effect" label="placebo effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q274083" start="42244" end="42251" title="antacid" label="antacid"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="42276" end="42293" title="mineral (nutrient)" label="essential mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="42367" end="42395" title="Traditional Chinese medicine" label="Traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198644" start="42480" end="42493" title="Ruyang County" label="Ruyang County"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="42722" end="42725" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="42835" end="42854" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q94887" start="43108" end="43120" title="Khan Academy" label="Khan Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="43190" end="43220" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="43289" end="43308" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134257" start="43424" end="43437" title="Atlas Obscura" label="Atlas Obscura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088061" start="43507" end="43520" title="Olivia Judson" label="Olivia Judson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="43546" end="43564" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088061" start="43621" end="43634" title="Olivia Judson" label="Olivia Judson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="43656" end="43674" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10960" wikidata="Q5433102" url="?curid=10960" title="Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act">
<text>The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Actof 1974 (FERPA or the Buckley Amendment) is a United States federal law that governs the access to educational information and records by public entities such as potential employers, publicly funded educational institutions, and foreign governments. The act is also referred to as the &quot;Buckley Amendment&quot;, for one of its proponents, Senator James L. Buckley of New York.

FERPA is a U.S. federal law that regulates access and disclosure of student education records. It grants parents access to their child&#x27;s records, allows amendments, and controls disclosure. After a student turns 18, their consent is generally required for disclosure. The law applies to institutions receiving U.S. Department of Education funds and provides privacy rights to students 18 years or older, or those in post-secondary institutions. Disclosure is permitted to parents of dependent students, and medical records are usually protected under FERPA rather than HIPAA. The law has faced criticism for concealing non-educational public records.

==Overview==
FERPA gives parents access to their child&#x27;s education records, an opportunity to seek to have the records amended, and some control over the disclosure of information from the records. With several exceptions, schools must have a student&#x27;s consent prior to the disclosure of education records after that student is 18 years old. The law applies only to educational agencies and institutions that receive funds under a program administered by the U.S. Department of Education.

Other regulations under this Act, effective starting January 3, 2012, allow for greater disclosures of personal and directory student identifying information and regulate disclosure of student IDs and e-mail addresses. For example, schools may provide external companies with a student&#x27;s personally identifiable information without the student&#x27;s consent. Conversely, tying student directory information to other information may result in a violation, as the combination creates an education record.

Examples of situations affected by FERPA include school employees divulging information to anyone other than the student about the student&#x27;s grades or behavior, and school work posted on a bulletin board with a grade. Generally, schools must have written permission from the parent or eligible student in order to release any information from a student&#x27;s education record.

This privacy policy also governs how state agencies transmit testing data to federal agencies, such as the Education Data Exchange Network.

This U.S. federal law also gave students 18 years of age or older, or students of any age if enrolled in any post-secondary educational institution, the right of privacy regarding grades, enrollment, and even billing information unless the school has specific permission from the student to share that specific type of information.

FERPA also permits a school to disclose personally identifiable information from education records of an &quot;eligible student&quot; (a student age 18 or older or enrolled in a postsecondary institution at any age) to his or her parents if the student is a dependent &quot;student&quot; as that term is defined in Section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, if either parent has claimed the student as a dependent on the parent&#x27;s most recent U.S. Federal income tax return, the school may non-consensually disclose the student&#x27;s education records to both parents.

The law allowed students who apply to an educational institution such as graduate school permission to view recommendations submitted by others as part of the application. On standard application forms, students are given the option to waive this right.

FERPA specifically excludes employees of an educational institution if they are not students.

FERPA is now a guide to communicating higher education issues and privacy issues that include sexual assault and campus safety. It provides a framework on addressing needs of certain populations in higher education.

==Access to public records==
The citing of FERPA to conceal public records that are not &quot;educational&quot; in nature has been widely criticized, including criticism by the Act&#x27;s primary Senate sponsor. For example, in the &quot;Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo&quot; case, an important part of the debate was determining the relationship between peer-grading and &quot;education records&quot; as defined in FERPA. The plaintiffs argued &quot;that allowing students to score each other&#x27;s tests [...] as the teachers explain the correct answers to the entire class [...] embarrassed [...] children&quot;, but they lost in a summary judgment by the district court. The Court of Appeals, ruled that students placing grades on the work of other students made such work into an &quot;education record.&quot; Thus, peer-grading was determined as a violation of FERPA privacy policies because students had access to other students&#x27; academic performance without full consent. However, on appeal to the Supreme Court, it was unanimously ruled that peer-grading was not a violation of FERPA. This is because a grade written on a student&#x27;s work does not become an &quot;education record&quot; until the teacher writes the final grade into a grade book.

==Student medical records==
Legal experts have debated the issue of whether student medical records (e.g. records of therapy sessions with a therapist at an on-campus counseling center) might be released to the school administration under certain triggering events, such as when a student sues his or her college or university.

Usually, student medical treatment records will remain under the protection of FERPA, not the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). This is due to the &quot;FERPA Exception&quot; written within HIPAA.

==See also==
* &quot;Gonzaga University v. Doe&quot;
* Liability and student records
*&quot;Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo&quot;

==References==

==External links==
* 2004 CFR Title 34, Volume 1
* Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
* G-T loses appeal of OSU pay records denial
* Inside Higher Ed&#x27;s News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5433102" start="4" end="45" title="Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act" label="Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433102" start="54" end="59" title="Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act" label="FERPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433102" start="67" end="84" title="Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act" label="Buckley Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="91" end="116" title="United States federal law" label="United States federal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244777" start="396" end="412" title="James L. Buckley" label="James L. Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="416" end="424" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="742" end="770" title="U.S. Department of Education" label="U.S. Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q606563" start="1001" end="1006" title="Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act" label="HIPAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593443" start="1382" end="1399" title="Privacy in education" label="education records"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="1553" end="1581" title="United States Department of Education" label="U.S. Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340890" start="2585" end="2616" title="Education Data Exchange Network" label="Education Data Exchange Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="2772" end="2788" title="right to privacy" label="right of privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="2992" end="3027" title="personally identifiable information" label="personally identifiable information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666281" start="3286" end="3307" title="Internal Revenue Code" label="Internal Revenue Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198163" start="3366" end="3375" title="dependent" label="dependent"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="3610" end="3625" title="graduate school" label="graduate school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114300" start="4342" end="4385" title="Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo" label="Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067088" start="4471" end="4483" title="Peer assessment" label="peer-grading"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889828" start="4776" end="4790" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of Oklahoma" label="district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q286918" start="4796" end="4812" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit" label="Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q606563" start="5805" end="5856" title="Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act" label="Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582144" start="5957" end="5982" title="Gonzaga University v. Doe" label="Gonzaga University v. Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539411" start="5991" end="6020" title="Liability and student records" label="Liability and student records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114300" start="6028" end="6071" title="Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo" label="Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10963" wikidata="Q1377840" url="?curid=10963" title="Forgetting">
<text>Forgetting or disremembering is the apparent loss or modification of information already encoded and stored in an individual&#x27;s short or long-term memory. It is a spontaneous or gradual process in which old memories are unable to be recalled from memory storage. Problems with remembering, learning and retaining new information are a few of the most common complaints of older adults. 
Studies show that retention improves with increased rehearsal. This improvement occurs because rehearsal helps to transfer information into long-term memory.

Forgetting curves (amount remembered as a function of time since an event was first experienced) have been extensively analyzed. The most recent evidence suggests that a power function provides the closest mathematical fit to the forgetting function.

==Overview==
Failing to retrieve an event does not mean that this specific event has been forever forgotten. Research has shown that there are a few health behaviors that to some extent can prevent forgetting from happening so often. One of the simplest ways to keep the brain healthy and prevent forgetting is to stay active and exercise. Staying active is important because overall it keeps the body healthy. When the body is healthy the brain is healthy and less inflamed as well. Older adults who were more active were found to have had less episodes of forgetting compared to those older adults who were less active. A healthy diet can also contribute to a healthier brain and aging process which in turn results in less frequent forgetting.

==History==
One of the first to study the mechanisms of forgetting was the German psychologist Hermann Ebbinghaus (1885). Using himself as the sole subject in his experiment, he memorized lists of three letter nonsense syllable words—two consonants and one vowel in the middle. He then measured his own capacity to relearn a given list of words after a variety of given time period. He found that forgetting occurs in a systematic manner, beginning rapidly and then leveling off. Although his methods were primitive, his basic premises have held true today and have been reaffirmed by more methodologically sound methods. The Ebbinghaus &quot;forgetting curve&quot; is the name of his results which he plotted out and made 2 conclusions. The first being that much of what we forget is lost soon after it is originally learned. The second being that the amount of forgetting eventually levels off.

Around the same time Ebbinghaus developed the forgetting curve, psychologist Sigmund Freud theorized that people intentionally forgot things in order to push bad thoughts and feelings deep into their unconscious, a process he called &quot;repression&quot;.
There is debate as to whether (or how often) memory repression really occurs and mainstream psychology holds that true memory repression occurs only very rarely.

One process model for memory was proposed by Richard Atkinson and Richard Shiffrin in the 1960s as a way to explain the operation of memory. This modal model of memory, also known as the Atkinson-Shiffrin model of memory, suggests there are three types of memory: sensory memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory. Each type of memory is separate in its capacity and duration. In the modal model, how quickly information is forgotten is related to the type of memory where that information is stored. Information in the first stage, sensory memory, is forgotten after only a few seconds. In the second stage, short-term memory, information is forgotten after about 20 years. While information in long-term memory can be remembered for minutes or even decades, it may be forgotten when the retrieval processes for that information fail.

Concerning unwanted memories, modern terminology divides motivated forgetting into unconscious repression (which is disputed) and conscious thought suppression.

==Measurements==
Forgetting can be measured in different ways all of which are based on recall:

===Recall===

For this type of measurement, a participant has to identify material that was previously learned. The participant is asked to remember a list of material. Later on they are shown the same list of material with additional information and they are asked to identify the material that was on the original list. The more they recognize, the less information is forgotten.

====Free recall and variants====
Free recall is a basic paradigm used to study human memory. In a free recall task, a subject is presented a list of to-be-remembered items, one at a time. For example, an experimenter might read a list of 20 words aloud, presenting a new word to the subject every 4 seconds. At the end of the presentation of the list, the subject is asked to recall the items (e.g., by writing down as many items from the list as possible). It is called a free recall task because the subject is free to recall the items in any order that he or she desires.

=====Prompted (cued) recall=====
Prompted recall is a slight variation of free recall that consists of presenting hints or prompts to increase the likelihood that the behavior will be produced. Usually these prompts are stimuli that were not there during the training period. Thus in order to measure the degree of forgetting, one can see how many prompts the subject misses or the number of prompts required to produce the behavior.

====Relearning method====
This method measures forgetting by the amount of training required to reach the previous level of performance. German psychologist Hermann Ebbinghaus (1885) used this method on himself. He memorized lists of nonsensical syllables until he could repeat the list two times without error. After a certain interval, he relearned the list and saw how long it would take him to do this task. If it took fewer times, then there had been less forgetting. His experiment was one of the first to study forgetting.

====Recognition====
Participants are given a list of words and that they have to remember. Then they are shown the same list of material with additional information and they are asked to identify the material that was on the original list. The more they recognize, the less information is forgotten.

==Theories==
The four main theories of forgetting apparent in the study of psychology are as follows:

=== Cue-dependent forgetting ===

Cue-dependent forgetting (also, context-dependent forgetting) or retrieval failure, is the failure to recall a memory due to missing stimuli or cues that were present at the time the memory was encoded. Encoding is the first step in creating and remembering a memory. How well something has been encoded in the memory can be measured by completing specific tests of retrieval. Examples of these tests would be explicit ones like cued recall or implicit tests like word fragment completion. Cue-dependent forgetting is one of five cognitive psychology theories of forgetting. This theory states that a memory is sometimes temporarily forgotten purely because it cannot be retrieved, but the proper cue can bring it to mind. A good metaphor for this is searching for a book in a library without the reference number, title, author or even subject. The information still exists, but without these cues retrieval is unlikely. Furthermore, a good retrieval cue must be consistent with the original encoding of the information. If the sound of the word is emphasized during the encoding process, the cue that should be used should also put emphasis on the phonetic quality of the word. Information is available however, just not readily available without these cues. Depending on the age of a person, retrieval cues and skills may not work as well. This is usually common in older adults but that is not always the case. When information is encoded into the memory and retrieved with a technique called spaced retrieval, this helps older adults retrieve the events stored in the memory better. There is also evidence from different studies that show age related changes in memory. These specific studies have shown that episodic memory performance does in fact decline with age and have made known that older adults produce vivid rates of forgetting when two items are combined and not encoded.

=== Organic causes ===
Forgetting that occurs through physiological damage or dilapidation to the brain are referred to as organic causes of forgetting. These theories encompass the loss of information already retained in long-term memory or the inability to encode new information again. Examples include Alzheimer&#x27;s, amnesia, dementia, consolidation theory and the gradual slowing down of the central nervous system due to aging.

=== Interference theories ===
Interference theory refers to the idea that when the learning of something new causes forgetting of older material on the basis of competition between the two. This essentially states that memory&#x27;s information may become confused or combined with other information during encoding, resulting in the distortion or disruption of memories. In nature, the interfering items are said to originate from an overstimulating environment. Interference theory exists in three branches: Proactive, Retroactive and Output. Retroactive and Proactive inhibition each referring in contrast to the other. Retroactive interference is when new information (memories) interferes with older information. On the other hand, proactive interference is when old information interferes with the retrieval of new information. This is sometimes thought to occur especially when memories are similar. Output Interference occurs when the initial act of recalling specific information interferes with the retrieval of the original information. Another reason why retrieval failure occurs is due to encoding failure. The information never made it to long-term memory storage. According to the level of processing theory, how well information is encoded depends on the level of processing a piece of information receives. Certain parts of information are better encoded than others; for example, information this visual imagery or that has a survival value is more easily transferred to the long-term memory storage. This theory shows a contradiction: an extremely intelligent individual is expected to forget more hastily than one who has a slow mentality. For this reason, an intelligent individual has stored up more memory in his mind which will cause interferences and impair their ability to recall specific information. Based on current research, testing interference has only been carried out by recalling from a list of words rather than using situation from daily lives, thus it is hard to generalize the findings for this theory.
It has been found that interference related tasks decreased memory performance by up to 20%, with negative effects at all interference time points and large variability between participants concerning both the time point and the size of maximal interference. Furthermore, fast learners seem to be more affected by interference than slow learners. People are also less likely to recall items when intervening stimuli are presented within the first ten minutes after learning. Recall performance is better without interference. Peripheral processes such as encoding time, recognition memory and motor execution decline with age. However proactive interference is similar. Suggesting contrary to earlier reports that the inhibitory processes observed with this paradigm remain intact in older adults.

=== Trace decay theory ===
Decay theory states that when something new is learned, a neurochemical, physical &quot;memory trace&quot; is formed in the brain and over time this trace tends to disintegrate, unless it is occasionally used. Decay theory states the reason we eventually forget something or an event is because the memory of it fades with time. If we do not attempt to look back at an event, the greater the interval time between the time when the event from happening and the time when we try to remember, the memory will start to fade. Time is the greatest impact in remembering an event.

Trace decay theory explains memories that are stored in both short-term and long-term memory system, and assumes that the memories leave a trace in the brain. According to this theory, short-term memory (STM) can only retain information for a limited amount of time, around 15 to 30 seconds unless it is rehearsed. If it is not rehearsed, the information will start to gradually fade away and decay. Donald Hebb proposed that incoming information causes a series of neurons to create a neurological memory trace in the brain which would result in change in the morphological and/or chemical changes in the brain and would fade with time. Repeated firing causes a structural change in the synapses. Rehearsal of repeated firing maintains the memory in STM until a structural change is made. Therefore, forgetting happens as a result of automatic decay of the memory trace in brain. This theory states that the events between learning and recall have no effects on recall; the important factor that affects is the duration that the information has been retained. Hence, as longer time passes more of traces are subject to decay and as a result the information is forgotten.

One major problem about this theory is that in real-life situation, the time between encoding a piece of information and recalling it, is going to be filled with all different kinds of events that might happen to the individual. Therefore, it is difficult to conclude that forgetting is a result of only the time duration. It is also important to consider the effectiveness of this theory. Although it seems very plausible, it is about impossible to test. It is difficult to create a situation where there is a blank period of time between presenting the material and recalling it later.

This theory is supposedly contradicted by the fact that one is able to ride a bike even after not having done so for decades. &quot;Flashbulb memories&quot; are another piece of seemingly contradicting evidence. It is believed that certain memories &quot;trace decay&quot; while others do not. Sleep is believed to play a key role in halting trace decay, although the exact mechanism of this is unknown.

Physical and chemical changes in our brain lead to a memory trace, and this is based on the idea of the trace theory of memory. Information that gets into our short-term memory lasts a few seconds (15–20 seconds), and it fades away if it is not rehearsed or practiced as the neurochemical memory trace disappears rapidly. According to the trace decay theory of forgetting, what occurs between the creation of new memories and the recall of these memories is not influenced by the recall. However, the time between these events (memory formation and recalling) decides whether the information can be kept or forgotten. As there is an inverse correlation that if the time is short, more information can be recalled. On the other hand, if the time is long less information can be recalled or more information will be forgotten. This theory can be criticized for not sharing ideas on how some memories can stay and others can fade, though there was a long time between the formation and recall. Newness to something plays a crucial role in this situation. For instance, people are more likely to recall their very first day abroad than all of the intervening days between it and living there. Emotions also play a crucial role in this situation.

==Impairments and lack of forgetting==

Forgetting can have very different causes than simply removal of stored content. Forgetting can mean access problems, availability problems, or can have other reasons such as amnesia caused by an accident.

An inability to forget can cause distress, as with post-traumatic stress disorder and hyperthymesia (in which people have an extremely detailed autobiographical memory).

==Social forgetting==

Psychologists have called attention to &quot;social aspects of forgetting&quot;. Though often loosely defined, social amnesia is generally considered to be the opposite of collective memory. &quot;Social amnesia&quot; was first discussed by Russell Jacoby, yet his use of the term was restricted to a narrow approach, which was limited to what he perceived to be a relative neglect of psychoanalytical theory in psychology. The cultural historian Peter Burke suggested that &quot;it may be worth investigating the social organization of forgetting, the rules of exclusion, suppression or repression, and the question of who wants whom to forget what&quot;. In an in-depth historical study spanning two centuries, Guy Beiner proposed the term &quot;social forgetting&quot;, which he distinguished from crude notions of &quot;collective amnesia&quot; and &quot;total oblivion&quot;, arguing that &quot;social forgetting is to be found in the interface of public silence and more private remembrance&quot;. The philosopher Walter Benjamin sees social forgetting closely linked to the question of present-day interests, arguing that &quot;every image of the past that is not recognized by the present as one of its own concerns threatens to disappear irretrievably&quot;. Building on this, the sociologist David Leupold argued in the context of competing national narratives that what is suppressed and forgotten in one national narrative &quot;might appear at the core of past narrations by the other&quot; - thus often leading to diametrically opposed, mutually exclusive accounts on the past.

== See also ==

* Amnesia
* Cue-dependent forgetting
* Experience curve effects
* Educational psychology
* Hyperthymesia
* Language attrition
* Lotus tree
* Memory
* Pseudodementia
* Repressed memory
* Tip of the tongue
* Unethical amnesia
==References==
==Sources==
* McLeod, S. A. (2008). Simply Psychology; . Retrieved 19 February 2012, from Simply Psychology

==External links==
*The End of Forgetting An article by Jeffrey Rosen
*Forgetting: High School Psychology
*Forgetting is Key to a Healthy Mind</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1377840" start="0" end="10" title="Forgetting" label="Forgetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377840" start="14" end="28" title="Forgetting" label="disremembering"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="141" end="157" title="long-term memory" label="long-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="211" end="219" title="memory" label="memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q949167" start="550" end="566" title="Forgetting curve" label="Forgetting curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="720" end="734" title="power function" label="power function"/>
<link wikidata="Q57332" start="1645" end="1663" title="Hermann Ebbinghaus" label="Hermann Ebbinghaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q941796" start="2687" end="2697" title="Psychological repression" label="repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4815941" start="3014" end="3035" title="Atkinson–Shiffrin memory model" label="modal model of memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080996" start="3132" end="3146" title="sensory memory" label="sensory memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18599" start="3148" end="3165" title="short-term memory" label="short-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="3171" end="3187" title="long-term memory" label="long-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917862" start="3768" end="3788" title="motivated forgetting" label="motivated forgetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495864" start="3851" end="3870" title="thought suppression" label="thought suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q18733" start="4035" end="4080" title="recall (memory)" label="identify material that was previously learned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192551" start="6333" end="6357" title="Cue-dependent forgetting" label="Cue-dependent forgetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165163" start="6365" end="6393" title="context-dependent memory" label="context-dependent forgetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="6444" end="6450" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q859031" start="6466" end="6473" title="Stimulus (physiology)" label="stimuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18653" start="6527" end="6534" title="Encoding (memory)" label="encoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="6863" end="6883" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="7063" end="7071" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q621080" start="7130" end="7146" title="Library of Congress Classification" label="reference number"/>
<link wikidata="Q816826" start="7275" end="7284" title="Information retrieval" label="retrieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q920360" start="7383" end="7393" title="Emphatic consonant" label="emphasized"/>
<link wikidata="Q35395" start="7483" end="7491" title="phonetic" label="phonetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095869" start="7830" end="7846" title="spaced retrieval" label="spaced retrieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352673" start="7977" end="8006" title="Memory and aging" label="age related changes in memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18646" start="8047" end="8062" title="episodic memory" label="episodic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="8445" end="8461" title="long-term memory" label="long-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="8529" end="8545" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="8547" end="8554" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="8556" end="8564" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352673" start="8653" end="8658" title="Memory and aging" label="aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480151" start="8691" end="8710" title="Interference theory" label="Interference theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248831" start="11530" end="11542" title="Decay theory" label="Decay theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q288223" start="14000" end="14018" title="Flashbulb memories" label="Flashbulb memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="15731" end="15738" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="15814" end="15844" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q45320" start="15849" end="15862" title="hyperthymesia" label="hyperthymesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q682304" start="15907" end="15930" title="autobiographical memory" label="autobiographical memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550918" start="16068" end="16082" title="social amnesia" label="social amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q254217" start="16129" end="16146" title="collective memory" label="collective memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381598" start="16198" end="16212" title="Russell Jacoby" label="Russell Jacoby"/>
<link wikidata="Q504484" start="16404" end="16415" title="Peter Burke (historian)" label="Peter Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622081" start="16670" end="16680" title="Guy Beiner" label="Guy Beiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078" start="16977" end="16992" title="Walter Benjamin" label="Walter Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17259" end="17272" title="David Leupold" label="David Leupold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="17568" end="17575" title="Amnesia" label="Amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192551" start="17578" end="17602" title="Cue-dependent forgetting" label="Cue-dependent forgetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646565" start="17605" end="17629" title="Experience curve effects" label="Experience curve effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q59157" start="17632" end="17654" title="Educational psychology" label="Educational psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q45320" start="17657" end="17670" title="Hyperthymesia" label="Hyperthymesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q387080" start="17673" end="17691" title="Language attrition" label="Language attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724064" start="17694" end="17704" title="Lotus tree" label="Lotus tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="17707" end="17713" title="Memory" label="Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254736" start="17716" end="17730" title="Pseudodementia" label="Pseudodementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167292" start="17733" end="17749" title="Repressed memory" label="Repressed memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q230100" start="17752" end="17769" title="Tip of the tongue" label="Tip of the tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q131913724" start="17772" end="17789" title="Unethical amnesia" label="Unethical amnesia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10965" wikidata="Q266694" url="?curid=10965" title="Fay Wray">
<text>Vina Fay Wray (September 15, 1907 – August 8, 2004) was a Canadian-American actress best known for starring as Ann Darrow in the 1933 film &quot;King Kong&quot;. Through an acting career that spanned nearly six decades, Wray attained international recognition as an actress in horror films. She has been dubbed the first &quot;scream queen&quot;.

After appearing in minor film roles, Wray gained media attention after being selected as one of the &quot;WAMPAS Baby Stars&quot; in 1926. This led to her being contracted to Paramount Pictures as a teenager, where she made more than a dozen feature films. After leaving Paramount, she signed deals with various film companies, being cast in her first horror film roles, in addition to many other types of roles, including in &quot;The Bowery&quot; (1933) and &quot;Viva Villa!&quot; (1934), both of which starred Wallace Beery. For RKO Radio Pictures, Inc., Wray starred in the film she is most identified with, &quot;King Kong&quot; (1933). After the success of &quot;King Kong&quot;, she made numerous appearances in both film and television, retiring in 1980.

==Life and career==

===Early life===
Wray was born on a ranch near Cardston, Alberta, to parents who were members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Elvina Marguerite Jones, who was from Salt Lake City, Utah, and Joseph Heber Wray, who was from Kingston upon Hull, England. She was one of six children and was a granddaughter of LDS pioneer Daniel Webster Jones. Her ancestors came from England, Scotland, Ireland, Northern Ireland, and Wales. 

Her family returned to the United States a few years after she was born; they moved to Salt Lake City in 1912 and moved to Lark, Utah, in 1914. In 1919, the Wray family returned to Salt Lake City, and then relocated to Hollywood, where Fay attended Hollywood High School.

===Early acting career===
In 1923, Wray appeared in her first film at the age of 16, when she landed a role in a short historical film sponsored by a local newspaper. In the 1920s, Wray appeared in the silent film &quot;The Coast Patrol&quot; (1925), as well as uncredited bit parts at the Hal Roach Studios.

In 1926, the Western Association of Motion Picture Advertisers selected Wray as one of the &quot;WAMPAS Baby Stars&quot;, a group of women whom they believed to be on the threshold of movie stardom. She was at the time under contract to Universal Studios, mostly co-starring in low-budget Westerns opposite Buck Jones. 

The following year, Wray was signed to a contract with Paramount Pictures. In 1926, director Erich von Stroheim cast her as the main female lead in his film &quot;The Wedding March&quot;, released by Paramount two years later. While the film was noted for its high budget and production values, it was a financial failure. It also gave Wray her first lead role. Wray stayed with Paramount to make more than a dozen films and made the transition from silent films to &quot;talkies&quot;.

===Horror films and &quot;King Kong&quot;===
After leaving Paramount, Wray signed with other film studios. Under these deals, Wray was cast in several horror films, including &quot;Doctor X&quot; (1932) and &quot;Mystery of the Wax Museum&quot; (1933). However, her best known films were produced under her deal with RKO Radio Pictures. Her first film with RKO was &quot;The Most Dangerous Game&quot; (1932), co-starring Joel McCrea. The production was filmed at night on the same jungle sets that were being used for &quot;King Kong&quot; during the day, and with Wray and Robert Armstrong starring in both movies. 

&quot;The Most Dangerous Game&quot; was followed by the release of Wray&#x27;s best-remembered film, &quot;King Kong&quot;. According to Wray, Jean Harlow had been RKO&#x27;s original choice, but because MGM put Harlow under exclusive contract during the pre-production phase of the film, she became unavailable. Wray was approached by director Merian C. Cooper to play the blonde captive of King Kong; the role of Ann Darrow for which she was paid $10,000 ($ in dollars) to portray. The film was a commercial success and Wray was reportedly proud that the film saved RKO from bankruptcy.

===Later career===
Wray continued to star in films, including &quot;The Richest Girl in the World&quot;, but by the early 1940s, her appearances became less frequent. She retired in 1942 after her second marriage but due to financial exigencies she soon resumed her acting career, and over the next three decades, Wray appeared in several films and appeared frequently on television. Wray portrayed Catherine Morrison in the 1953–54 sitcom &quot;The Pride of the Family&quot; with Natalie Wood playing her daughter. Wray appeared in &quot;Queen Bee&quot; and &quot;The Cobweb&quot;, both released in 1955.

Wray appeared in three episodes of &quot;Perry Mason&quot;: &quot;The Case of the Prodigal Parent&quot; (1958); &quot;The Case of the Watery Witness&quot; (1959), as murder victim Lorna Thomas; and &quot;The Case of the Fatal Fetish&quot; (1965), as voodoo practitioner Mignon Germaine. Interstingly, Wray also co-starred with Perry Mason star Raymond Burr in the 1957 noir film release “Crime of Passion.”

In 1959, Wray was cast as Tula Marsh in the episode &quot;The Second Happiest Day&quot; of &quot;Playhouse 90.&quot; Other roles around this time were in the episodes &quot;Dip in the Pool&quot; (1958) and &quot;The Morning After&quot; of CBS&#x27;s &quot;Alfred Hitchcock Presents&quot;. In 1960, she appeared as Clara in an episode of &quot;77 Sunset Strip&quot;, &quot;Who Killed Cock Robin?&quot; Another 1960 role was that of Mrs. Staunton, with Gigi Perreau as her daughter, in the episode &quot;Flight from Terror&quot; of &quot;The Islanders.&quot;

Wray appeared in a 1961 episode of &quot;The Real McCoys&quot; titled &quot;Theatre in the Barn&quot;. In 1963, she played Mrs. Brubaker in &quot;The Eleventh Hour&quot; episode &quot;You&#x27;re So Smart, Why Can&#x27;t You Be Good?&quot; She ended her acting career with the 1980 made-for-television film &quot;Gideon&#x27;s Trumpet&quot;.

In 1988, she published her autobiography &quot;On the Other Hand&quot;. In her later years, Wray continued to make public appearances. In 1991, she was crowned Queen of the Beaux Arts Ball, presiding with King Herbert Huncke.

She was approached by James Cameron to play the part of Rose Dawson Calvert for his blockbuster &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997) with Kate Winslet to play her younger self, but she turned down the role, which was subsequently portrayed by Gloria Stuart in an Oscar-nominated performance. She was a special guest at the 70th Academy Awards, where the show&#x27;s host Billy Crystal introduced her as the &quot;Beauty who charmed the Beast.&quot; She was the only 1920s Hollywood actress in attendance that evening. On October 3, 1998, she appeared at the Pine Bluff Film Festival, which showed &quot;The Wedding March&quot; with live orchestral accompaniment. 

In January 2003, the 95-year-old Wray appeared at the 2003 Palm Beach International Film Festival to celebrate the Rick McKay documentary film &quot;&quot;, where she was honored with a &quot;Legend in Film&quot; award. In her later years, she visited the Empire State Building frequently; in 1991, she was a guest of honor at the building&#x27;s 60th anniversary, and in May 2004, she made one of her last public appearances at the ESB. Her final public appearance was at the premiere of the documentary film &quot;Broadway: The Golden Age, by the Legends Who Were There&quot; in June 2004.
==Personal life==
Wray married three times – to writers John Monk Saunders and Robert Riskin and the neurosurgeon Sanford Rothenberg (January 28, 1919 – January 4, 1991). She had three children: Susan Saunders, Victoria Riskin, and Robert Riskin Jr.

After returning to the US after finishing &quot;The Clairvoyant&quot; she became a naturalized citizen of the United States in May 1935.

==Death==

Wray died in her sleep of natural causes on the night of August 8, 2004, in her apartment on Fifth Avenue Manhattan. She is interred at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery in Hollywood, California.

Two days after her death, the lights of the Empire State Building were lowered for 15 minutes in her memory.

==Honors==

In 1989, Wray was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award. Wray was honored with a Legend in Film award at the 2003 Palm Beach International Film Festival. For her contribution to the motion picture industry, Wray was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6349 Hollywood Blvd. She received a star posthumously on Canada&#x27;s Walk of Fame in Toronto on June 5, 2005. A small park near Lee&#x27;s Creek on Main Street in Cardston, Alberta, her birthplace, was named Fay Wray Park in her honor. The small sign at the edge of the park on Main Street has a silhouette of King Kong on it, remembering her role in &quot;King Kong&quot;. A large oil portrait of Wray by Alberta artist Neil Boyle is on display in the Empress Theatre in Fort Macleod, Alberta. In May 2006, Wray became one of the first four entertainers to be honored by Canada Post by being featured on a postage stamp.

== Filmography ==
===Features===

===Short subjects===

===Partial Television Credits===

==Cultural references==

*In &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot;, Fay Wray is referenced by name in two songs. At the beginning of the movie, &quot;Science Fiction/Double Feature&quot; contains &quot;Then something went wrong / For Fay Wray and King Kong / They got caught in a celluloid jam&quot;, and near the end extraterrestrial transvestite mad scientist Frank N. Furter sings in the song, &quot;Don&#x27;t Dream It&quot;: &quot;Whatever happened to Fay Wray? / That delicate satin-draped frame / As it clung to her thigh / How I started to cry / &#x27;Cause I wanted to be dressed just the same&quot;.
*Mentioned in the chorus of the Jimmy Ray song, &quot;Are You Jimmy Ray?&quot;
*Type O Negative, on their album &quot;Bloody Kisses&quot;, has a track titled &quot;Fay Wray Come Out to Play.&quot;
*Mentioned repeatedly in Thomas Pynchon&#x27;s &quot;Gravity&#x27;s Rainbow.&quot;
* Fay Wray is briefly mentioned in the Bruce Cockburn song &quot;Mama Just Wants to Barrelhouse All Night Long&quot; on the 1973 &quot;Night Vision&quot; album in its second verse: &quot;I hear the city singing like a siren choir / Some fool tried to set this town on fire / TV preacher screams &#x27;come on along&#x27; / I feel like Fay Wray face to face with King Kong / But Mama just wants to barrelhouse all night long.&quot;
* Fay Wray has been mentioned in the &quot;Peanuts&quot; comic strip a couple of times, mostly involving characters Snoopy and Woodstock in reenacting the iconic scenes from &quot;King Kong&quot;. The first one was in a September 11, 1976 strip with Snoopy playing as King Kong while holding Woodstock as Ann Darrow (with a brief mention of her co-star Bruce Cabot); and in an August 29, 1976 Sunday strip format where Snoopy is dreaming that his nose is the Empire State Building and Woodstock, as King Kong, is climbing atop of it in real time. Waking up from it, Snoopy complains afterwards that &quot;Fay Wray didn&#x27;t even show up&quot; in it.

==See also==

* Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Fay Wray at Northern Stars website
* Fay Wray speaking at UCLA 11/18/1970</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q266694" start="0" end="13" title="Fay Wray" label="Vina Fay Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="145" end="154" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381535" start="327" end="339" title="scream queen" label="scream queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297960" start="454" end="471" title="WAMPAS Baby Stars" label="WAMPAS Baby Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="523" end="541" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924247" start="780" end="790" title="The Bowery (1933 film)" label="The Bowery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619412" start="814" end="825" title="Viva Villa!" label="Viva Villa!"/>
<link wikidata="Q322179" start="862" end="875" title="Wallace Beery" label="Wallace Beery"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="881" end="905" title="RKO Radio Pictures, Inc." label="RKO Radio Pictures, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1743545" start="1181" end="1198" title="Cardston, Alberta" label="Cardston, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="1231" end="1278" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="1318" end="1338" title="Salt Lake City, Utah" label="Salt Lake City, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="1376" end="1394" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1396" end="1403" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219054" start="1472" end="1492" title="Daniel Webster Jones (Mormon)" label="Daniel Webster Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489541" start="1700" end="1710" title="Lark, Utah" label="Lark, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="1796" end="1805" title="Hollywood, California" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882770" start="1826" end="1847" title="Hollywood High School" label="Hollywood High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125893" start="2140" end="2157" title="Hal Roach Studios" label="Hal Roach Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297960" start="2257" end="2274" title="WAMPAS Baby Stars" label="WAMPAS Baby Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="2397" end="2414" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="2449" end="2457" title="Western (genre)" label="Westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630976" start="2467" end="2477" title="Buck Jones" label="Buck Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="2536" end="2554" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q78508" start="2574" end="2592" title="Erich von Stroheim" label="Erich von Stroheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713338" start="2644" end="2661" title="The Wedding March (1928 film)" label="The Wedding March"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="2953" end="2960" title="Sound film" label="talkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233890" start="3150" end="3158" title="Doctor X (film)" label="Doctor X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168139" start="3182" end="3207" title="Mystery of the Wax Museum" label="Mystery of the Wax Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="3286" end="3304" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO Radio Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541422" start="3340" end="3363" title="The Most Dangerous Game (1932 film)" label="The Most Dangerous Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q436784" start="3390" end="3401" title="Joel McCrea" label="Joel McCrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q82360" start="3543" end="3559" title="Robert Armstrong (actor)" label="Robert Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q105719" start="3730" end="3741" title="Jean Harlow" label="Jean Harlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="3791" end="3794" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q446427" start="3932" end="3948" title="Merian C. Cooper" label="Merian C. Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413857" start="4245" end="4274" title="The Richest Girl in the World (1934 film)" label="The Richest Girl in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944821" start="4623" end="4646" title="The Pride of the Family" label="The Pride of the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q180919" start="4658" end="4670" title="Natalie Wood" label="Natalie Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299272" start="4716" end="4725" title="Queen Bee (1955 film)" label="Queen Bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057432" start="4742" end="4752" title="The Cobweb (1955 film)" label="The Cobweb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258617" start="4801" end="4815" title="List of Perry Mason episodes" label="three episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q165356" start="4825" end="4836" title="Perry Mason (1957 TV series)" label="Perry Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248532" start="5289" end="5301" title="Playhouse 90" label="Playhouse 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="5448" end="5473" title="Alfred Hitchcock Presents" label="Alfred Hitchcock Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q268543" start="5535" end="5550" title="77 Sunset Strip" label="77 Sunset Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560316" start="5643" end="5655" title="Gigi Perreau" label="Gigi Perreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742710" start="5728" end="5741" title="The Islanders (TV series)" label="The Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488333" start="5791" end="5806" title="The Real McCoys" label="The Real McCoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004618" start="5896" end="5913" title="The Eleventh Hour (1962 TV series)" label="The Eleventh Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091635" start="6063" end="6084" title="Gideon&amp;#x27;s Trumpet (1980 film)" label="Gideon&amp;#x27;s Trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318001" start="6303" end="6317" title="Herbert Huncke" label="Herbert Huncke"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="6342" end="6355" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="6422" end="6429" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="6448" end="6460" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q189407" start="6553" end="6566" title="Gloria Stuart" label="Gloria Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="6573" end="6578" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q536749" start="6633" end="6652" title="70th Academy Awards" label="70th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="6681" end="6694" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127997" start="7034" end="7072" title="Palm Beach International Film Festival" label="Palm Beach International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="7231" end="7252" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298183" start="7623" end="7641" title="John Monk Saunders" label="John Monk Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q240370" start="7646" end="7659" title="Robert Riskin" label="Robert Riskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723249" start="7866" end="7881" title="The Clairvoyant (1935 film)" label="The Clairvoyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438541" start="7993" end="8007" title="natural causes" label="natural causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q109858" start="8060" end="8072" title="Fifth Avenue" label="Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624932" start="8107" end="8133" title="Hollywood Forever Cemetery" label="Hollywood Forever Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="8205" end="8226" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031439" start="8313" end="8326" title="Women in Film Los Angeles" label="Women in Film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8327" end="8340" title="Women in Film Crystal + Lucy Awards#THE CRYSTAL AWARD" label="Crystal Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="8528" end="8550" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q857933" start="8611" end="8637" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743545" start="8719" end="8736" title="Cardston, Alberta" label="Cardston, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q37777923" start="9009" end="9024" title="Empress Theatre (Fort Macleod)" label="Empress Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032001" start="9128" end="9139" title="Canada Post" label="Canada Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q751921" start="9304" end="9333" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201118" start="9915" end="9924" title="Jimmy Ray" label="Jimmy Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q633405" start="9963" end="9978" title="Type O Negative (band)" label="Type O Negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q885279" start="10001" end="10014" title="Bloody Kisses" label="Bloody Kisses"/>
<link wikidata="Q35155" start="10105" end="10119" title="Thomas Pynchon" label="Thomas Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212160" start="10133" end="10155" title="Gravity&amp;#x27;s Rainbow" label="Gravity&amp;#x27;s Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q773830" start="10202" end="10216" title="Bruce Cockburn" label="Bruce Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033544" start="10298" end="10310" title="Night Vision (Bruce Cockburn album)" label="Night Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="10637" end="10644" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q207369" start="10710" end="10716" title="Snoopy" label="Snoopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q246867" start="10721" end="10730" title="Woodstock (Peanuts)" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="10774" end="10783" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876200" start="10899" end="10909" title="Ann Darrow" label="Ann Darrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q373500" start="10947" end="10958" title="Bruce Cabot" label="Bruce Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="11053" end="11074" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030854" start="11263" end="11299" title="Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood" label="Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10967" wikidata="Q949167" url="?curid=10967" title="Forgetting curve">
<text>The forgetting curve hypothesizes the decline of memory retention in time. This curve shows how information is lost over time when there is no attempt to retain it. A related concept is the strength of memory that refers to the durability that memory traces in the brain. The stronger the memory, the longer period of time that a person is able to recall it. A typical graph of the forgetting curve purports to show that humans tend to halve their memory of newly learned knowledge in a matter of days or weeks unless they consciously review the learned material.

The forgetting curve supports one of the seven kinds of memory failures: transience, which is the process of forgetting that occurs with the passage of time.

== History ==

From 1880 to 1885, Hermann Ebbinghaus ran a limited, incomplete study on himself and published his hypothesis in 1885 as &quot;&quot; (later translated into English as &quot;Memory: A Contribution to Experimental Psychology&quot;). Ebbinghaus studied the memorisation of nonsense syllables, such as &quot;WID&quot; and &quot;ZOF&quot; (CVCs or Consonant–Vowel–Consonant) by repeatedly testing himself after various time periods and recording the results. He plotted these results on a graph creating what is now known as the &quot;forgetting curve&quot;. Ebbinghaus investigated the rate of forgetting, but not the effect of spaced repetition on the increase in retrievability of memories.

Ebbinghaus&#x27;s publication also included an equation to approximate his forgetting curve:

formula_1

Here, formula_2 represents &#x27;Savings&#x27; expressed as a percentage, and formula_3 represents time in minutes, counting from one minute before end of learning. The constants c and k are 1.25 and 1.84 respectively. Savings is defined as the relative amount of time saved on the second learning trial as a result of having had the first. A savings of 100% would indicate that all items were still known from the first trial. A 75% savings would mean that relearning missed items required 25% as long as the original learning session (to learn all items). &#x27;Savings&#x27; is thus, analogous to retention rate.

In 2015, an attempt to replicate the forgetting curve with one study subject has shown the experimental results similar to Ebbinghaus&#x27; original data.

Ebbinghaus&#x27; experiment has significantly contributed to experimental psychology. He was the first to carry out a series of well-designed experiments on the subject of forgetting, and he was one of the first to choose artificial stimuli in the research of experimental psychology. Since his introduction of nonsense syllables, a large number of experiments in experimental psychology has been based on highly controlled artificial stimuli.

== Increasing rate of learning ==
Hermann Ebbinghaus hypothesized that the speed of forgetting depends on a number of factors such as the difficulty of the learned material (e.g. how meaningful it is), its representation and other physiological factors such as stress and sleep. He further hypothesized that the basic forgetting rate differs little between individuals. He concluded that the difference in performance can be explained by mnemonic representation skills.

He went on to hypothesize that basic training in mnemonic techniques can help overcome those differences in part. He asserted that the best methods for increasing the strength of memory are:
# better memory representation (e.g. with mnemonic techniques)
# repetition based on active recall (especially spaced repetition).
His premise was that each repetition in learning increases the optimum interval before the next repetition is needed (for near-perfect retention, initial repetitions may need to be made within days, but later they can be made after years). He discovered that information is easier to recall when it&#x27;s built upon things you already know, and the forgetting curve was flattened by every repetition. It appeared that by applying frequent training in learning, the information was solidified by repeated recalling.

Later research also suggested that, other than the two factors Ebbinghaus proposed, higher original learning would also produce slower forgetting. The more information was originally learned, the slower the forgetting rate would be.

Spending time each day to remember information will greatly decrease the effects of the forgetting curve. Some learning consultants claim reviewing material in the first 24 hours after learning information is the optimum time to actively recall the content and reset the forgetting curve. Evidence suggests waiting 10–20% of the time towards when the information will be needed is the optimum time for a single review.

Some memories remain free from the detrimental effects of interference and do not necessarily follow the typical forgetting curve as various noise and outside factors influence what information would be remembered. There is debate among supporters of the hypothesis about the shape of the curve for events and facts that are more significant to the subject. Some supporters, for example, suggest that memories of shocking events such as the Kennedy Assassination or 9/11 are vividly imprinted in memory (flashbulb memory). Others have compared contemporaneous written recollections with recollections recorded years later, and found considerable variations as the subject&#x27;s memory incorporates after-acquired information. There is considerable research in this area as it relates to eyewitness identification testimony, and eyewitness accounts are found demonstrably unreliable.

==Equations ==
Many equations have since been proposed to approximate forgetting, perhaps the simplest being an exponential curve described by the equation

formula_4

where formula_5 is retrievability (a measure of how easy it is to retrieve a piece of information from memory), formula_6 is stability of memory (determines how fast formula_5 falls over time in the absence of training, testing or other recall), and formula_3 is time.

Simple equations such as this one were not found to provide a good fit to the available data.

== See also ==
* 
* Spacing effect

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
*Bremer, Rod. The Manual – A guide to the Ultimate Study Method (USM) (Amazon Digital Services).
*Loftus, Geoffrey R. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition11. 2 (Apr 1985): 397–406.
*http://www.trainingindustry.com/wiki/entries/forgetting-curve.aspx
*https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/do-the-eyes-have-it/
*https://qz.com/1213768/the-forgetting-curve-explains-why-humans-struggle-to-memorize/
*https://www.growthengineering.co.uk/what-is-the-forgetting-curve/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q949167" start="4" end="20" title="Forgetting curve" label="forgetting curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q949167" start="190" end="208" title="Forgetting curve" label="strength of memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="244" end="250" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="265" end="270" title="Human brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="369" end="374" title="graph of a function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377840" start="382" end="392" title="forgetting" label="forgetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q57332" start="758" end="776" title="Hermann Ebbinghaus" label="Hermann Ebbinghaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095869" start="1364" end="1381" title="spaced repetition" label="spaced repetition"/>
<link wikidata="Q475042" start="2369" end="2392" title="experimental psychology" label="experimental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="3014" end="3020" title="Stress (biology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="3025" end="3030" title="sleep" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="3457" end="3465" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705913" start="3500" end="3513" title="active recall" label="active recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095869" start="3526" end="3543" title="spaced repetition" label="spaced repetition"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="5158" end="5179" title="John F. Kennedy assassination" label="Kennedy Assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="5183" end="5187" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q288223" start="5221" end="5237" title="flashbulb memory" label="flashbulb memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422882" start="5505" end="5530" title="eyewitness identification" label="eyewitness identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095859" start="6155" end="6169" title="Spacing effect" label="Spacing effect"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10969" wikidata="Q190411" url="?curid=10969" title="Field-programmable gate array">
<text>A field-programmable gate array (FPGA) is a type of configurable integrated circuit that can be repeatedly programmed after manufacturing. FPGAs are a subset of logic devices referred to as programmable logic devices (PLDs). They consist of an array of programmable logic blocks with a connecting grid, that can be configured &quot;in the field&quot; to interconnect with other logic blocks to perform various digital functions. FPGAs are often used in limited (low) quantity production of custom-made products, and in research and development, where the higher cost of individual FPGAs is not as important, and where creating and manufacturing a custom circuit would not be feasible. Other applications for FPGAs include the telecommunications, automotive, aerospace, and industrial sectors, which benefit from their flexibility, high signal processing speed, and parallel processing abilities. FPGAs can also be used to implement large scale integrated DDAs, a form of an analog computer based on digital computing elements.

A FPGA configuration is generally written using a hardware description language (HDL) e.g. VHDL, similar to the ones used for application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs). Circuit diagrams were formerly used to write the configuration.

The logic blocks of an FPGA can be configured to perform complex combinational functions, or act as simple logic gates like AND and XOR. In most FPGAs, logic blocks also include memory elements, which may be simple flip-flops or more sophisticated blocks of memory. Many FPGAs can be reprogrammed to implement different logic functions, allowing flexible reconfigurable computing as performed in computer software.

FPGAs also have a role in embedded system development due to their capability to start system software development simultaneously with hardware, enable system performance simulations at a very early phase of the development, and allow various system trials and design iterations before finalizing the system architecture.

FPGAs are also commonly used during the development of ASICs to speed up the simulation process.

== History ==

The FPGA industry sprouted from programmable read-only memory (PROM) and programmable logic devices (PLDs). PROMs and PLDs both had the option of being programmed in batches in a factory or in the field (field-programmable).

Altera was founded in 1983 and delivered the industry&#x27;s first reprogrammable logic device in 1984 – the EP300 – which featured a quartz window in the package that allowed users to shine an ultra-violet lamp on the die to erase the EPROM cells that held the device configuration.

Xilinx produced the first commercially viable field-programmable gate array in 1985the XC2064. The XC2064 had programmable gates and programmable interconnects between gates, the beginnings of a new technology and market. The XC2064 had 64 configurable logic blocks (CLBs), with two three-input lookup tables (LUTs).

In 1987, the Naval Surface Warfare Center funded an experiment proposed by Steve Casselman to develop a computer that would implement 600,000 reprogrammable gates. Casselman was successful and a patent related to the system was issued in 1992.

Altera and Xilinx continued unchallenged and quickly grew from 1985 to the mid-1990s when competitors sprouted up, eroding a significant portion of their market share. By 1993, Actel (later Microsemi, now Microchip) was serving about 18 percent of the market.

The 1990s were a period of rapid growth for FPGAs, both in circuit sophistication and the volume of production. In the early 1990s, FPGAs were primarily used in telecommunications and networking. By the end of the decade, FPGAs found their way into consumer, automotive, and industrial applications.

By 2013, Altera (31 percent), Xilinx (36 percent) and Actel (10 percent) together represented approximately 77 percent of the FPGA market.

Companies like Microsoft have started to use FPGAs to accelerate high-performance, computationally intensive systems (like the data centers that operate their Bing search engine), due to the performance per watt advantage FPGAs deliver. Microsoft began using FPGAs to accelerate Bing in 2014, and in 2018 began deploying FPGAs across other data center workloads for their Azure cloud computing platform.

===Growth===
The following timelines indicate progress in different aspects of FPGA design.

====Gates====
* 1987: 9,000 gates, Xilinx
* 1992: 600,000, Naval Surface Warfare Department
* Early 2000s: millions
* 2013: 50 million, Xilinx

====Market size====
* 1985: First commercial FPGA : Xilinx XC2064
* 1987: $14 million
* : &gt;$385 million
* 2005: $1.9 billion
* 2010 estimates: $2.75 billion
* 2013: $5.4 billion
* 2020 estimate: $9.8 billion
* 2030 estimate: $23.34 billion

====Design starts====
A &quot;design start&quot; is a new custom design for implementation on an FPGA.
* 2005: 80,000
* 2008: 90,000

== Design ==
Contemporary FPGAs have ample logic gates and RAM blocks to implement complex digital computations. FPGAs can be used to implement any logical function that an ASIC can perform. The ability to update the functionality after shipping, partial re-configuration of a portion of the design and the low non-recurring engineering costs relative to an ASIC design (notwithstanding the generally higher unit cost), offer advantages for many applications.

As FPGA designs employ very fast I/O rates and bidirectional data buses, it becomes a challenge to verify correct timing of valid data within setup time and hold time. Floor planning helps resource allocation within FPGAs to meet these timing constraints.

Some FPGAs have analog features in addition to digital functions. The most common analog feature is a programmable slew rate on each output pin. This allows the user to set low rates on lightly loaded pins that would otherwise ring or couple unacceptably, and to set higher rates on heavily loaded high-speed channels that would otherwise run too slowly. Also common are quartz-crystal oscillator driver circuitry, on-chip RC oscillators, and phase-locked loops with embedded voltage-controlled oscillators used for clock generation and management as well as for high-speed serializer-deserializer (SERDES) transmit clocks and receiver clock recovery. Fairly common are differential comparators on input pins designed to be connected to differential signaling channels. A few mixed signal FPGAs have integrated peripheral analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) and digital-to-analog converters (DACs) with analog signal conditioning blocks, allowing them to operate as a system on a chip (SoC). Such devices blur the line between an FPGA, which carries digital ones and zeros on its internal programmable interconnect fabric, and field-programmable analog array (FPAA), which carries analog values on its internal programmable interconnect fabric.

=== Logic blocks ===

The most common FPGA architecture consists of an array of logic blocks called configurable logic blocks (CLBs) or logic array blocks (LABs) (depending on vendor), I/O pads, and routing channels. Generally, all the routing channels have the same width (number of signals). Multiple I/O pads may fit into the height of one row or the width of one column in the array.

&quot;An application circuit must be mapped into an FPGA with adequate resources. While the number of logic blocks and I/Os required is easily determined from the design, the number of routing channels needed may vary considerably even among designs with the same amount of logic. For example, a crossbar switch requires much more routing than a systolic array with the same gate count. Since unused routing channels increase the cost (and decrease the performance) of the FPGA without providing any benefit, FPGA manufacturers try to provide just enough channels so that most designs that will fit in terms of lookup tables (LUTs) and I/Os can be routed. This is determined by estimates such as those derived from Rent&#x27;s rule or by experiments with existing designs.&quot;

In general, a logic block consists of a few logical cells. A typical cell consists of a 4-input LUT, a full adder (FA) and a D-type flip-flop. The LUT might be split into two 3-input LUTs. In &quot;normal mode&quot; those are combined into a 4-input LUT through the first multiplexer (mux). In &quot;arithmetic&quot; mode, their outputs are fed to the adder. The selection of mode is programmed into the second mux. The output can be either synchronous or asynchronous, depending on the programming of the third mux. In practice, the entire adder or parts of it are stored as functions into the LUTs in order to save space.

=== Hard blocks ===
Modern FPGA families expand upon the above capabilities to include higher-level functionality fixed in silicon. Having these common functions embedded in the circuit reduces the area required and gives those functions increased performance compared to building them from logical primitives. Examples of these include multipliers, generic DSP blocks, embedded processors, high-speed I/O logic and embedded memories.

Higher-end FPGAs can contain high-speed multi-gigabit transceivers and &quot;hard IP cores&quot; such as processor cores, Ethernet medium access control units, PCI or PCI Express controllers, and external memory controllers. These cores exist alongside the programmable fabric, but they are built out of transistors instead of LUTs so they have ASIC-level performance and power consumption without consuming a significant amount of fabric resources, leaving more of the fabric free for the application-specific logic. The multi-gigabit transceivers also contain high-performance signal conditioning circuitry along with high-speed serializers and deserializers, components that cannot be built out of LUTs. Higher-level physical layer (PHY) functionality such as line coding may or may not be implemented alongside the serializers and deserializers in hard logic, depending on the FPGA.

=== Soft core ===
An alternate approach to using hard macro processors is to make use of soft processor IP cores that are implemented within the FPGA logic. Nios II, MicroBlaze and Mico32 are examples of popular softcore processors. Many modern FPGAs are programmed at &quot;run time&quot;, which has led to the idea of reconfigurable computing or reconfigurable systems – CPUs that reconfigure themselves to suit the task at hand. Additionally, new non-FPGA architectures are beginning to emerge. Software-configurable microprocessors such as the Stretch S5000 adopt a hybrid approach by providing an array of processor cores and FPGA-like programmable cores on the same chip.

=== Integration ===
In 2012 the coarse-grained architectural approach was taken a step further by combining the logic blocks and interconnects of traditional FPGAs with embedded microprocessors and related peripherals to form a complete system on a programmable chip. Examples of such hybrid technologies can be found in the Xilinx Zynq-7000 all Programmable SoC, which includes a 1.0 GHz dual-core ARM Cortex-A9 MPCore processor embedded within the FPGA&#x27;s logic fabric, or in the Altera Arria V FPGA, which includes an 800 MHz dual-core ARM Cortex-A9 MPCore. The Atmel FPSLIC is another such device, which uses an AVR processor in combination with Atmel&#x27;s programmable logic architecture. The Microsemi SmartFusion devices incorporate an ARM Cortex-M3 hard processor core (with up to 512 kB of flash and 64 kB of RAM) and analog peripherals such as a multi-channel analog-to-digital converters and digital-to-analog converters in their flash memory-based FPGA fabric.

=== Clocking ===
Most of the logic inside of an FPGA is synchronous circuitry that requires a clock signal. FPGAs contain dedicated global and regional routing networks for clock and reset, typically implemented as an H tree, so they can be delivered with minimal skew. FPGAs may contain analog phase-locked loop or delay-locked loop components to synthesize new clock frequencies and manage jitter. Complex designs can use multiple clocks with different frequency and phase relationships, each forming separate clock domains. These clock signals can be generated locally by an oscillator or they can be recovered from a data stream. Care must be taken when building clock domain crossing circuitry to avoid metastability. Some FPGAs contain dual port RAM blocks that are capable of working with different clocks, aiding in the construction of building FIFOs and dual port buffers that bridge clock domains.

=== 3D architectures ===
To shrink the size and power consumption of FPGAs, vendors such as Tabula and Xilinx have introduced 3D or stacked architectures. Following the introduction of its 28 nm 7-series FPGAs, Xilinx said that several of the highest-density parts in those FPGA product lines will be constructed using multiple dies in one package, employing technology developed for 3D construction and stacked-die assemblies.

Xilinx&#x27;s approach stacks several (three or four) active FPGA dies side by side on a silicon interposer – a single piece of silicon that carries passive interconnect. The multi-die construction also allows different parts of the FPGA to be created with different process technologies, as the process requirements are different between the FPGA fabric itself and the very high speed 28 Gbit/s serial transceivers. An FPGA built in this way is called a &quot;heterogeneous FPGA&quot;.

Altera&#x27;s heterogeneous approach involves using a single monolithic FPGA die and connecting other dies and technologies to the FPGA using Intel&#x27;s embedded multi_die interconnect bridge (EMIB) technology.

== Programming ==

To define the behavior of the FPGA, the user provides a design in a hardware description language (HDL) or as a schematic design. The HDL form is more suited to work with large structures because it&#x27;s possible to specify high-level functional behavior rather than drawing every piece by hand. However, schematic entry can allow for easier visualization of a design and its component modules.

Using an electronic design automation tool, a technology-mapped netlist is generated. The netlist can then be fit to the actual FPGA architecture using a process called &quot;place and route&quot;, usually performed by the FPGA company&#x27;s proprietary place-and-route software. The user will validate the results using timing analysis, simulation, and other verification and validation techniques. Once the design and validation process is complete, the binary file generated, typically using the FPGA vendor&#x27;s proprietary software, is used to (re-)configure the FPGA. This file is transferred to the FPGA via a serial interface (JTAG) or to an external memory device such as an EEPROM.

The most common HDLs are VHDL and Verilog. National Instruments&#x27; LabVIEW graphical programming language (sometimes referred to as &quot;G&quot;) has an FPGA add-in module available to target and program FPGA hardware. Verilog was created to simplify the process making HDL more robust and flexible. Verilog has a C-like syntax, unlike VHDL.

To simplify the design of complex systems in FPGAs, there exist libraries of predefined complex functions and circuits that have been tested and optimized to speed up the design process. These predefined circuits are commonly called &quot;intellectual property (IP) cores&quot;, and are available from FPGA vendors and third-party IP suppliers. They are rarely free, and typically released under proprietary licenses. Other predefined circuits are available from developer communities such as OpenCores (typically released under free and open source licenses such as the GPL, BSD or similar license). Such designs are known as open-source hardware.

In a typical design flow, an FPGA application developer will simulate the design at multiple stages throughout the design process. Initially the RTL description in VHDL or Verilog is simulated by creating test benches to simulate the system and observe results. Then, after the synthesis engine has mapped the design to a netlist, the netlist is translated to a gate-level description where simulation is repeated to confirm the synthesis proceeded without errors. Finally, the design is laid out in the FPGA at which point propagation delay values can be back-annotated onto the netlist, and the simulation can be run again with these values.

More recently, OpenCL (Open Computing Language) is being used by programmers to take advantage of the performance and power efficiencies that FPGAs provide. OpenCL allows programmers to develop code in the C programming language. For further information, see high-level synthesis and C to HDL.

Most FPGAs rely on an SRAM-based approach to be programmed. These FPGAs are in-system programmable and re-programmable, but require external boot devices. For example, flash memory or EEPROM devices may load contents into internal SRAM that controls routing and logic. The SRAM approach is based on CMOS.

Rarer alternatives to the SRAM approach include:
* Fuse: one-time programmable. Bipolar. Obsolete.
* Antifuse: one-time programmable. CMOS. Examples: Actel SX and Axcelerator families; Quicklogic Eclipse II family.
* PROM: programmable read-only memory technology. One-time programmable because of plastic packaging. Obsolete.
* EPROM: erasable programmable read-only memory technology. One-time programmable but with window, can be erased with ultraviolet (UV) light. CMOS. Obsolete.
* EEPROM: electrically erasable programmable read-only memory technology. Can be erased, even in plastic packages. Some but not all EEPROM devices can be in-system programmed. CMOS.
* Flash: flash-erase EPROM technology. Can be erased, even in plastic packages. Some but not all flash devices can be in-system programmed. Usually, a flash cell is smaller than an equivalent EEPROM cell and is, therefore, less expensive to manufacture. CMOS. Example: Actel ProASIC family.

== Manufacturers ==
In 2016, long-time industry rivals Xilinx (now part of AMD) and Altera (now part of İntel) were the FPGA market leaders. At that time, they controlled nearly 90 percent of the market.

Both Xilinx (now AMD) and Altera (now Intel) provide proprietary electronic design automation software for Windows and Linux (ISE/Vivado and Quartus) which enables engineers to design, analyze, simulate, and synthesize (compile) their designs. 

In March 2010, Tabula announced their FPGA technology that uses time-multiplexed logic and interconnect that claims potential cost savings for high-density applications. On March 24, 2015, Tabula officially shut down.

On June 1, 2015, Intel announced it would acquire Altera for approximately US$16.7 billion and completed the acquisition on December 30, 2015.

On October 27, 2020, AMD announced it would acquire Xilinx and completed the acquisition valued at about US$50 billion in February 2022.

In February 2024 Altera became independent of Intel again.

Other manufacturers include:

* Achronix, manufacturing SRAM based FPGAs with 1.5 GHz fabric speed
*Altium, provides system-on-FPGA hardware-software design environment. 
* Cologne Chip, German Government backed designer and producer of FPGAs 
* Efinix offers small to medium-sized FPGAs. They combine logic and routing interconnects into a configurable XLR cell.
* GOWIN Semiconductors, manufacturing small and medium-sized SRAM and Flash-based FPGAs. They also offer pin-compatible replacements for a few Xilinx, Altera and Lattice products.
* Lattice Semiconductor manufactures low-power SRAM-based FPGAs featuring integrated configuration flash, instant-on and live reconfiguration
** SiliconBlue Technologies provides extremely low-power SRAM-based FPGAs with optional integrated nonvolatile configuration memory; acquired by Lattice in 2011
* Microchip:
** Microsemi (previously Actel), producing antifuse, flash-based, mixed-signal FPGAs; acquired by Microchip in 2018
** Atmel, a second source of some Altera-compatible devices; also FPSLIC mentioned above; acquired by Microchip in 2016
* QuickLogic manufactures ultra-low-power sensor hubs, extremely-low-powered, low-density SRAM-based FPGAs, with display bridges MIPI and RGB inputs; MIPI, RGB and LVDS outputs.

== Applications ==

An FPGA can be used to solve any problem which is computable. FPGAs can be used to implement a soft microprocessor, such as the Xilinx MicroBlaze or Altera Nios II. But their advantage lies in that they are significantly faster for some applications because of their parallel nature and optimality in terms of the number of gates used for certain processes.

FPGAs were originally introduced as competitors to CPLDs to implement glue logic for printed circuit boards. As their size, capabilities, and speed increased, FPGAs took over additional functions to the point where some are now marketed as full systems on chips (SoCs). Particularly with the introduction of dedicated multipliers into FPGA architectures in the late 1990s, applications that had traditionally been the sole reserve of digital signal processors (DSPs) began to use FPGAs instead.

The evolution of FPGAs has motivated an increase in the use of these devices, whose architecture allows the development of hardware solutions optimized for complex tasks, such as 3D MRI image segmentation, 3D discrete wavelet transform, tomographic image reconstruction, or PET/MRI systems. The developed solutions can perform intensive computation tasks with parallel processing, are dynamically reprogrammable, and have a low cost, all while meeting the hard real-time requirements associated with medical imaging.

Another trend in the use of FPGAs is hardware acceleration, where one can use the FPGA to accelerate certain parts of an algorithm and share part of the computation between the FPGA and a general-purpose processor. The search engine Bing is noted for adopting FPGA acceleration for its search algorithm in 2014. , FPGAs are seeing increased use as AI accelerators including Microsoft&#x27;s Project Catapult and for accelerating artificial neural networks for machine learning applications.

Originally, FPGAs were reserved for specific vertical applications where the volume of production is small. For these low-volume applications, the premium that companies pay in hardware cost per unit for a programmable chip is more affordable than the development resources spent on creating an ASIC. Often a custom-made chip would be cheaper if made in larger quantities, but FPGAs may be chosen to quickly bring a product to market. By 2017, new cost and performance dynamics broadened the range of viable applications.

Other uses for FPGAs include:

* Space (with radiation hardening)
* Hardware security modules
* High-speed financial transactions
* Retrocomputing (e.g. the MARS and MiSTer FPGA projects)

=== Usage by United States military ===
FPGAs play a crucial role in modern military communications, especially in systems like the Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) and in devices from companies such as Thales and Harris Corporation. Their flexibility and programmability make them ideal for military communications, offering customizable and secure signal processing. In the JTRS, used by the US military, FPGAs provide adaptability and real-time processing, crucial for meeting various communication standards and encryption methods. Thales uses FPGA technology in designing communication devices that fulfill the rigorous demands of military use, including rapid reconfiguration and robust security. Similarly, Harris Corporation, now part of L3Harris Technologies, incorporates FPGAs in its defense and commercial communication solutions, enhancing signal processing and system security.

==== L3Harris ====

# Rapidly adaptable standards-compliant radio (RASOR): A modular open system approach (MOSA) solution supporting over 50 data links and waveforms.
# ASPEN technology platform: Consists of proven hardware modules with programmable software and FPGA options for advanced, configurable data links.
# AN/PRC-117F(C) radios: Supported the U.S. Air Force Electronic Systems Command, strengthening Harris&#x27; role as a full-spectrum communications system supplier.

==== Thales ====

# SYNAPS radio damily: Utilizes software-defined radio (SDR) technology, typically involving FPGA for enhanced flexibility and performance.
# AN/PRC-148 (multiband inter/intra team radio - MBITR): A small-form-factor, multiband, multi-mode SDR used in Afghanistan and Iraq.
# JTRS Cluster 2 handheld radio: Currently in development, recently completed a successful early operational assessment.

== Security ==

FPGAs have both advantages and disadvantages as compared to ASICs or secure microprocessors, concerning hardware security. FPGAs&#x27; flexibility makes malicious modifications during fabrication a lower risk. Previously, for many FPGAs, the design bitstream was exposed while the FPGA loads it from external memory (typically on every power-on). All major FPGA vendors now offer a spectrum of security solutions to designers such as bitstream encryption and authentication. For example, Altera and Xilinx offer AES encryption (up to 256-bit) for bitstreams stored in an external flash memory. Physical unclonable functions (PUFs) are integrated circuits that have their own unique signatures, due to processing, and can also be used to secure FPGAs while taking up very little hardware space. 

FPGAs that store their configuration internally in nonvolatile flash memory, such as Microsemi&#x27;s ProAsic 3 or Lattice&#x27;s XP2 programmable devices, do not expose the bitstream and do not need encryption. In addition, flash memory for a lookup table provides single event upset protection for space applications. Customers wanting a higher guarantee of tamper resistance can use write-once, antifuse FPGAs from vendors such as Microsemi.

With its Stratix 10 FPGAs and SoCs, Altera introduced a Secure Device Manager and physical unclonable functions to provide high levels of protection against physical attacks.

In 2012 researchers Sergei Skorobogatov and Christopher Woods demonstrated that some FPGAs can be vulnerable to hostile intent. They discovered a critical backdoor vulnerability had been manufactured in silicon as part of the Actel/Microsemi ProAsic 3 making it vulnerable on many levels such as reprogramming crypto and access keys, accessing unencrypted bitstream, modifying low-level silicon features, and extracting configuration data.

In 2020 a critical vulnerability (named &quot;Starbleed&quot;) was discovered in all Xilinx 7series FPGAs that rendered bitstream encryption useless. There is no workaround. Xilinx did not produce a hardware revision. Ultrascale and later devices, already on the market at the time, were not affected.

== Similar technologies ==

Historically, FPGAs have been slower, less energy efficient and generally achieved less functionality than their fixed ASIC counterparts. A study from 2006 showed that designs implemented on FPGAs need on average 40 times as much area, draw 12 times as much dynamic power, and run at one third the speed of corresponding ASIC implementations. 

Advantages of FPGAs include the ability to re-program when already deployed (i.e. &quot;in the field&quot;) to fix bugs, and often include shorter time to market and lower non-recurring engineering costs. Vendors can also take a middle road via FPGA prototyping: developing their prototype hardware on FPGAs, but manufacture their final version as an ASIC so that it can no longer be modified after the design has been committed. This is often also the case with new processor designs. Some FPGAs have the capability of partial re-configuration that lets one portion of the device be re-programmed while other portions continue running.

The primary differences between complex programmable logic devices (CPLDs) and FPGAs are architectural. A CPLD has a comparatively restrictive structure consisting of one or more programmable sum-of-products logic arrays feeding a relatively small number of clocked registers. As a result, CPLDs are less flexible but have the advantage of more predictable timing delays and FPGA architectures, on the other hand, are dominated by interconnect. This makes them far more flexible (in terms of the range of designs that are practical for implementation on them) but also far more complex to design for, or at least requiring more complex electronic design automation (EDA) software. In practice, the distinction between FPGAs and CPLDs is often one of size as FPGAs are usually much larger in terms of resources than CPLDs. Typically only FPGAs contain more complex embedded functions such as adders, multipliers, memory, and serializer/deserializers. Another common distinction is that CPLDs contain embedded flash memory to store their configuration while FPGAs usually require external non-volatile memory (but not always). When a design requires simple instant-on (logic is already configured at power-up) CPLDs are generally preferred. For most other applications FPGAs are generally preferred. Sometimes both CPLDs and FPGAs are used in a single system design. In those designs, CPLDs generally perform glue logic functions and are responsible for &quot;booting&quot; the FPGA as well as controlling reset and boot sequence of the complete circuit board. Therefore, depending on the application it may be judicious to use both FPGAs and CPLDs in a single design.

== See also ==

* FPGA Mezzanine Card
* CRUVI FPGA daughtercard standard
* List of HDL simulators

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* Mencer, Oskar et al. (2020). &quot;The history, status, and future of FPGAs&quot;. Communications of the ACM. ACM. Vol. 63, No. 10. doi:

== External links ==
* Migrating from MCU to FPGA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="2" end="31" title="Field-programmable gate array" label="field-programmable gate array"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="33" end="37" title="Field-programmable gate array" label="FPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="65" end="83" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063837" start="190" end="216" title="programmable logic devices" label="programmable logic devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063837" start="253" end="265" title="programmable logic device" label="programmable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125244" start="266" end="278" title="logic block" label="logic blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276063" start="955" end="959" title="Digital differential analyzer" label="DDAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="974" end="989" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173341" start="1078" end="1107" title="hardware description language" label="hardware description language"/>
<link wikidata="Q209455" start="1119" end="1123" title="VHDL" label="VHDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="1154" end="1193" title="application-specific integrated circuit" label="application-specific integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045991" start="1204" end="1220" title="Circuit diagram" label="Circuit diagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q76505" start="1334" end="1357" title="combinational logic" label="combinational functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="1376" end="1386" title="logic gate" label="logic gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q560370" start="1393" end="1396" title="AND gate" label="AND"/>
<link wikidata="Q155516" start="1401" end="1404" title="XOR gate" label="XOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343761" start="1447" end="1462" title="Memory cell (computing)" label="memory elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="1484" end="1494" title="flip-flop (electronics)" label="flip-flops"/>
<link wikidata="Q942353" start="1589" end="1604" title="Boolean function" label="logic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q240838" start="1624" end="1648" title="reconfigurable computing" label="reconfigurable computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="1665" end="1682" title="computer software" label="computer software"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="1711" end="1726" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q381364" start="2153" end="2182" title="programmable read-only memory" label="programmable read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063837" start="2194" end="2219" title="programmable logic device" label="programmable logic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q438294" start="2347" end="2353" title="Altera" label="Altera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072430" start="2566" end="2569" title="Die (integrated circuit)" label="die"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="2583" end="2588" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046482" start="2632" end="2638" title="Xilinx" label="Xilinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q114901" start="2697" end="2707" title="gate array" label="gate array"/>
<link wikidata="Q690265" start="2927" end="2939" title="lookup table" label="lookup table"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981958" start="2963" end="2991" title="Naval Surface Warfare Center" label="Naval Surface Warfare Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840048" start="3385" end="3394" title="Microsemi" label="Microsemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545076" start="3400" end="3409" title="Microchip Technology" label="Microchip"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="3617" end="3635" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="3640" end="3650" title="Computer network" label="networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q671224" start="4024" end="4035" title="data center" label="data center"/>
<link wikidata="Q182496" start="4056" end="4074" title="Bing search engine" label="Bing search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375344" start="4088" end="4108" title="performance per watt" label="performance per watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q600158" start="4165" end="4175" title="Hardware acceleration" label="accelerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q725967" start="4269" end="4274" title="Microsoft Azure" label="Azure"/>
<link wikidata="Q483639" start="4275" end="4290" title="cloud computing" label="cloud computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="4960" end="4970" title="logic gate" label="logic gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="5090" end="5094" title="ASIC" label="ASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q240838" start="5164" end="5188" title="partial re-configuration" label="partial re-configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="5444" end="5449" title="Bus (computing)" label="buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553985" start="5546" end="5560" title="Floorplan (microelectronics)" label="Floor planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591315" start="5750" end="5759" title="slew rate" label="slew rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q552311" start="5862" end="5866" title="Electrical resonance" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418695" start="5870" end="5876" title="Coupling (electronics)" label="couple"/>
<link wikidata="Q877055" start="6013" end="6031" title="crystal oscillator" label="crystal oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q255596" start="6058" end="6071" title="RC oscillator" label="RC oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q52637" start="6078" end="6095" title="phase-locked loop" label="phase-locked loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q852341" start="6111" end="6140" title="voltage-controlled oscillator" label="voltage-controlled oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164179" start="6318" end="6328" title="comparator" label="comparator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928527" start="6372" end="6394" title="differential signaling" label="differential signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541329" start="6411" end="6423" title="mixed signal" label="mixed signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="6457" end="6484" title="analog-to-digital converter" label="analog-to-digital converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="6497" end="6524" title="digital-to-analog converter" label="digital-to-analog converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="6603" end="6619" title="system on a chip" label="system on a chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q380201" start="6762" end="6793" title="field-programmable analog array" label="field-programmable analog array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125244" start="6961" end="6972" title="logic block" label="logic block"/>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="7066" end="7074" title="I/O address" label="I/O pads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929149" start="7566" end="7581" title="crossbar switch" label="crossbar switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377218" start="7616" end="7630" title="systolic array" label="systolic array"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7881" end="7894" title="Lookup table#Hardware LUTs" label="lookup tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446839" start="7918" end="7924" title="Routing (electronic design automation)" label="routed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313495" start="7985" end="8001" title="Rent&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Rent&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q376953" start="8153" end="8163" title="Adder (electronics)" label="full adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="8175" end="8191" title="D-type flip-flop" label="D-type flip-flop"/>
<link wikidata="Q189434" start="8322" end="8333" title="multiplexer" label="multiplexer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186179" start="8491" end="8502" title="Synchronous circuit" label="synchronous"/>
<link wikidata="Q629971" start="8506" end="8518" title="Asynchronous circuit" label="asynchronous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277040" start="8616" end="8635" title="Shannon expansion" label="stored as functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605447" start="8667" end="8672" title="Circuit utilization" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377144" start="9012" end="9023" title="Binary multiplier" label="multipliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="9033" end="9043" title="Digital signal processor" label="DSP blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="9045" end="9064" title="Microprocessor" label="embedded processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="9100" end="9108" title="Computer memory" label="memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934457" start="9151" end="9176" title="multi-gigabit transceiver" label="multi-gigabit transceiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="9216" end="9230" title="processor core" label="processor core"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="9233" end="9241" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295108" start="9242" end="9269" title="Medium access control" label="medium access control units"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="9271" end="9274" title="Conventional PCI" label="PCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q206924" start="9278" end="9289" title="PCI Express" label="PCI Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175867" start="9316" end="9333" title="memory controller" label="memory controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="9415" end="9425" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686420" start="9690" end="9709" title="signal conditioning" label="signal conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457387" start="9874" end="9885" title="line coding" label="line coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495986" start="10088" end="10102" title="soft processor" label="soft processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654284" start="10103" end="10111" title="Semiconductor intellectual property core" label="IP cores"/>
<link wikidata="Q438281" start="10156" end="10163" title="Nios II" label="Nios II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644704" start="10165" end="10175" title="MicroBlaze" label="MicroBlaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218554" start="10180" end="10186" title="Mico32" label="Mico32"/>
<link wikidata="Q240838" start="10319" end="10343" title="reconfigurable computing" label="reconfigurable computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="10372" end="10375" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125244" start="10790" end="10801" title="logic block" label="logic block"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="10856" end="10870" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="10915" end="10944" title="System on a chip" label="system on a programmable chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046482" start="11003" end="11009" title="Xilinx" label="Xilinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640617" start="11024" end="11040" title="Programmable SoC" label="Programmable SoC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="11063" end="11066" title="GHz" label="GHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997451" start="11077" end="11090" title="ARM Cortex-A9" label="ARM Cortex-A9"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="11108" end="11116" title="Embedded system" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q438294" start="11164" end="11170" title="Altera" label="Altera"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="11211" end="11220" title="dual-core" label="dual-core"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997451" start="11221" end="11234" title="ARM Cortex-A9" label="ARM Cortex-A9"/>
<link wikidata="Q757489" start="11247" end="11252" title="Atmel" label="Atmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q216651" start="11298" end="11301" title="Atmel AVR" label="AVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840048" start="11382" end="11391" title="Microsemi" label="Microsemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676760" start="11392" end="11403" title="SmartFusion" label="SmartFusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="11483" end="11488" title="Flash memory" label="flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="11518" end="11528" title="peripheral" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="11554" end="11581" title="analog-to-digital converter" label="analog-to-digital converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="11587" end="11614" title="digital-to-analog converter" label="digital-to-analog converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="11625" end="11637" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186179" start="11714" end="11733" title="synchronous circuit" label="synchronous circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q426882" start="11752" end="11764" title="clock signal" label="clock signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562440" start="11876" end="11882" title="H tree" label="H tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382014" start="11922" end="11926" title="Clock skew" label="skew"/>
<link wikidata="Q52637" start="11953" end="11970" title="phase-locked loop" label="phase-locked loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q492265" start="11974" end="11991" title="delay-locked loop" label="delay-locked loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q911691" start="12021" end="12038" title="clock frequencies" label="clock frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052698" start="12050" end="12056" title="jitter" label="jitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409965" start="12170" end="12182" title="clock domain" label="clock domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172540" start="12279" end="12290" title="data stream" label="data stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134799" start="12325" end="12346" title="clock domain crossing" label="clock domain crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409965" start="12366" end="12379" title="Metastability (electronics)" label="metastability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065347" start="12400" end="12413" title="dual port RAM" label="dual port RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q515636" start="12511" end="12516" title="FIFO (computing and electronics)" label="FIFOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673602" start="12659" end="12665" title="Tabula (company)" label="Tabula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046482" start="12670" end="12676" title="Xilinx" label="Xilinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q229370" start="12693" end="12720" title="three-dimensional integrated circuit" label="3D or stacked architectures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12756" end="12761" title="28 nm" label="28 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056418" start="13093" end="13103" title="interposer" label="interposer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111997" start="13457" end="13470" title="Heterogeneous computing" label="heterogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q173341" start="13785" end="13814" title="hardware description language" label="hardware description language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4514647" start="13829" end="13838" title="schematic" label="schematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453666" start="14095" end="14112" title="Modular programming" label="component modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194864" start="14124" end="14152" title="electronic design automation" label="electronic design automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760303" start="14179" end="14186" title="netlist" label="netlist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390760" start="14290" end="14305" title="place and route" label="place and route"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025226" start="14437" end="14452" title="Static timing analysis" label="timing analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="14454" end="14464" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919644" start="14476" end="14503" title="verification and validation" label="verification and validation"/>
<link wikidata="Q518280" start="14735" end="14751" title="Serial communication" label="serial interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q545306" start="14753" end="14757" title="JTAG" label="JTAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="14802" end="14808" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q209455" start="14836" end="14840" title="VHDL" label="VHDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q827773" start="14845" end="14852" title="Verilog" label="Verilog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544413" start="14854" end="14874" title="National Instruments" label="National Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q746261" start="14881" end="14888" title="LabVIEW" label="LabVIEW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654284" start="15397" end="15429" title="Semiconductor intellectual property core" label="intellectual property (IP) cores"/>
<link wikidata="Q851141" start="15651" end="15660" title="OpenCores" label="OpenCores"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="15687" end="15707" title="free and open source" label="free and open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="15729" end="15732" title="GPL" label="GPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="15734" end="15737" title="BSD license" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q159172" start="15785" end="15805" title="open-source hardware" label="open-source hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q931942" start="15821" end="15832" title="design flow" label="design flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484552" start="15953" end="15956" title="Register-transfer level" label="RTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q209455" start="15972" end="15976" title="VHDL" label="VHDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q827773" start="15980" end="15987" title="Verilog" label="Verilog"/>
<link wikidata="Q476482" start="16013" end="16023" title="test bench" label="test bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q173198" start="16086" end="16095" title="Logic synthesis" label="synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="16170" end="16180" title="Logic gate" label="gate-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144416" start="16332" end="16349" title="propagation delay" label="propagation delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760303" start="16364" end="16378" title="Back annotation" label="back-annotated"/>
<link wikidata="Q681360" start="16468" end="16474" title="OpenCL" label="OpenCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="16659" end="16681" title="C programming language" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754574" start="16712" end="16732" title="high-level synthesis" label="high-level synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015143" start="16737" end="16745" title="C to HDL" label="C to HDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="16770" end="16774" title="static random-access memory" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="16916" end="16928" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="16932" end="16938" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="17047" end="17051" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q182221" start="17105" end="17109" title="Fuse (electrical)" label="Fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q365870" start="17155" end="17163" title="Antifuse" label="Antifuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q381364" start="17271" end="17275" title="Programmable read-only memory" label="PROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="17383" end="17388" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="17541" end="17547" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="17723" end="17728" title="Flash memory" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046482" start="18068" end="18074" title="Xilinx" label="Xilinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="18088" end="18091" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q438294" start="18097" end="18103" title="Altera" label="Altera"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="18117" end="18122" title="Intel" label="İntel"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="18271" end="18282" title="proprietary software" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194864" start="18283" end="18311" title="electronic design automation" label="electronic design automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="18325" end="18332" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="18337" end="18342" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044441" start="18344" end="18347" title="Xilinx ISE" label="ISE"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220741" start="18348" end="18354" title="Vivado" label="Vivado"/>
<link wikidata="Q843225" start="18359" end="18366" title="Intel Quartus Prime" label="Quartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303814" start="18395" end="18401" title="Hardware design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="18412" end="18420" title="simulate" label="simulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q173198" start="18426" end="18436" title="Logic synthesis" label="synthesize"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="18438" end="18445" title="compile" label="compile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673602" start="18479" end="18485" title="Tabula (company)" label="Tabula"/>
<link wikidata="Q901831" start="18528" end="18544" title="Time-division multiplexing" label="time-multiplexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="18758" end="18761" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944944" start="19057" end="19065" title="Achronix" label="Achronix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066620" start="19125" end="19131" title="Altium" label="Altium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19271" end="19277" title="Efinix" label="Efinix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19391" end="19411" title="GOWIN Semiconductors" label="GOWIN Semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q747207" start="19571" end="19592" title="Lattice Semiconductor" label="Lattice Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692774" start="19606" end="19615" title="Low-power electronics" label="low-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983701" start="19675" end="19685" title="instant-on" label="instant-on"/>
<link wikidata="Q240838" start="19695" end="19710" title="Reconfigurable computing" label="reconfiguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514933" start="19714" end="19738" title="SiliconBlue Technologies" label="SiliconBlue Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997658" start="19810" end="19821" title="Non-volatile memory" label="nonvolatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545076" start="19874" end="19883" title="Microchip Technology" label="Microchip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840048" start="19888" end="19897" title="Microsemi" label="Microsemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q240333" start="19910" end="19915" title="Actel" label="Actel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541329" start="19951" end="19963" title="mixed-signal" label="mixed-signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q757489" start="20004" end="20009" title="Atmel" label="Atmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q818888" start="20370" end="20380" title="computable" label="computable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495986" start="20415" end="20434" title="soft microprocessor" label="soft microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644704" start="20455" end="20465" title="MicroBlaze" label="MicroBlaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q438281" start="20476" end="20483" title="Nios II" label="Nios II"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="20587" end="20602" title="Parallel computing" label="parallel nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667469" start="20607" end="20617" title="Logic optimization" label="optimality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063858" start="20730" end="20735" title="Complex programmable logic device" label="CPLDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q385200" start="20749" end="20759" title="glue logic" label="glue logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="20764" end="20785" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="20924" end="20939" title="systems on chip" label="systems on chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377144" start="20997" end="21007" title="Binary multiplier" label="multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="21113" end="21137" title="digital signal processor" label="digital signal processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q600158" start="21730" end="21751" title="hardware acceleration" label="hardware acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q182496" start="21926" end="21930" title="Bing (search engine)" label="Bing"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895600" start="22041" end="22055" title="AI accelerator" label="AI accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q192776" start="22122" end="22147" title="artificial neural network" label="artificial neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="22153" end="22169" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922840" start="22230" end="22250" title="vertical application" label="vertical application"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026015" start="22753" end="22772" title="radiation hardening" label="radiation hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432354" start="22776" end="22800" title="Hardware security module" label="Hardware security module"/>
<link wikidata="Q389525" start="22840" end="22854" title="Retrocomputing" label="Retrocomputing"/>
<link wikidata="Q110413966" start="22874" end="22880" title="MiSTer" label="MiSTer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596292" start="23029" end="23056" title="Joint Tactical Radio System" label="Joint Tactical Radio System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161666" start="23102" end="23108" title="Thales Group" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433308" start="23113" end="23131" title="Harris Corporation" label="Harris Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053147" start="23645" end="23666" title="L3Harris Technologies" label="L3Harris Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652865" start="24109" end="24123" title="AN/PRC-117" label="AN/PRC-117F(C)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358319" start="24146" end="24187" title="Electronic Systems Center" label="U.S. Air Force Electronic Systems Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331892" start="24323" end="24345" title="software-defined radio" label="software-defined radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652864" start="24433" end="24443" title="AN/PRC-148" label="AN/PRC-148"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596292" start="24567" end="24571" title="JTRS" label="JTRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325435" start="24807" end="24824" title="hardware security" label="hardware security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="24887" end="24898" title="Semiconductor device fabrication" label="fabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q415568" start="24952" end="24961" title="bitstream" label="bitstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="25147" end="25157" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q212108" start="25162" end="25176" title="authentication" label="authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q438294" start="25191" end="25197" title="Altera" label="Altera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046482" start="25202" end="25208" title="Xilinx" label="Xilinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q190746" start="25215" end="25218" title="Advanced Encryption Standard" label="AES"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046262" start="25297" end="25325" title="Physical unclonable function" label="Physical unclonable function"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840048" start="25584" end="25593" title="Microsemi" label="Microsemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q747207" start="25614" end="25621" title="Lattice Semiconductor" label="Lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="25699" end="25709" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q690265" start="25743" end="25755" title="lookup table" label="lookup table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476733" start="25765" end="25783" title="single event upset" label="single event upset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840048" start="25933" end="25942" title="Microsemi" label="Microsemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q438294" start="25981" end="25987" title="Altera" label="Altera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046262" start="26027" end="26055" title="physical unclonable function" label="physical unclonable function"/>
<link wikidata="Q254569" start="26276" end="26284" title="Backdoor (computing)" label="backdoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q631425" start="26285" end="26298" title="Vulnerability (computing)" label="vulnerability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091757" start="26442" end="26452" title="access key" label="access key"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754470" start="26498" end="26507" title="low-level" label="low-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781447" start="26541" end="26554" title="Computer configuration" label="configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="27353" end="27357" title="Bug (computer programming)" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q445235" start="27385" end="27399" title="time to market" label="time to market"/>
<link wikidata="Q845173" start="27410" end="27435" title="non-recurring engineering" label="non-recurring engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426992" start="27483" end="27499" title="FPGA prototyping" label="FPGA prototyping"/>
<link wikidata="Q240838" start="27758" end="27782" title="partial re-configuration" label="partial re-configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063858" start="27908" end="27941" title="complex programmable logic device" label="complex programmable logic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q173212" start="27965" end="27978" title="Computer architecture" label="architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719417" start="28068" end="28083" title="Canonical normal form" label="sum-of-products"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="28142" end="28151" title="Register (computing)" label="registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771903" start="28233" end="28246" title="Latency (engineering)" label="timing delays"/>
<link wikidata="Q577764" start="28307" end="28319" title="Communications subsystem" label="interconnect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194864" start="28512" end="28540" title="electronic design automation" label="electronic design automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365898" start="28740" end="28758" title="Functional unit" label="embedded functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q376953" start="28767" end="28773" title="Adder (electronics)" label="adders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377144" start="28775" end="28786" title="Binary multiplier" label="multipliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="28788" end="28794" title="Computer memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510662" start="28800" end="28824" title="SerDes" label="serializer/deserializers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="28884" end="28896" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997658" start="28963" end="28982" title="non-volatile memory" label="non-volatile memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q385200" start="29042" end="29083" title="glue logic" label="(logic is already configured at power-up)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180256" start="29334" end="29341" title="booting" label="booting"/>
<link wikidata="Q847824" start="29380" end="29385" title="Reset (computing)" label="reset"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426625" start="29562" end="29581" title="FPGA Mezzanine Card" label="FPGA Mezzanine Card"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29584" end="29616" title="CRUVI FPGA Card" label="CRUVI FPGA daughtercard standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603465" start="29619" end="29641" title="List of HDL simulators" label="List of HDL simulators"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10971" wikidata="Q5499626" url="?curid=10971" title="Free-running sleep">
<text>Free-running sleep is a rare sleep pattern whereby the sleep schedule of a person shifts later every day. It occurs as the sleep disorder non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder or artificially as part of experiments used in the study of circadian rhythms and other rhythms in biology. Study subjects are shielded from all time cues, often by a constant light protocol, by a constant dark protocol or by the use of light/dark conditions to which the organism cannot entrain such as the ultrashort protocol of one hour dark and two hours light. Also, limited amounts of food may be made available at short intervals so as to avoid entrainment to mealtimes. Subjects are thus forced to live by their internal circadian &quot;clocks&quot;.

==Background==
The individual&#x27;s or animal&#x27;s circadian phase can be known only by the monitoring of some kind of output of the circadian system, the internal &quot;body clock&quot;. The researcher can precisely determine, for example, the daily cycles of gene activity, body temperature, blood pressure, hormone secretion or sleep and activity/alertness. Alertness in humans can be determined by many kinds of verbal and non-verbal tests, whereas alertness in animals can usually be assessed by observing physical activity (for example, of wheel-running in rodents).

When animals or people &quot;free-run&quot;, experiments can be done to see what sort of signals, known as zeitgebers, are effective in entrainment. Also, much work has been done to see how long or short a circadian cycle can be entrained to various organisms. For example, some animals can be entrained to a 22-hour day, but they can not be entrained to a 20-hour day. In recent studies funded by the U.S. space industry, it has been shown that most humans can be entrained to a 23.5-hour day and to a 24.65-hour day.

The effect of unintended time cues is called &quot;masking&quot; and can totally confound experimental results. Examples of masking are morning rush traffic audible to the subjects, or researchers or maintenance staff visiting subjects on a regular schedule.

==In humans==
Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder, also referred to as &quot;free-running disorder&quot; (FRD) or &quot;Non-24&quot;, is one of the circadian rhythm sleep disorders in humans. It affects more than half of people who are totally blind and a smaller number of sighted individuals.

Among blind people, the cause is the inability to register, and therefore to entrain to, light cues. The many blind people who do entrain to the 24-hour light/dark cycle have eyes with functioning retinas including operative non-visual light-sensitive cells, ipRGCs. These ganglion cells, which contain melanopsin, convey their signals to the &quot;circadian clock&quot; via the retinohypothalamic tract (branching off from the optic nerve), linking the retina to the pineal gland.

Among sighted individuals, Non-24 usually first appears in the teens or early twenties. As with delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPS or DSPD), in the absence of neurological damage due to trauma or stroke, cases almost never appear after the age of 30. Non-24 affects more sighted males than sighted females. A quarter of sighted individuals with Non-24 also have an associated psychiatric condition, and a quarter of them have previously shown symptoms of DSPS.

==See also==
* Circadian rhythm
* Circadian rhythm sleep disorder

==References==
==External links==
* A collection of articles about sleep by Piotr A. Wozniak, July 2000</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5499626" start="0" end="18" title="Free-running sleep" label="Free-running sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="29" end="34" title="sleep" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="123" end="137" title="sleep disorder" label="sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773215" start="138" end="169" title="non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder" label="non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="230" end="246" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="269" end="276" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q367158" start="352" end="360" title="protocol (natural sciences)" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="994" end="998" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="1009" end="1025" title="body temperature" label="body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="1027" end="1041" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="1043" end="1050" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="1064" end="1069" title="sleep" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423044" start="1083" end="1092" title="alertness" label="alertness"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="1296" end="1302" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q185962" start="1414" end="1423" title="zeitgeber" label="zeitgeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773215" start="2101" end="2132" title="Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder" label="Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712607" start="2231" end="2262" title="circadian rhythm sleep disorder" label="circadian rhythm sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="2327" end="2332" title="blindness" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q934475" start="2638" end="2644" title="ipRGCs" label="ipRGCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q927337" start="2652" end="2665" title="retinal ganglion cell" label="ganglion cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q92594" start="2682" end="2692" title="melanopsin" label="melanopsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918596" start="2758" end="2782" title="retinohypothalamic tract" label="retinohypothalamic tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q186029" start="2807" end="2818" title="optic nerve" label="optic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="2847" end="2859" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470530" start="2958" end="2986" title="delayed sleep phase disorder" label="delayed sleep phase disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="3058" end="3064" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="3339" end="3355" title="Circadian rhythm" label="Circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712607" start="3358" end="3389" title="Circadian rhythm sleep disorder" label="Circadian rhythm sleep disorder"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="10972" wikidata="Q182560" url="?curid=10972" title="Fenrir">
<text>Fenrir (Old Norse &#x27;fen-dweller&#x27;) or Fenrisúlfr (Old Norse &quot;Fenrir&#x27;s wolf&quot;, often translated &quot;Fenris-wolf&quot;), also referred to as Hróðvitnir (Old Norse &quot;fame-wolf&quot;) and Vánagandr (Old Norse &#x27;monster of the [River] Ván&#x27;), is a monstrous wolf in Norse mythology. In Old Norse texts, Fenrir plays a key role during the events of Ragnarök, where he is foretold to assist in setting the world aflame, resulting in the collapse of humanity and society, and killing the god Odin. 

Fenrir, along with Hel and Jörmungandr, is a child of Loki and female jötunn Angrboða. He is attested in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;, compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, and the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; and &quot;Heimskringla&quot;, composed in the 13th century. In both the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; and &quot;Prose Edda&quot;, Fenrir is the father of the wolves Sköll and Hati Hróðvitnisson, is a son of Loki and is foretold to kill the god Odin during the events of Ragnarök, but will in turn be killed by Odin&#x27;s son Víðarr.

In the &quot;Prose Edda&quot;, additional information is given about Fenrir, including that, due to the gods&#x27; knowledge of prophecies foretelling great trouble from Fenrir and his rapid growth, the gods bound him and as a result Fenrir bit off the right hand of the god Týr. Depictions of Fenrir have been identified on various objects and scholarly theories have been proposed regarding Fenrir&#x27;s relation to other canine beings in Norse mythology. Fenrir has been the subject of artistic depictions and he appears in literature.

==Attestations==
===&quot;Poetic Edda&quot;===

Fenrir is mentioned in three stanzas of the poem &quot;Völuspá&quot; and in two stanzas of the poem &quot;Vafþrúðnismál&quot;. In stanza 40 of the poem &quot;Völuspá&quot;, a völva divulges to Odin that, in the east, an old woman sat in the forest Járnviðr &quot;and bred there the broods of Fenrir. There will come from them all one of that number to be a moon-snatcher in troll&#x27;s skin.&quot; Further into the poem the völva foretells that Odin will be consumed by Fenrir at Ragnarök:

In the stanza that follows the völva describes that Odin&#x27;s &quot;tall child of Triumph&#x27;s Sire&quot; (Odin&#x27;s son Víðarr) will then come to &quot;strike at the beast of slaughter&quot; and with his hands he will drive a sword into the heart of &quot;Hveðrungr&#x27;s son&quot;, avenging the death of his father.

In the first of two stanzas mentioning Fenrir in &quot;Vafþrúðnismál&quot; Odin poses a question to the wise jötunn Vafþrúðnir:

In the stanza that follows Vafþrúðnir responds that Sól (here referred to as &quot;Álfröðull&quot;) will bear a daughter before Fenrir attacks her, and that this daughter shall continue the paths of her deceased mother through the heavens.

In the flyting poem &quot;Lokasenna&quot; verse 38, Loki insults Týr by saying he cannot deal fairly with men because &quot;it was your right hand/ that Fenrir tore away&quot; referring to the association between left hands and dishonesty. Týr responds in stanza 39 with references to the incident of Fenrir&#x27;s binding, &quot;I lost my hand, you the famous wolf.&quot;

===&quot;Prose Edda&quot;===
In the &quot;Prose Edda&quot;, Fenrir is mentioned in three books: &quot;Gylfaginning&quot;, &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; and &quot;Háttatal&quot;.

====&quot;Gylfaginning&quot; chapters 13 and 25====
In chapter 13 of the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; book &quot;Gylfaginning&quot;, Fenrir is first mentioned in a stanza quoted from &quot;Völuspá&quot;. Fenrir is first mentioned in prose in chapter 25, where the enthroned figure of High tells Gangleri (described as King Gylfi in disguise) about the god Týr. High says that one example of Týr&#x27;s bravery is that when the Æsir were luring Fenrir (referred to here as &quot;Fenrisúlfr&quot;) to place the fetter Gleipnir on the wolf, Týr placed his hand within the wolf&#x27;s mouth as a pledge. This was done at Fenrir&#x27;s own request because he did not trust that the Æsir would let him go. As a result, when the Æsir refused to release him, he bit off Týr&#x27;s hand at a location &quot;now called the wolf-joint&quot; (the wrist), causing Týr to be one-handed and &quot;not considered to be a promoter of settlements between people.&quot;

====&quot;Gylfaginning&quot; chapter 34====

In chapter 34, High describes Loki, and says that Loki had three children with a woman named Angrboða located in the land of Jötunheimr; Fenrisúlfr, the serpent Jörmungandr, and the female being Hel. High continues that, once the gods found that these three children were being brought up in the land of Jötunheimr, and when the gods &quot;traced prophecies that from these siblings great mischief and disaster would arise for them&quot; the gods expected a lot of trouble from the three children, partially due to the nature of the mother of the children, yet worse so due to the nature of their father.

High says that Odin sent the gods to gather the children and bring them to him. Upon their arrival, Odin threw Jörmungandr into &quot;that deep sea that lies round all lands&quot;, and then threw Hel into Niflheim, and bestowed upon her authority over nine worlds. However, the Æsir brought up the wolf &quot;at home&quot;, and only Týr had the courage to approach Fenrir, and give Fenrir food. The gods noticed that Fenrir was growing rapidly every day, and since all prophecies foretold that Fenrir was destined to cause them harm, the gods formed a plan. The gods prepared three fetters: The first, greatly strong, was called Leyding. They brought Leyding to Fenrir and suggested that the wolf try his strength with it. Fenrir judged that it was not beyond his strength, and so let the gods do what they wanted with it. At Fenrir&#x27;s first kick the bind snapped, and Fenrir loosened himself from Leyding. The gods made a second fetter, twice as strong, and named it Dromi. The gods asked Fenrir to try the new fetter, and that should he break this feat of engineering, Fenrir would achieve great fame for his strength. Fenrir considered that, while the fetter was very strong, his strength had grown since he broke Leyding; and also that he would have to take some risks if he were to become famous. Fenrir allowed them to place the fetter.

When the Æsir exclaimed that they were ready, Fenrir shook himself, knocked the fetter to the ground, strained hard, and kicking with his feet, snapped the fetter – breaking it into pieces that flew far into the distance. High says that, as a result, to &quot;loose from Leyding&quot; or to &quot;strike out of Dromi&quot; have become sayings for when something is achieved with great effort. The Æsir started to fear that they would not be able to bind Fenrir, and so Odin sent Freyr&#x27;s messenger Skírnir down into the land of Svartálfaheimr to &quot;some dwarfs&quot; and had them make a fetter called Gleipnir. The dwarves constructed Gleipnir from six mythical ingredients. After an exchange between Gangleri and High, High continues that the fetter was smooth and soft as a silken ribbon, yet strong and firm. The messenger brought the ribbon to the Æsir, and they thanked him heartily for completing the task.

The Æsir went out on to the lake Amsvartnir sent for Fenrir to accompany them, and continued to the island Lyngvi (Old Norse &quot;a place overgrown with heather&quot;). The gods showed Fenrir the silken fetter Gleipnir, told him to tear it, stated that it was much stronger than it appeared, passed it among themselves, used their hands to pull it, and yet it did not tear. However, they said that Fenrir would be able to tear it, to which Fenrir replied:

The Æsir said Fenrir would quickly tear apart a thin silken strip, noting that Fenrir earlier broke great iron binds, and added that if Fenrir wasn&#x27;t able to break slender Gleipnir then Fenrir is nothing for the gods to fear, and as a result would be freed. Fenrir responded:

With this statement, all of the Æsir look to one another, finding themselves in a dilemma. Everyone refused to place their hand in Fenrir&#x27;s mouth until Týr put out his right hand and placed it into the wolf&#x27;s jaws. When Fenrir kicked, Gleipnir caught tightly, and the more Fenrir struggled, the stronger the band grew. At this, everyone laughed, except Týr, who there lost his right hand. When the gods knew that Fenrir was fully bound, they took a cord called Gelgja (Old Norse &quot;fetter&quot;) hanging from Gleipnir, inserted the cord through a large stone slab called Gjöll (Old Norse &quot;scream&quot;), and the gods fastened the stone slab deep into the ground. After, the gods took a great rock called Thviti (Old Norse &quot;hitter, batterer&quot;), and thrust it even further into the ground as an anchoring peg. Fenrir reacted violently; he opened his jaws very wide, and tried to bite the gods. Then the gods thrust a sword into his mouth. Its hilt touched the lower jaw and its point the upper one; by means of it the jaws of the wolf were spread apart and the wolf gagged. Fenrir &quot;howled horribly&quot;, saliva ran from his mouth, and this saliva formed the river Ván (Old Norse &quot;hope&quot;). There Fenrir will lie until Ragnarök. Gangleri comments that Loki created a &quot;pretty terrible family&quot; though important, and asks why the Æsir did not just kill Fenrir there since they expected great malice from him. High replies that &quot;so greatly did the gods respect their holy places and places of sanctuary that they did not want to defile them with the wolf&#x27;s blood even though the prophecies say that he will be the death of Odin.&quot;

====&quot;Gylfaginning&quot; chapters 38 and 51====
In chapter 38, High says that there are many men in Valhalla, and many more who will arrive, yet they will &quot;seem too few when the wolf comes&quot;. In chapter 51, High foretells that as part of the events of Ragnarök, after Fenrir&#x27;s son Sköll has swallowed the sun and his other son Hati Hróðvitnisson has swallowed the moon, the stars will disappear from the sky. The earth will shake violently, trees will be uprooted, mountains will fall, and all binds will snap – Fenrisúlfr will be free. Fenrisúlfr will go forth with his mouth opened wide, his upper jaw touching the sky and his lower jaw the earth, and flames will burn from his eyes and nostrils. Later, Fenrisúlfr will arrive at the field Vígríðr with his sibling Jörmungandr. With the forces assembled there, an immense battle will take place. During this, Odin will ride to fight Fenrisúlfr. During the battle, Fenrisúlfr will eventually swallow Odin, killing him, and Odin&#x27;s son Víðarr will move forward and kick one foot into the lower jaw of the wolf. This foot will bear a legendary shoe &quot;for which the material has been collected throughout all time&quot;. With one hand, Víðarr will take hold of the wolf&#x27;s upper jaw and tear apart his mouth, killing Fenrisúlfr. High follows this prose description by citing various quotes from &quot;Völuspá&quot; in support, some of which mention Fenrir.

====&quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; and &quot;Háttatal&quot;====
In the Epilogue section of the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; book &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot;, a euhemerized monologue equates Fenrisúlfr to Pyrrhus, attempting to rationalize that &quot;it killed Odin, and Pyrrhus could be said to be a wolf according to their religion, for he paid no respect to places of sanctuary when he killed the king in the temple in front of Thor&#x27;s altar.&quot; In chapter 2, &quot;wolf&#x27;s enemy&quot; is cited as a kenning for Odin as used by the 10th century skald Egill Skallagrímsson. In chapter 9, &quot;feeder of the wolf&quot; is given as a kenning for Týr and, in chapter 11, &quot;slayer of Fenrisúlfr&quot; is presented as a kenning for Víðarr. In chapter 50, a section of &quot;Ragnarsdrápa&quot; by the 9th century skald Bragi Boddason is quoted that refers to Hel, the being, as &quot;the monstrous wolf&#x27;s sister&quot;. In chapter 75, names for wargs and wolves are listed, including both &quot;Hróðvitnir&quot; and &quot;Fenrir&quot;. &quot;Fenrir&quot; appears twice in verse as a common noun for a &quot;wolf&quot; or &quot;warg&quot; in chapter 58 of &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot;, and in chapter 56 of the book &quot;Háttatal&quot;. Additionally, the name &quot;Fenrir&quot; can be found among a list of jötnar in chapter 75 of &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot;.

===&quot;Heimskringla&quot;===

At the end of the &quot;Heimskringla&quot; saga &quot;Hákonar saga góða&quot;, the poem &quot;Hákonarmál&quot; by the 10th century skald Eyvindr skáldaspillir is presented. The poem is about the fall of King Haakon I of Norway; although he is Christian, he is taken by two valkyries to Valhalla, and is there received as one of the Einherjar. Towards the end of the poem, a stanza relates sooner will the bonds of Fenrir snap than as good a king as Haakon shall stand in his place:

==Archaeological record==
===Thorwald&#x27;s Cross===
Thorwald&#x27;s Cross, a partially surviving runestone erected at Kirk Andreas on the Isle of Man, depicts a bearded human holding a spear downward at a wolf, his right foot in its mouth, while a large bird sits at his shoulder. Rundata dates it to 940, while Pluskowski dates it to the 11th century. This depiction has been interpreted as Odin, with a raven or eagle at his shoulder, being consumed by Fenrir at Ragnarök. On the reverse of the stone is another image parallel to it that has been described as Christ triumphing over Satan. These combined elements have led to the cross as being described as &quot;syncretic art&quot;; a mixture of pagan and Christian beliefs.

===Gosforth Cross===
The mid-11th century Gosforth Cross, located in Cumbria, England, has been described as depicting a combination of scenes from the Christian Judgement Day and the pagan Ragnarök. The cross features various figures depicted in Borre style, including a man with a spear facing a monstrous head, one of whose feet is thrust into the beast&#x27;s forked tongue and on its lower jaw, while a hand is placed against its upper jaw, a scene interpreted as Víðarr fighting Fenrir. This depiction has been theorized as a metaphor for Christ&#x27;s defeat of Satan.

===Ledberg stone===
The 11th century Ledberg stone in Sweden, similarly to Thorwald&#x27;s Cross, features a figure with his foot at the mouth of a four-legged beast, and this may also be a depiction of Odin being devoured by Fenrir at Ragnarök. Below the beast and the man is a depiction of a legless, helmeted man, with his arms in a prostrate position. The Younger Futhark inscription on the stone bears a commonly seen memorial dedication, but is followed by an encoded runic sequence that has been described as &quot;mysterious&quot;, and &quot;an interesting magic formula which is known from all over the ancient Norse world&quot;.

===Other===
If the images on the Tullstorp Runestone are correctly identified as depicting Ragnarök, then Fenrir is shown above the ship Naglfar.

Meyer Schapiro theorizes a connection between the &quot;Hell Mouth&quot; that appears in medieval Christian iconography and Fenrir. According to Schapiro, &quot;the Anglo-Saxon taste for the Hell Mouth was perhaps influenced by the northern pagan myth of the Crack of Doom and the battle with the wolf, who devoured Odin.&quot;

Scholars propose that a variety of objects from the archaeological record depict Týr. For example, a Migration Period gold bracteate from Trollhättan, Sweden, features a person receiving a bite on the hand from a beast, which may depict Týr and Fenrir. A Viking Age hogback in Sockburn, County Durham, North East England may depict Týr and Fenrir.

==Theories==

In reference to Fenrir&#x27;s presentation in the &quot;Prose Edda&quot;, Andy Orchard theorizes that &quot;the hound (or wolf)&quot; Garmr, Sköll, and Hati Hróðvitnisson were originally simply all Fenrir, stating that &quot;Snorri, characteristically, is careful to make distinctions, naming the wolves who devour the sun and moon as Sköll and Hati, and describing an encounter between Garm and Týr (who, one would have thought, might like to get his hand on Fenrir) at Ragnarök.&quot;

John Lindow says that it is unclear why the gods decide to raise Fenrir as opposed to his siblings Hel and Jörmungandr in &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; chapter 35, theorizing that it may be &quot;because Odin had a connection with wolves? Because Loki was Odin&#x27;s blood brother?&quot; Referring to the same chapter, Lindow comments that neither of the phrases that Fenrir&#x27;s binding result in have left any other traces. Lindow compares Fenrir&#x27;s role to his father Loki and Fenrir&#x27;s sibling Jörmungandr, in that they all spend time with the gods, are bound or cast out by them, return &quot;at the end of the current mythic order to destroy them, only to be destroyed himself as a younger generation of gods, one of them his slayer, survives into the new world order.&quot; He also points to Fenrir&#x27;s binding as part of a recurring theme of the bound monster, where an enemy of the gods is bound, but destined to break free at Ragnarok.

Indo-European parallels have been proposed between myths of Fenrir and the Persian demon Ahriman. The Yashts refer to a story where Taxma Urupi rode Angra Mainyu as a horse for thirty years. An elaboration of this allusion is found only in a late Parsi commentary. The ruler Taxmoruw (Taxma Urupi) managed to lasso Ahriman (Angra Mainyu) and keep him tied up while taking him for a ride three times a day. After thirty years, Ahriman outwitted and swallowed Taxmoruw. In a sexual encounter with Ahriman, Jamshid, Taxmoruw&#x27;s brother, inserted his hand into Ahriman&#x27;s anus and pulled out his brother&#x27;s corpse. His hand withered from contact with the diabolic innards. The suggested parallels with Fenrir myths are the binding of an evil being by a ruler figure and the subsequent swallowing of the ruler figure by the evil being (Odin and Fenrir), trickery involving the thrusting of a hand into a monster&#x27;s orifice and the affliction of the inserted limb (Týr and Fenrir).

Ethologist Valerius Geist wrote that Fenrir&#x27;s maiming and ultimate killing of Odin, who had previously nurtured him, was likely based on true experiences of wolf-behaviour, seeing as wolves are genetically encoded to rise up in the pack hierarchy and have, on occasion, been recorded to rebel against, and kill, their parents. Geist states that &quot;apparently, even the ancients knew that wolves may turn on their parents and siblings and kill them.&quot;

==Modern influence==

*Fenrir appears in modern literature in the poem &quot;Om Fenrisulven og Tyr&quot; (1819) by Adam Gottlob Oehlenschläger (collected in &quot;Nordens Guder&quot;), the novel &quot;Der Fenriswolf&quot; by K. H. Strobl, and &quot;Til kamp mod dødbideriet&quot; (1974) by E. K. Reich and E. Larsen.
*Fenrir has been depicted in the artwork &quot;Odin and Fenris&quot; (1909) and &quot;The Binding of Fenris&quot; (around 1900) by Dorothy Hardy, &quot;Odin und Fenriswolf&quot; and &quot;Fesselung des Fenriswolfe&quot; (1901) by Emil Doepler, and is the subject of the metal sculpture &quot;Fenrir&quot; by Arne Vinje Gunnerud located on the island of Askøy, Norway.
*Fenrir is a highly durable mech option in Pixonic&#x27;s game &quot;War Robots&quot; (released as &quot;Walking War Robots&quot; in 2014).
*Fenrir appears in the 2022 game &quot;God of War Ragnarök&quot;.

==See also==
* List of wolves

==Citations==
==General and cited references==

* Crumlin-Pedersen, Ole &amp; Thye, Birgitte Munch (eds.) (1995). &quot;The Ship as Symbol in Prehistoric and Medieval Scandinavia: Papers from an International Research Seminar at the Danish National Museum, Copenhagen, 5–7 May 1994&quot;. Nationalmuseet. 
*Davidson, Hilda Ellis. 1993. &quot;The Lost Beliefs of Northern Europe&quot;. Routledge. 
* Faulkes, Anthony (Trans.) (1995). &quot;Edda&quot;. Everyman. 
* Hollander, Lee Milton (Trans.) (2007). &quot;Heimskringla: History of the Kings of Norway &quot;. University of Texas Press 
*
*McKinnell, John. 2005. &quot;Meeting the Other in Norse Myth and Legend&quot;. D.S. Brewer. 
*
*
*Rundata 2.0 for Windows.
*
==External links==

* MyNDIR (My Norse Digital Image Repository)Illustrations of Fenrir from manuscripts and early print books.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182560" start="0" end="6" title="Fenrir" label="Fenrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="8" end="17" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q514050" start="24" end="27" title="fen" label="fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182560" start="46" end="56" title="Fenrir" label="Fenrisúlfr"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="88" end="92" title="wolf" label="wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q182560" start="163" end="173" title="Fenrir" label="Hróðvitnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q182560" start="212" end="221" title="Fenrir" label="Vánagandr"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="297" end="312" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="379" end="387" title="Ragnarök" label="Ragnarök"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="520" end="524" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191589" start="547" end="550" title="Hel (being)" label="Hel"/>
<link wikidata="Q181227" start="555" end="566" title="Jörmungandr" label="Jörmungandr"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="582" end="586" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q210053" start="598" end="604" title="jötunn" label="jötunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q371828" start="605" end="613" title="Angrboða" label="Angrboða"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="643" end="654" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="739" end="749" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="766" end="778" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q738737" start="915" end="920" title="Sköll" label="Sköll"/>
<link wikidata="Q259182" start="925" end="943" title="Hati Hróðvitnisson" label="Hati Hróðvitnisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="994" end="998" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="1020" end="1028" title="Ragnarök" label="Ragnarök"/>
<link wikidata="Q372614" start="1076" end="1082" title="Víðarr" label="Víðarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q172713" start="1360" end="1363" title="Týr" label="Týr"/>
<link wikidata="Q940563" start="1729" end="1736" title="Völuspá" label="Völuspá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546735" start="1780" end="1793" title="Vafþrúðnismál" label="Vafþrúðnismál"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477129" start="1849" end="1854" title="völva" label="völva"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="1867" end="1871" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995463" start="1922" end="1930" title="Járnviðr" label="Járnviðr"/>
<link wikidata="Q12581" start="2048" end="2053" title="troll" label="troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="2429" end="2438" title="Loki" label="Hveðrungr"/>
<link wikidata="Q210053" start="2601" end="2607" title="jötunn" label="jötunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455231" start="2608" end="2618" title="Vafþrúðnir" label="Vafþrúðnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q15791580" start="2704" end="2713" title="Álfröðull" label="Álfröðull"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463686" start="2869" end="2876" title="flyting" label="flyting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536612" start="2888" end="2897" title="Lokasenna" label="Lokasenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="3278" end="3288" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134288" start="3338" end="3350" title="Gylfaginning" label="Gylfaginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q178075" start="3364" end="3378" title="Skáldskaparmál" label="Skáldskaparmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634576" start="3395" end="3403" title="Háttatal" label="Háttatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q421981" start="3690" end="3694" title="High, Just-As-High, and Third" label="High"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296321" start="3701" end="3709" title="Gylfi" label="Gangleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296321" start="3729" end="3734" title="Gylfi" label="Gylfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172713" start="3762" end="3765" title="Týr" label="Týr"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="3833" end="3837" title="Æsir" label="Æsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q846921" start="3922" end="3930" title="Gleipnir" label="Gleipnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q185706" start="4241" end="4246" title="wrist" label="wrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q371828" start="4496" end="4504" title="Angrboða" label="Angrboða"/>
<link wikidata="Q204102" start="4528" end="4538" title="Jötunheimr" label="Jötunheimr"/>
<link wikidata="Q181227" start="4564" end="4575" title="Jörmungandr" label="Jörmungandr"/>
<link wikidata="Q191589" start="4598" end="4601" title="Hel (being)" label="Hel"/>
<link wikidata="Q204102" start="4707" end="4717" title="Jötunheimr" label="Jötunheimr"/>
<link wikidata="Q176062" start="5214" end="5222" title="Niflheim" label="Niflheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798538" start="5261" end="5272" title="Norse cosmology" label="nine worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509240" start="5585" end="5590" title="Numbers in Germanic paganism" label="three"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478548" start="5591" end="5597" title="fetter" label="fetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131474" start="6836" end="6841" title="Freyr" label="Freyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q264522" start="6859" end="6866" title="Skírnir" label="Skírnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055292" start="6889" end="6903" title="Svartálfaheimr" label="Svartálfaheimr"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="6918" end="6924" title="Dwarf (Germanic mythology)" label="dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679444" start="7311" end="7321" title="Amsvartnir" label="Amsvartnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983007" start="7432" end="7439" title="Calluna" label="heather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500292" start="8602" end="8607" title="Gjöll" label="Gjöll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036775" start="9534" end="9545" title="Vé (shrine)" label="holy places"/>
<link wikidata="Q337168" start="9800" end="9808" title="Einherjar" label="many men"/>
<link wikidata="Q177860" start="9812" end="9820" title="Valhalla" label="Valhalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q738737" start="10007" end="10012" title="Sköll" label="Sköll"/>
<link wikidata="Q654596" start="10031" end="10034" title="Sól (Sun)" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q259182" start="10053" end="10071" title="Hati Hróðvitnisson" label="Hati Hróðvitnisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q739765" start="10090" end="10094" title="Máni" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130175" start="10468" end="10475" title="Vígríðr" label="Vígríðr"/>
<link wikidata="Q372614" start="10716" end="10722" title="Víðarr" label="Víðarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q178075" start="11269" end="11283" title="Skáldskaparmál" label="Skáldskaparmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513013" start="11293" end="11304" title="euhemerism" label="euhemerized"/>
<link wikidata="Q322639" start="11337" end="11344" title="Neoptolemus" label="Pyrrhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="11563" end="11567" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q952912" start="11646" end="11653" title="kenning" label="kenning"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="11691" end="11696" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q314454" start="11697" end="11717" title="Egill Skallagrímsson" label="Egill Skallagrímsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970724" start="11919" end="11931" title="Ragnarsdrápa" label="Ragnarsdrápa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367169" start="11963" end="11977" title="Bragi Boddason" label="Bragi Boddason"/>
<link wikidata="Q191589" start="12003" end="12006" title="Hel (being)" label="Hel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463858" start="12093" end="12097" title="warg" label="warg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="12231" end="12242" title="common noun" label="common noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634576" start="12367" end="12375" title="Háttatal" label="Háttatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210053" start="12454" end="12460" title="jötunn" label="jötnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="12563" end="12575" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="12593" end="12610" title="Hákonar saga góða" label="Hákonar saga góða"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041107" start="12633" end="12643" title="Hákonarmál" label="Hákonarmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="12670" end="12675" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q741327" start="12676" end="12697" title="Eyvindr skáldaspillir" label="Eyvindr skáldaspillir"/>
<link wikidata="Q314477" start="12747" end="12765" title="Haakon I of Norway" label="Haakon I of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q131087" start="12812" end="12820" title="valkyrie" label="valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q177860" start="12825" end="12833" title="Valhalla" label="Valhalla"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13076" end="13097" title="Manx Runestones#Thorwald&amp;#x27;s Cross: Br Olsen;185A (Andreas (III), MM 128)" label="Thorwald&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055922" start="13121" end="13130" title="Manx Runestones" label="runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="13162" end="13173" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q492230" start="13305" end="13312" title="Rundata" label="Rundata"/>
<link wikidata="Q207041" start="13429" end="13434" title="Hugin and Munin" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="13690" end="13703" title="Syncretism" label="syncretic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="13724" end="13729" title="Norse paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003348" start="13796" end="13810" title="Gosforth Cross" label="Gosforth Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="13823" end="13830" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="13916" end="13929" title="Last Judgement" label="Judgement Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q222466" start="14001" end="14012" title="Borre style" label="Borre style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273" start="14368" end="14381" title="Ledberg stone" label="Ledberg stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="14385" end="14391" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306379" start="14691" end="14706" title="Younger Futhark" label="Younger Futhark"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="14805" end="14810" title="runic alphabet" label="runic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415870" start="15004" end="15023" title="Tullstorp Runestone" label="Tullstorp Runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="15062" end="15070" title="Ragnarök" label="Ragnarök"/>
<link wikidata="Q846277" start="15108" end="15115" title="Naglfar" label="Naglfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q533444" start="15118" end="15132" title="Meyer Schapiro" label="Meyer Schapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644025" start="15174" end="15184" title="Hellmouth" label="Hell Mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="15548" end="15564" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q848960" start="15570" end="15579" title="bracteate" label="bracteate"/>
<link wikidata="Q54339" start="15585" end="15596" title="Trollhättan" label="Trollhättan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570646" start="15713" end="15720" title="Hogback (sculpture)" label="hogback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847391" start="15724" end="15732" title="Sockburn" label="Sockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="15734" end="15747" title="County Durham" label="County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="15749" end="15767" title="North East England" label="North East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q213932" start="15944" end="15949" title="Garmr" label="Garmr"/>
<link wikidata="Q738737" start="15951" end="15956" title="Sköll" label="Sköll"/>
<link wikidata="Q259182" start="15962" end="15980" title="Hati Hróðvitnisson" label="Hati Hróðvitnisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315290" start="17161" end="17174" title="bound monster" label="bound monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145774" start="17254" end="17267" title="Proto-Indo-Europeans" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130378" start="17329" end="17336" title="Persian mythology" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q223805" start="17343" end="17350" title="Ahriman" label="Ahriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q689581" start="17356" end="17361" title="Yasht" label="Yasht"/>
<link wikidata="Q519239" start="17529" end="17537" title="Taxmoruw" label="Taxmoruw"/>
<link wikidata="Q155755" start="17758" end="17765" title="Jamshid" label="Jamshid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911428" start="18258" end="18272" title="Valerius Geist" label="Valerius Geist"/>
<link wikidata="Q168356" start="18826" end="18853" title="Adam Gottlob Oehlenschläger" label="Adam Gottlob Oehlenschläger"/>
<link wikidata="Q315103" start="19258" end="19270" title="Emil Doepler" label="Emil Doepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794695" start="19336" end="19355" title="Arne Vinje Gunnerud" label="Arne Vinje Gunnerud"/>
<link wikidata="Q215374" start="19381" end="19386" title="Askøy" label="Askøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="19388" end="19394" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344663" start="19439" end="19446" title="Pixonic" label="Pixonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640476" start="19465" end="19475" title="War Robots" label="War Robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q99397916" start="19575" end="19594" title="God of War Ragnarök" label="God of War Ragnarök"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966156" start="19618" end="19632" title="List of wolves" label="List of wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114011" start="19941" end="19962" title="Hilda Ellis Davidson" label="Davidson, Hilda Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="20019" end="20028" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417845" start="20085" end="20093" title="Everyman&amp;#x27;s Library" label="Everyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514431" start="20098" end="20119" title="Lee Milton Hollander" label="Hollander, Lee Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005866" start="20196" end="20221" title="University of Texas Press" label="University of Texas Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20226" end="20241" title="John McKinnell" label="McKinnell, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952408" start="20305" end="20316" title="D.S. Brewer" label="D.S. Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q492230" start="20324" end="20347" title="Rundata" label="Rundata 2.0 for Windows"/>
</links>
</doc>
