<doc id="646612" wikidata="Q1061891" url="?curid=646612" title="Selma to Montgomery marches">
<text>The Selma to Montgomery marches were three protest marches, held in 1965, along the highway from Selma, Alabama, to the state capital of Montgomery. The marches were organized by nonviolent activists to demonstrate the desire of African-American citizens to exercise their constitutional right to vote, in defiance of segregationist repression; they were part of a broader voting rights movement underway in Selma and throughout the American South. By highlighting racial injustice, they contributed to passage that year of the Voting Rights Act, a landmark federal achievement of the civil rights movement.

Since the late 19th century, Southern state legislatures had passed and maintained a series of Jim Crow laws that had disenfranchised the millions of African Americans across the South and enforced racial segregation. The initial voter registration drive, started in 1963 by the African-American Dallas County Voters League (DCVL) and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) failed as local White officials arrested the organizers and otherwise harassed Blacks wishing to register to vote. The passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 legally ended segregation but the situation in Selma changed little. The DCVL then invited Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. and the activists of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) to amplify the efforts, and these figures drew more prominent people to Alabama. Local and regional protests began in January 1965, with 3,000 people arrested by the end of February. On February 26, activist and deacon Jimmie Lee Jackson died after being shot several days earlier by state trooper James Bonard Fowler during a peaceful march in nearby Marion. To defuse and refocus the Black community&#x27;s outrage, James Bevel, who was directing SCLC&#x27;s Selma voting rights movement, called for a march of dramatic length, from Selma to the state capital of Montgomery, calling for an unhindered exercise of the right to vote. 

The first march took place on March 7, 1965, led by figures including Bevel and Amelia Boynton, but was ended by state troopers and county possemen, who charged on about 600 unarmed protesters with batons and tear gas after they crossed the Edmund Pettus Bridge in the direction of Montgomery. The event became known as Bloody Sunday. Law enforcement beat Boynton unconscious, and the media publicized worldwide a picture of her lying wounded on the bridge. The second march took place two days later but King cut it short as a federal court issued a temporary injunction against further marches. That night, an anti-civil rights group murdered civil rights activist James Reeb, a Unitarian Universalist minister from Boston. The third march, which started on March 21, was escorted by the Alabama National Guard under federal control, the FBI and federal marshals (segregationist Governor George Wallace refused to protect the protesters). Thousands of marchers averaged a day along U.S. Route 80 (US 80), reaching Montgomery on March 24. The following day, 25,000 people staged a demonstration on the steps of the Alabama State Capitol.

The violence of &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot; and Reeb&#x27;s murder resulted in a national outcry, and the marches were widely discussed in national and international news media. The protesters campaigned for a new federal voting rights law to enable African Americans to register and vote without harassment. President Lyndon B. Johnson seized the opportunity and held a historic, nationally televised joint session of Congress on March 15, asking lawmakers to pass what is now known as the Voting Rights Act of 1965. He enacted it on August 6, removing obstacles for Blacks to register &quot;en masse.&quot; The march route is memorialized and designated as the Selma to Montgomery National Historic Trail.

==Selma movement established: 1963–1964==
At the turn of the 20th century, the Alabama state legislature passed a new constitution that effectively disenfranchised most blacks and many poor whites by requirements for payment of a poll tax and passing a literacy test and comprehension of the constitution. Subjective application of the laws effectively closed most blacks out of politics. Selma is a major town and the seat of Dallas County, part of the Alabama Black Belt with a majority-black population. In 1961, the population of Dallas County was 57% black, but of the 15,000 blacks old enough to vote, only 130 were registered (fewer than 1%). At that time, more than 80% of Dallas County blacks lived below the poverty line, most of them working as sharecroppers, farmhands, maids, janitors, and day laborers, but there were also teachers and business owners. With the literacy test administered subjectively by white registrars, even educated blacks were prevented from registering or voting.

Led by the Boynton family (Amelia, Sam, and son Bruce), Rev. L. L. Anderson, J. L. Chestnut, and Marie Foster, the Dallas County Voters League (DCVL) tried to register black citizens during the late 1950s and early 1960s. Their efforts were blocked by state and local officials, the White Citizens&#x27; Council, and the Ku Klux Klan. By the 1960s, county officials and the Citizens&#x27; Council used such tactics as restricted registration hours; economic pressure, including threatening people&#x27;s jobs, firing them, evicting people from leased homes, and economic boycotts of black-owned businesses; and violence against blacks who tried to register. The Society of Saint Edmund, an order of Catholics committed to alleviating poverty and promoting civil rights, were the only whites in Selma who openly supported the voting rights campaign. SNCC staff member Don Jelinek later described this order as &quot;the unsung heroes of the Selma March ... who provided the only integrated Catholic church in Selma, and perhaps in the entire Deep South&quot;.

In early 1963, SNCC organizers Bernard Lafayette and Colia Liddel Lafayette arrived in Selma to begin a voter-registration project in cooperation with the DCVL. In mid-June, Bernard was beaten and almost killed by Klansmen determined to prevent blacks from voting. When the Lafayettes returned to college in the fall, SNCC organizers Prathia Hall and Worth Long carried on the work despite arrests, beatings, and death threats. When 32 black school teachers applied at the county courthouse to register as voters, they were immediately fired by the all-white school board.
After the Birmingham church bombing on September 15, 1963, which killed four black girls, black students in Selma began sit-ins at local lunch counters to protest segregation; they were physically attacked and arrested. More than 300 were arrested in two weeks of protests, including SNCC chairman John Lewis.

On October 7, 1963, one of two days during the month when residents were allowed to go to the courthouse to apply to register to vote, SNCC&#x27;s James Forman and the DCVL mobilized more than 300 blacks from Dallas County to line up at the voter registration office in what was called a &quot;Freedom Day&quot;. Supporting them were national figures: author James Baldwin and his brother David, and comedian Dick Gregory and his wife Lillian (she was later arrested for picketing with SNCC activists and local supporters). SNCC members who tried to bring water to African Americans waiting in line were arrested, as were those who held signs saying &quot;Register to Vote&quot;. After waiting all day in the hot sun, only a handful of the hundreds in the line were allowed to fill out the voter application, and most of those applications were denied by white county officials. United States Justice Department lawyers and FBI agents were present and observing the scene, but took no action against local officials.

On July 2, 1964, President Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 into law, prohibiting segregation of public facilities. Some Jim Crow laws and customs remained in effect in Selma and other places for some time. When activists resumed efforts to integrate Selma&#x27;s eating and entertainment venues, blacks who tried to attend the Wilby Theatre or the Selmont Drive-in theater and eat at the 25¢ hamburger stand were both beaten and arrested.

On July 6, 1964, one of the two registration days that month, John Lewis led 50 black citizens to the courthouse, but County Sheriff Jim Clark arrested them all instead of allowing them to apply to vote. On July 9, 1964, Judge James Hare issued an injunction forbidding any gathering of three or more people under the sponsorship of civil rights organizations or leaders. This injunction made it illegal for more than two people at a time to talk about civil rights or voter registration in Selma, suppressing public civil rights activity there for the next six months.

== 1965 campaign launched ==

===Background===
With civil rights activity blocked by Judge Hare&#x27;s injunction, Frederick Douglas Reese requested the assistance of King and the SCLC. Reese was president of the DCVL, but the group declined to invite the SCLC; the invitation instead came from a group of local activists who would become known as the Courageous Eight – Ulysses S. Blackmon Sr., Amelia Boynton, Ernest Doyle, Marie Foster, James Gildersleeve, J.D. Hunter Sr., Henry Shannon Sr., and Reese.

Three of SCLC&#x27;s main organizers – James Bevel, Diane Nash, and James Orange – had already been working on Bevel&#x27;s Alabama Voting Rights Project since late 1963. King and the executive board of SCLC had not joined it.

When SCLC officially accepted the invitation from the &quot;Courageous Eight&quot;, Bevel, Nash, Orange, and others in SCLC began working in Selma in December 1964. They also worked in the surrounding counties, along with the SNCC staff who had been active there since early 1963.

Since the rejection of voting status for the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party delegates by the regular delegates at the 1964 Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City, major tensions between SCLC and SNCC had been brewing. SCLC ultimately remained neutral in the MFDP dispute to maintain its ties with the national Democratic coalition. Many SNCC members believed they were in an adversarial position with an American establishment which they thought had scorned grassroots democracy. SNCC&#x27;s focus was on bottom-up organizing, establishing deep-rooted local power bases through community organizing. They had become distrustful of SCLC&#x27;s spectacular mobilizations which were designed to appeal to the national media and Washington, DC, but which, most of SNCC believed, did not result in major improvements for the lives of African Americans on the ground. But, SNCC chairman John Lewis (also an SCLC board member), believed mass mobilizations to be invaluable, and he urged the group to participate. SNCC called in Fay Bellamy and Silas Norman to be full-time organizers in Selma.

Selma had both moderate and hardline segregationists in its white power structure. The newly elected Mayor Joseph Smitherman was a moderate who hoped to attract Northern business investment, and he was very conscious of the city&#x27;s image. Smitherman appointed veteran lawman Wilson Baker to head the city&#x27;s 30-man police force. Baker believed that the most effective method of undermining civil rights protests was to de-escalate them and deny them publicity, as Police Chief Laurie Pritchett had done against the Albany Movement in Georgia. He earned what was described as a grudging respect from activists.

The hardline of segregation was represented by Dallas County Sheriff Jim Clark, who used violence and repression to maintain Jim Crow. He commanded a posse of 200 deputies, some of whom were members of Ku Klux Klan chapters or the National States&#x27; Rights Party. Possemen were armed with electric cattle-prods. Some were mounted on horseback and carried long leather whips they used to lash people on foot. Clark and Chief Baker were known to spar over jurisdiction. Baker&#x27;s police patrolled the city except for the block of the county courthouse, which Clark and his deputies controlled. Outside the city limits, Clark and his volunteer posse were in complete control in the county.

===Events of January===
The Selma Voting Rights Campaign officially started on January 2, 1965, when King addressed a mass meeting in Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church in defiance of the anti-meeting injunction. The date had been chosen because Sheriff Clark was out of town, and Chief Baker had stated he would not enforce the injunction. Over the following weeks, SCLC and SNCC activists expanded voter registration drives and protests in Selma and the adjacent Black Belt counties.

Preparations for mass registration commenced in early January, and with King out of town fundraising, were largely under the leadership of Diane Nash. On January 15, King called President Johnson and the two agreed to begin a major push for voting rights legislation which would assist in advancing the passage of more anti-poverty legislation. After King returned to Selma, the first big &quot;Freedom Day&quot; of the new campaign occurred on January 18.

According to their respective strategies, Chief Baker&#x27;s police were cordial toward demonstrators, but Sheriff Clark refused to let black registrants enter the county courthouse. Clark made no arrests or assaults at this time. However, in an incident that drew national attention, Dr. King was knocked down and kicked by a leader of the National States Rights Party, who was quickly arrested by Chief Baker. Baker also arrested the head of the American Nazi Party, George Lincoln Rockwell, who said he&#x27;d come to Selma to &quot;run King out of town&quot;.

Over the next week, blacks persisted in their attempts to register. Sheriff Clark responded by arresting organizers, including Amelia Boynton and Hosea Williams. Eventually, 225 registrants were arrested as well at the county courthouse. Their cases were handled by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. On January 20, President Johnson gave his inaugural address but did not mention voting rights.

Up to this point, the overwhelming majority of registrants and marchers were sharecroppers, blue-collar workers, and students. On January 22, Frederick Reese, a black schoolteacher who was also DCVL President, finally convinced his colleagues to join the campaign and register en masse. When they refused Sheriff Clark&#x27;s orders to disperse at the courthouse, an ugly scene commenced. Clark&#x27;s posse beat the teachers away from the door, but they rushed back only to be beaten again. The teachers retreated after three attempts, and marched to a mass meeting where they were celebrated as heroes by the black community.

On January 25, U.S. District Judge Daniel Thomas issued rules requiring that at least 100 people must be permitted to wait at the courthouse without being arrested. After Dr. King led marchers to the courthouse that morning, Jim Clark began to arrest all registrants in excess of 100, and corral the rest. Annie Lee Cooper, a fifty-three-year-old practical nurse who had been part of the Selma movement since 1963, struck Clark after he twisted her arm, and she knocked him to his knees. Four deputies seized Cooper, and photographers captured images of Clark beating her repeatedly with his club. The crowd was inflamed and some wanted to intervene against Clark, but King ordered them back as Cooper was taken away. Although Cooper had violated nonviolent discipline, the movement rallied around her.

James Bevel, speaking at a mass meeting, deplored her actions because &quot;then [the press] don&#x27;t talk about the registration.&quot; But when asked about the incident by &quot;Jet&quot; magazine, Bevel said, &quot;Not everybody who registers is nonviolent; not everybody who registers is supposed to be nonviolent.&quot; The incident between Clark and Cooper was a media sensation, putting the campaign on the front page of &quot;The New York Times&quot;. When asked if she would do it again, Cooper told &quot;Jet&quot;, &quot;I try to be nonviolent, but I just can&#x27;t say I wouldn&#x27;t do the same thing all over again if they treat me brutish like they did this time.&quot;

===Events of February===
Dr. King decided to make a conscious effort to get arrested, for the benefit of publicity. On February 1, King and Ralph Abernathy refused to cooperate with Chief Baker&#x27;s traffic directions on the way to the courthouse, calculating that Baker would arrest them, putting them in the Selma city jail run by Baker&#x27;s police, rather than the county jail run by Clark&#x27;s deputies. Once processed, King and Abernathy refused to post bond. On the same day, SCLC and SNCC organizers took the campaign outside of Dallas County for the first time; in nearby Perry County 700 students and adults, including James Orange, were arrested.

On the same day, students from Tuskegee Institute, working in cooperation with SNCC, were arrested for acts of civil disobedience in solidarity with the Selma campaign. In New York and Chicago, Friends of SNCC chapters staged sit-ins at federal buildings in support of Selma blacks, and CORE chapters in the North and West also mounted protests. Solidarity pickets began circling in front of the White House late into the night.

After the assault on Dr. King by the white supremacist in January, black nationalist leader Malcolm X had sent an open telegram to George Lincoln Rockwell, stating: &quot;if your present racist agitation against our people there in Alabama causes physical harm ... you and your KKK friends will be met with maximum physical retaliation from those of us who ... believe in asserting our right to self-defense by any means necessary.&quot; Fay Bellamy and Silas Norman attended a talk by Malcolm X to 3,000 students at the Tuskegee Institute, and invited him to address a mass meeting at Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church to kick off the protests on the morning of February 4.

When Malcolm X arrived, SCLC staff initially wanted to block his talk, but he assured them that he did not intend to undermine their work. During his address, Malcolm X warned the protesters about &quot;House Negroes&quot; who, he said, were a hindrance to black liberation. Dr. King later said that he thought this was an attack on him. But Malcolm told Coretta Scott King that he thought to aid the campaign by warning white people what &quot;the alternative&quot; would be if Dr. King failed in Alabama. Bellamy recalled that Malcolm told her he would begin recruiting in Alabama for his Organization of Afro-American Unity later that month (Malcolm was assassinated two weeks later).

That February 4, President Lyndon Johnson made his first public statement in support of the Selma campaign. At midday, Judge Thomas, at the Justice Department&#x27;s urging, issued an injunction that suspended Alabama&#x27;s current literacy test, ordered Selma to take at least 100 applications per registration day, and guaranteed that all applications received by June 1 would be processed before July. In response to Thomas&#x27; favorable ruling, and in alarm at Malcolm X&#x27;s visit, Andrew Young, who was not in charge of the Selma movement, said he would suspend demonstrations. James Bevel, however, continued to ask people to line up at the voter&#x27;s registration office as they had been doing, and Dr. King called Young from jail, telling him the demonstrations would continue. They did so the next day, and more than 500 protesters were arrested. On February 5, King bailed himself and Abernathy out of jail. On February 6, the White House announced that it would urge Congress to enact a voting rights bill during the current session and that the vice-president and Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach would meet with King in the following week. On February 9, King met with Attorney General Katzenbach, Vice President Hubert Humphrey, and White House aides before having a brief, seven-minute session with President Johnson. Following the Oval Office visit, King reported that Johnson planned to deliver his message &quot;very soon&quot;.

Throughout that February, King, SCLC staff, and members of Congress met for strategy sessions at the Selma, Alabama home of Richie Jean Jackson. In addition to actions in Selma, marches and other protests in support of voting rights were held in neighboring Perry, Wilcox, Marengo, Greene, and Hale counties. Attempts were made to organize in Lowndes County, but fear of the Klan there was so intense from previous violence and murders that blacks would not support a nonviolent campaign in great number, even after Dr. King made a personal appearance on March 1.

Overall more than 3,000 people were arrested in protests between January 1 and February 7, but blacks achieved fewer than 100 new registered voters. In addition, hundreds of people were injured or blacklisted by employers due to their participation in the campaign. DCLV activists became increasingly wary of SCLC&#x27;s protests, preferring to wait and see if Judge Thomas&#x27; ruling of February 4 would make a long-term difference. SCLC was less concerned with Dallas County&#x27;s immediate registration figures, and primarily focused on creating a public crisis that would make a voting rights bill the White House&#x27;s number one priority. James Bevel and C. T. Vivian both led dramatic nonviolent confrontations at the courthouse in the second week of February. Selma students organized themselves after the SCLC leaders were arrested. King told his staff on February 10 that &quot;to get the bill passed, we need to make a dramatic appeal through Lowndes and other counties because the people of Selma are tired.&quot;

By the end of the month, 300 blacks were registered in Selma, compared to 9500 whites.

==First Selma-to-Montgomery march==

===Jimmie Lee Jackson&#x27;s murder===
On February 18, 1965, C. T. Vivian led a march to the courthouse in Marion, the county seat of neighboring Perry County, to protest the arrest of James Orange. State officials had received orders to target Vivian, and a line of Alabama state troopers waited for the marchers at the Perry County courthouse. Officials had turned off all of the nearby street lights, and state troopers rushed at the protesters, attacking them. Protesters Jimmie Lee Jackson, his grandfather and his mother fled the scene to hide in a nearby café. Alabama State Trooper corporal James Bonard Fowler followed Jackson into the café and shot him, saying he thought the protester was trying to get his gun as they grappled. Jackson died eight days later at Selma&#x27;s Good Samaritan Hospital, of an infection resulting from the gunshot wound. The death of Jimmie Lee Jackson prompted civil rights leaders to bring their cause directly to Alabama Governor George Wallace by performing a march from Selma to the state capital of Montgomery. Jackson was the only male wage-earner of his household, which lived in extreme poverty. Jackson&#x27;s grandfather, mother, wife, and children were left with no source of income.

===Initiation and goals of the march===

During a public meeting at Zion United Methodist Church in Marion on February 28 after Jackson&#x27;s death, emotions were running high. James Bevel, as director of the Selma voting rights movement for SCLC, called for a march from Selma to Montgomery to talk to Governor George Wallace directly about Jackson&#x27;s death, and to ask him if he had ordered the State Troopers to turn off the lights and attack the marchers. Bevel strategized that this would focus the anger and pain of the people of Marion and Selma toward a nonviolent goal, as many were so outraged they wanted to retaliate with violence.

The marchers also hoped to bring attention to the continued violations of their Constitutional rights by marching to Montgomery. Dr. King agreed with Bevel&#x27;s plan of the march, which they both intended to symbolize a march for full voting rights. They were to ask Governor Wallace to protect black registrants.

SNCC had severe reservations about the march, especially when they heard that King would not be present. They permitted John Lewis to participate, and SNCC provided logistical support, such as the use of its Wide Area Telephone Service (WATS) lines and the services of the Medical Committee on Human Rights, organized by SNCC during the Mississippi Summer Project of 1964.

Governor Wallace denounced the march as a threat to public safety; he said that he would take all measures necessary to prevent it from happening. &quot;There will be no march between Selma and Montgomery,&quot; Wallace said on March 6, 1965, citing concern over traffic violations. He ordered Alabama Highway Patrol Chief Col. Al Lingo to &quot;use whatever measures are necessary to prevent a march&quot;.

=== &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot; events ===

On March 7, 1965, an estimated 525 to 600 civil rights marchers headed southeast out of Selma on U.S. Highway 80. The march was led by John Lewis of SNCC and the Reverend Hosea Williams of SCLC, followed by Bob Mants of SNCC and Albert Turner of SCLC. The protest went according to plan until the marchers crossed the Edmund Pettus Bridge, where they encountered a wall of state troopers and county posse waiting for them on the other side.

County sheriff Jim Clark had issued an order for all white men in Dallas County over the age of twenty-one to report to the courthouse that morning to be deputized. Commanding officer John Cloud told the demonstrators to disband at once and go home. Rev. Hosea Williams tried to speak to the officer, but Cloud curtly informed him there was nothing to discuss. Seconds later, the troopers began shoving the demonstrators, knocking many to the ground and beating them with nightsticks. Another detachment of troopers fired tear gas, and mounted troopers charged the crowd on horseback.

Televised images of the brutal attack presented Americans and international audiences with horrifying images of marchers left bloodied and severely injured, and roused support for the Selma Voting Rights Campaign. Amelia Boynton, who had helped organize the march as well as marching in it, was beaten unconscious. A photograph of her lying on the road of the Edmund Pettus Bridge appeared on the front page of newspapers and news magazines around the world. Another marcher, Lynda Blackmon Lowery, age 14, was brutally beaten by a police officer during the march, and needed seven stitches for a cut above her right eye and 28 stitches on the back of her head. John Lewis suffered a skull fracture and bore scars on his head from the incident for the rest of his life. In all, 17 marchers were hospitalized and 50 treated for lesser injuries; the day soon became known as &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot;.

===Response to &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot;===
After the march, President Johnson issued an immediate statement &quot;deploring the brutality with which a number of Negro citizens of Alabama were treated&quot;. He also promised to send a voting rights bill to Congress that week, although it took him until March 15.

SNCC officially joined the Selma campaign, putting aside their qualms about SCLC&#x27;s tactics to rally for &quot;the fundamental right of protest&quot;. SNCC members independently organized sit-ins in Washington, DC, the following day, occupying the office of Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach until they were dragged away.

The executive board of the NAACP unanimously passed a resolution the day after &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot;, warning

If Federal troops are not made available to protect the rights of Negroes, then the American people are faced with terrible alternatives. Like the citizens of Nazi-occupied France, Negroes must either submit to the heels of their oppressors or they must organize underground to protect themselves from the oppression of Governor Wallace and his storm troopers.

In response to &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot;, labor leader Walter Reuther sent a telegram on March 9 to President Johnson, reading in part:

Americans of all religious faiths, of all political persuasions, and from every section of our Nation are deeply shocked and outraged at the tragic events in Selma Ala., and they look to the Federal Government as the only possible source to protect and guarantee the exercise of constitutional rights, which is being denied and destroyed by the Dallas County law enforcement agents and the Alabama State troops under the direction of Governor George Wallace.

Under these circumstances, Mr President, I join in urging you to take immediate and appropriate steps including the use of Federal marshals and troops if necessary, so that the full exercise of constitutional rights including free assembly and free speech be fully protected.

==Second march: &quot;Turnaround Tuesday&quot;==
Bevel, King, Nash, and others began organizing a second march to be held on Tuesday, March 9, 1965. They issued a call for clergy and citizens from across the country to join them. Awakened to issues of civil and voting rights by years of Civil Rights Movement activities, and shocked by the television images of &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot;, hundreds of people responded to SCLC&#x27;s call.

To prevent another outbreak of violence, SCLC attempted to gain a court order that would prohibit the police from interfering. Instead of issuing the court order, U.S. District Court Judge Frank Minis Johnson issued a restraining order, prohibiting the march from taking place until he could hold additional hearings later in the week.

Based on past experience, some in SCLC were confident that Judge Johnson would eventually lift the restraining order. They did not want to alienate one of the few southern judges who had displayed sympathy to their cause by violating his injunction. In addition, they did not yet have sufficient infrastructure in place to support the long march, one for which the marchers were ill-equipped. They knew that violating a court order could result in punishment for contempt, even if the order is later reversed. But some movement activists, both local and from around the country, were determined to march on Tuesday to protest both the &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot; violence and the systematic denial of black voting rights in Alabama. Both Hosea Williams and James Forman argued that the march must proceed and by the early morning of the march date, and after much debate, Dr. King had decided to lead people to Montgomery.

Assistant Attorney General John Doar and former Florida governor LeRoy Collins, representing President Lyndon Johnson, went to Selma to meet with King and others at Richie Jean Jackson&#x27;s house and privately urged King to postpone the march. The SCLC president told them that his conscience demanded that he proceed, and that many movement supporters, especially in SNCC, would go ahead with the march even if he told them it should be called off. Collins suggested to King that he make a symbolic witness at the bridge, then turn around and lead the marchers back to Selma. King told them that he would try to enact the plan provided that Collins could ensure that law enforcement would not attack them. Collins obtained this guarantee from Sheriff Clark and Al Lingo in exchange for a guarantee that King would follow a precise route drawn up by Clark.

On the morning of March 9, a day that would become known as &quot;Turnaround Tuesday&quot;, Collins handed Dr. King the secretly agreed route. King led about 2,500 marchers out on the Edmund Pettus Bridge and held a short prayer session before turning them around, thereby obeying the court order preventing them from making the full march, and following the agreement made by Collins, Lingo, and Clark. He did not venture across the border into the unincorporated area of the county, even though the police unexpectedly stood aside to let them enter.

As only SCLC leaders had been told in advance of the plan, many marchers felt confusion and consternation, including those who had traveled long distances to participate and oppose police brutality. King asked them to remain in Selma for another march to take place after the injunction was lifted.

That evening, three white Unitarian Universalist ministers in Selma for the march were attacked on the street and beaten with clubs by four KKK members. The worst injured was Reverend James Reeb from Boston. Fearing that Selma&#x27;s public hospital would refuse to treat Reeb, activists took him to Birmingham&#x27;s University Hospital, two hours away. Reeb died on Thursday, March 11 at University Hospital, with his wife by his side.

===Response to the second march===
James Reeb&#x27;s death provoked mourning throughout the country, and tens of thousands held vigils in his honor. President Johnson called Reeb&#x27;s widow and father to express his condolences (he would later invoke Reeb&#x27;s memory when he delivered a draft of the Voting Rights Act to Congress).

Blacks in Dallas County and the Black Belt mourned the death of Reeb, as they had earlier mourned the death of Jimmie Lee Jackson. But many activists were bitter that the media and national political leaders expressed great concern over the murder of Reeb, a northern white in Selma, but had paid scant attention to that of Jackson, a local African American. SNCC organizer Stokely Carmichael argued that &quot;the movement itself is playing into the hands of racism, because what you want as a nation is to be upset when anybody is killed [but] for it to be recognized, a white person must be killed. Well, what are you saying?&quot;

Dr. King&#x27;s credibility in the movement was shaken by the secret turnaround agreement. David Garrow notes that King publicly &quot;waffled and dissembled&quot; on how his final decision had been made. On some occasions King would inaccurately claim that &quot;no pre-arranged agreement existed&quot;, but under oath before Judge Johnson, he acknowledged that there had been a &quot;tacit agreement&quot;. Criticism of King by radicals in the movement became increasingly pronounced, with James Forman calling Turnaround Tuesday, &quot;a classic example of trickery against the people&quot;.

==== James Reeb&#x27;s memorial service ====
Following the death of James Reeb, a memorial service was held at the Brown&#x27;s Chapel AME Church on March 15, 1965. Among those who addressed the packed congregation were Dr. King, labor leader Walter Reuther, and some clergymen. A picture of King, Reuther, Greek Orthodox Archbishop Iakovos and others in Selma for Reeb&#x27;s memorial service appeared on the cover of Life magazine on March 26, 1965. After the memorial service, upon getting permission from the courts, the leaders and attendees marched from the Brown&#x27;s Chapel AME Church to the Dallas County Courthouse in Selma.

====Actions in Montgomery====
With the second march turned and its organizers awaiting a judicial order to safely proceed, Tuskegee Institute students, led by Gwen Patton and Sammy Younge Jr., decided to open a &quot;Second Front&quot; by marching to the Alabama State Capitol and delivering a petition to Governor Wallace. They were quickly joined by James Forman and much of the SNCC staff from Selma. The SNCC members distrusted King more than ever after the &quot;turnaround&quot;, and were eager to take a separate course. On March 11, SNCC began a series of demonstrations in Montgomery, and put out a national call for others to join them. James Bevel, SCLC&#x27;s Selma leader, followed them and discouraged their activities, bringing him and SCLC into conflict with Forman and SNCC. Bevel accused Forman of trying to divert people from the Selma campaign and of abandoning nonviolent discipline. Forman accused Bevel of driving a wedge between the student movement and the local black churches. The argument was resolved only when both were arrested.

On March 15 and 16, SNCC led several hundred demonstrators, including Alabama students, Northern students, and local adults, in protests near the capitol complex. The Montgomery County sheriff&#x27;s posse met them on horseback and drove them back, whipping them. Against the objections of James Bevel, some protesters threw bricks and bottles at police. At a mass meeting on the night of the 16th, Forman &quot;whipped the crowd into a frenzy&quot; demanding that the President act to protect demonstrators, and warned, &quot;If we can&#x27;t sit at the table of democracy, we&#x27;ll knock the fucking legs off.&quot;

&quot;The New York Times&quot; featured the Montgomery confrontations on the front page the next day. Although King was concerned by Forman&#x27;s violent rhetoric, he joined him in leading a march of 2000 people in Montgomery to the Montgomery County courthouse.

According to historian Gary May, &quot;City officials, also worried by the violent turn of events ... apologized for the assault on SNCC protesters and invited King and Forman to discuss how to handle future protests in the city.&quot; In the negotiations, Montgomery officials agreed to stop using the county posse against protesters, and to issue march permits to blacks for the first time.

Governor Wallace did not negotiate, however. He continued to have state police arrest any demonstrators who ventured onto Alabama State property of the capitol complex.
====Actions at the White House====
On March 11, seven Selma solidarity activists sat-in at the East Wing of the White House until arrested. Dozens of other protesters also tried to occupy the White House that weekend but were stopped by guards; they blocked Pennsylvania Avenue instead. On March 12, President Johnson had an unusually belligerent meeting with a group of civil rights advocates including Bishop Paul Moore, Reverend Robert Spike, and SNCC representative H. Rap Brown. Johnson complained that the White House protests were disturbing his family. The activists were unsympathetic and demanded to know why he hadn&#x27;t delivered the voting rights bill to Congress yet, or sent federal troops to Alabama to protect the protesters. In this same period, SNCC, CORE, and other groups continued to organize protests in more than eighty cities, actions that included 400 people blocking the entrances and exits of the Los Angeles Federal Building.

President Johnson told the press that he refused to be &quot;blackjacked&quot; into action by unruly &quot;pressure groups&quot;. The next day he arranged a personal meeting with Governor Wallace, urging him to use the Alabama National Guard to protect marchers. He also began preparing the final draft of his voting rights bill.

On March 11, Attorney General Katzenbach announced that the federal government was intending to prosecute local and state officials who were responsible for the attacks on the marchers on March 7. He would use an 1870 civil rights law as the basis for charges.

====Johnson&#x27;s decision and the Voting Rights Act====
On March 15, the president convened a joint session of Congress, outlined his new voting rights bill, and demanded that they pass it. In a historic presentation carried nationally on live television, making use of the largest media network, Johnson praised the courage of African-American activists. He called Selma &quot;a turning point in man&#x27;s unending search for freedom&quot; on a par with the Battle of Appomattox in the American Civil War. Johnson added that his entire Great Society program, not only the voting rights bill, was part of the Civil Rights Movement. He adopted language associated with Dr. King, declaring that &quot;it is not just Negroes, but really it is all of us, who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice. And we &quot;shall&quot; overcome.&quot; Afterward, King sent a telegram to Johnson congratulating him for his speech, calling it &quot;the most moving eloquent unequivocal and passionate plea for human rights ever made by any president of this nation&quot;. Johnson&#x27;s voting rights bill was formally introduced in Congress two days later.

==March to Montgomery==
A week after Reeb&#x27;s death, on Wednesday March 17, Judge Johnson ruled in favor of the protesters, saying their First Amendment right to march in protest could not be abridged by the state of Alabama:

The law is clear that the right to petition one&#x27;s government for the redress of grievances may be exercised in large groups . ... These rights may ... be exercised by marching, even along public highways.

Judge Johnson had sympathized with the protesters for some days, but had withheld his order until he received an iron-clad commitment of enforcement from the White House. President Johnson had avoided such a commitment in sensitivity to the power of the state&#x27;s rights movement, and attempted to cajole Governor Wallace into protecting the marchers himself, or at least giving the president permission to send troops. Finally, seeing that Wallace had no intention of doing either, the president gave his commitment to Judge Johnson on the morning of March 17, and the judge issued his order the same day. To ensure that this march would not be as unsuccessful as the first two marches were, the president federalized the Alabama National Guard on March 20 to escort the march from Selma. The ground operation was supervised by Deputy U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark. He also sent Joseph A. Califano Jr., who at the time served as Special Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, to outline the progress of the march. In a series of letters, Califano reported on the march at regular intervals for the four days.

On Sunday, March 21, close to 8,000 people assembled at Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church to commence the trek to Montgomery. Most of the participants were black, but some were white and some were Asian and Latino. Spiritual leaders of multiple races, religions, and creeds marched abreast with Dr. King, including Rev. Fred Shuttlesworth, Greek Orthodox Archbishop Iakovos, Rabbis Abraham Joshua Heschel and Maurice Davis, and at least one nun, all of whom were depicted in a photo that has become famous. The Dutch Catholic priest Henri Nouwen joined the march on March 24.

In 1965, the road to Montgomery was four lanes wide going east from Selma, then narrowed to two lanes through Lowndes County, and widened to four lanes again at the Montgomery county border. Under the terms of Judge Johnson&#x27;s order, the march was limited to no more than 300 participants for the two days they were on the two-lane portion of US 80. At the end of the first day, most of the marchers returned to Selma by bus and car, leaving 300 to camp overnight and take up the journey the next day.

On March 22 and 23, 300 protesters marched through chilling rain across Lowndes County, camping at three sites in muddy fields. At the time of the march, the population of Lowndes County was 81% black and 19% white, but not a single black was registered to vote. There were 2,240 whites registered to vote in Lowndes County, a figure that represented 118% of the adult white population (in many Southern counties of that era it was common practice to retain white voters on the rolls after they died or moved away). On March 23, Hundreds of black marchers wore &quot;kippot&quot;, Jewish skullcaps, to emulate the marching rabbis, as Heschel was marching at the front of the crowd. The marchers called the &quot;kippot&quot; &quot;freedom caps&quot;.

On the morning of March 24, the march crossed into Montgomery County and the highway widened again to four lanes. All day as the march approached the city, additional marchers were ferried by bus and car to join the line. By evening, several thousand marchers had reached the final campsite at the City of St. Jude, a complex on the outskirts of Montgomery.

That night on a makeshift stage, a &quot;Stars for Freedom&quot; rally was held, with singers Harry Belafonte, Tony Bennett, Frankie Laine, Peter, Paul and Mary, Sammy Davis Jr., Joan Baez, Nina Simone, and The Chad Mitchell Trio all performing. Thousands more people continued to join the march.

On Thursday, March 25, 25,000 people marched from St. Jude to the steps of the State Capitol Building where King delivered the speech &quot;How Long, Not Long&quot;. He said:

The end we seek is a society at peace with itself, a society that can live with its conscience. ... I know you are asking today, How long will it take? I come to say to you this afternoon however difficult the moment, however frustrating the hour, it will not be long.

After delivering the speech, King and the marchers approached the entrance to the capitol with a petition for Governor Wallace. A line of state troopers blocked the door. One announced that the governor was not in. Undeterred, the marchers remained at the entrance until one of Wallace&#x27;s secretaries appeared and took the petition.

Later that night, Viola Liuzzo, a white mother of five from Detroit who had come to Alabama to support voting rights for blacks, was assassinated by Ku Klux Klan members while she was ferrying marchers back to Selma from Montgomery. Among the Klansmen in the car from which the shots were fired was FBI informant Gary Rowe. Afterward, the FBI&#x27;s COINTELPRO operation spread false rumors that Liuzzo was a member of the Communist Party and had abandoned her children to have sexual relationships with African-American activists.

===Response to the third march ===
The third Selma march received national and international coverage. It was reported that it publicized the marchers&#x27; message without harassment by police and segregation supporters. Gaining more widespread support from other civil rights organizations in the area, this third march was considered an overall success, with greater degree of influence on the public. Subsequently, voter registration drives were organized in black-majority areas across the South, but it took time to get the target population to sign up.

U.S. Representative William Louis Dickinson made two speeches to Congress on March 30 and April 27, saying that there was alcohol abuse, bribery, and widespread sexual license among the marchers. Religious leaders present at the marches denied the allegations, and local and national journalists found no grounds for his accounts. The allegations of segregation supporters were collected in Robert M. Mikell&#x27;s pro-segregationist book &quot;Selma&quot; (Charlotte, 1965).

===Hammermill boycott===
During 1965, Martin Luther King Jr. was promoting an economic boycott of Alabama products to put pressure on the State to integrate schools and employment. In an action under development for some time, the Hammermill Paper Company announced the opening of a major plant in Selma, Alabama; this came during the height of violence in early 1965. On February 4, 1965, the company announced plans for construction of a $35 million plant, allegedly touting the &quot;fine reports the company had received about the character of the community and its people&quot;.

On March 26, 1965, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee called for a national boycott of Hammermill paper products, until the company reversed what SNCC described as racist policies. The SCLC joined in support of the boycott. In cooperation with SCLC, student members of Oberlin College Action for Civil Rights, joined with SCLC members to conduct picketing and a sit-in at Hammermill&#x27;s Erie, Pennsylvania headquarters. White activist and preacher Robert W. Spike called Hammermill&#x27;s decision as &quot;an affront not only to 20 million American Negroes, but also to all citizens of goodwill in this country.&quot; He also criticized Hammermill executives directly, stating: &quot;For the board chairman of one of America&#x27;s largest paper manufacturers to sit side by side with Governor Wallace of Alabama and say that Selma is fine ... is either the height of naiveté or the depth of racism.&quot;

The company called a meeting of the corporate leadership, SCLC&#x27;s C. T. Vivian, and Oberlin student leadership. Their discussions led to Hammermill executives signing an agreement to support integration in Alabama. The agreement also required Hammermill to commit to equal pay for black and white workers. During these negotiations, around 50 police officers arrived outside of the Erie headquarters and arrested 65 activists, charging them with obstruction of an officer.

==Aftermath and historical impact==


The marches had a powerful effect in Washington. After witnessing TV coverage of &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot;, President Lyndon Baines Johnson met with Governor George Wallace in Washington to discuss the civil rights situation in his state. He tried to persuade Wallace to stop the state harassment of the protesters. Two nights later, on March 15, 1965, Johnson presented a bill to a joint session of Congress. The bill was passed that summer and signed by Johnson as the Voting Rights Act on August 6, 1965.

Johnson&#x27;s televised speech before Congress was carried nationally; it was considered to be a watershed moment for the civil rights movement. He said:

Even if we pass this bill, the battle will not be over. What happened in Selma is part of a far larger movement which reaches into every section and state of America. It is the effort of American Negroes to secure for themselves the full blessings of American life. Their cause must be our cause, too, because it is not just Negroes but really it is all of us who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice. And we shall overcome.

Many in the Civil Rights Movement cheered the speech and were emotionally moved that after so long, and so hard a struggle, a President was finally willing to defend voting rights for blacks. According to C. T. Vivian, an SCLC activist who was with King at Richie Jean Jackson&#x27;s home when the speech was broadcast

I looked over ... and Martin was very quietly sitting in the chair, and a tear ran down his cheek. It was a victory like none other. It was an affirmation of the movement.

Many others in the movement remained skeptical of the White House, believing that Johnson was culpable for having allowed violence against the movement in the early months of the campaign and was not a reliable supporter. Neither Jimmie Lee Jackson&#x27;s murderer, nor Reverend Reeb&#x27;s was ever prosecuted by the federal government. J. L. Chestnut, reflecting the view of many Selma activists, feared that the president had &quot;outfoxed&quot; and &quot;co-opted&quot; King and the SCLC. James Forman quipped that by quoting &quot;We Shall Overcome&quot;, Johnson had simply &quot;spoiled a good song&quot;. Such grassroots activists were more determined than ever to remain independent in their political organizing.

Before the march to Montgomery concluded, SNCC staffers Stokely Carmichael and Cleveland Sellers committed themselves to registering voters in Lowndes County for the next year. Their efforts resulted in the creation of the Lowndes County Freedom Organization, an independent third party.

The bill was signed by President Johnson in an August 6 ceremony attended by Amelia Boynton and many other civil rights leaders and activists. This act prohibited most of the unfair practices used to prevent blacks from registering to vote, and provided for federal registrars to go to Alabama and other states with a history of voting-related discrimination to ensure that the law was implemented by overseeing registration and elections.

In the early years of the Act, overall progress was slow, with local registrars continuing to use their power to deny African Americans voting access. In most Alabama counties, for example, registration continued to be limited to two days per month. The United States Civil Rights Commission acknowledged that &quot;The Attorney General moved slowly in exercising his authority to designate counties for examiners ... he acted only in counties where he had ample evidence to support the belief that there would be intentional and flagrant violation of the Act.&quot; Dr. King demanded that federal registrars be sent to every county covered by the Act, but Attorney General Katzenbach refused.

In the summer of 1965, a well-funded SCLC decided to join SNCC and CORE in massive on-the-ground voter registration programs in the South. The Civil Rights Commission described this as a major contribution to expanding black voters in 1965, and the Justice Department acknowledged leaning on the work of &quot;local organizations&quot; in the movement to implement the Act. SCLC and SNCC were temporarily able to mend past differences through collaboration in the Summer Community Organization &amp; Political Education project. Ultimately, their coalition foundered on SCLC&#x27;s commitment to nonviolence and (at the time) the Democratic Party. Many activists worried that President Johnson still sought to appease Southern whites, and some historians support this view.

By March 1966, nearly 11,000 blacks had registered to vote in Selma, where 12,000 whites were registered. More blacks would register by November, when their goal was to replace County Sheriff Jim Clark; his opponent was Wilson Baker, for whom they had respect. In addition, five blacks ran for office in Dallas County. Rev. P. H. Lewis, pastor of Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church, ran for state representative on the Democratic ticket. David Ellwanger, a brother of Rev. Joseph Ellwanger of Birmingham, who led supporters in Selma in 1965, challenged incumbent state senator Walter C. Givhan (d. 1976), a fierce segregationist and a power in the state senate. First elected to the state senate in 1954, Givhan retained his seat for six terms, even after redistricting that preceded the 1966 election.

In November 1966, Katzenbach told Johnson regarding Alabama, that &quot;I am attempting to do the least I can do safely without upsetting the civil rights groups.&quot; Katzenbach did concentrate examiners and observers in Selma for the &quot;high-visibility&quot; election between incumbent County Sheriff Jim Clark and Wilson Baker, who had earned the grudging respect of many local residents and activists. With 11,000 blacks added to the voting rolls in Selma by March 1966, they voted for Baker in 1966, turning Clark out of office. Clark later was prosecuted and convicted of drug smuggling and served a prison sentence. The US Civil Rights Commission said that the murders of activists, such as Jonathan Daniels in 1965, had been a major impediment to voter registration.

Overall, the Justice Department assigned registrars to six of Alabama&#x27;s 24 Black Belt counties during the late 1960s, and to fewer than one-fifth of all the Southern counties covered by the Act. Expansion of enforcement grew gradually, and the jurisdiction of the Act was expanded through a series of amendments beginning in 1970. An important change was made in 1972, when Congress passed an amendment that discrimination could be determined by &quot;effect&quot; rather than by trying to prove &quot;intent&quot;. Thus, if county or local practices resulted in a significant minority population being unable to elect candidates of their choice, the practices were considered to be discriminatory in effect.

In 1960, there were a total of 53,336 black voters registered in the state of Alabama; three decades later, there were 537,285, a tenfold increase. 

==Legacy and honors==
* In 1996, the 54-mile Selma to Montgomery National Historic Trail was designated and is preserved by the National Park Service. As part of the National Historic Trail, the National Park Service operates three interpretive centers (Selma, Lowndes County, and Alabama State University in Montgomery).
* In February 2015, both houses of Congress voted for a resolution to award Congressional Gold Medals to the &quot;foot soldiers&quot; of the Selma campaign. In a later ceremony, two dozen individuals in Selma received certificates. Barack Obama signed the resolution in law on March 7. The award ceremony officially took place on February 24, 2016, at the US Capitol. Surviving marchers John Lewis and Frederick Reese accepted medals on behalf of the Selma marchers.

===Commemorative marches===
Since 1965, many marches have commemorated the events of Bloody Sunday, usually held on or around the anniversary of the original event, and currently known as the Selma Bridge Crossing Jubilee. In March 1975, Coretta Scott King, the widow of Martin Luther King Jr., led four thousand marchers commemorating Bloody Sunday. On its 30th anniversary, Rep. John Lewis, former president of Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and a prominent activist during the Selma to Montgomery marches, said, &quot;It&#x27;s gratifying to come back and see the changes that have occurred; to see the number of registered voters and the number of Black elected officials in the state of Alabama to be able to walk with other members of Congress that are African Americans.&quot;

On the 40th anniversary of Bloody Sunday, over 10,000 people, including Lewis, again marched across Edmund Pettus Bridge. Also, in 1996, the Olympic torch made its way across the bridge with its carrier, Andrew Young, along with many public officials, to symbolize how far the South has come. When Young spoke at the Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church as part of the torch ceremony, he said, &quot;We couldn&#x27;t have gone to Atlanta with the Olympic Games if we hadn&#x27;t come through Selma a long time ago.&quot;

In March 2015, on the 50th anniversary of Bloody Sunday, U.S. President Barack Obama, the first African-American U.S. president, delivered a speech at the foot of the bridge and then, along with former U.S. President George W. Bush, Representative John Lewis, and Civil Rights Movement activists such as Amelia Boynton Robinson (at Obama&#x27;s side in a wheelchair), led a march across the bridge. An estimated 40,000 people attended to commemorate the 1965 march, and to reflect on and speak about its impact on history and continuing efforts to address and improve U.S. civil rights.

After John Lewis died in July 2020, he managed to cross the bridge one last time when his casket, which was carried by a horse-drawn caisson, crossed along the same route he walked during the Bloody Sunday march.

===Revitalization===
Montgomery was one of four state capitals chosen for a Greening Americas Capitals Grant, a project of the Partnership for Sustainable Communities between the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the U.S. Department of Transportation. Beginning in 2011, EPA and community groups developed the study through consultations and a 3-day design workshops, aided by nationally acclaimed urban planners.
The Montgomery portion of the Selma to Montgomery trail was being improved through a multimillion-dollar investment to enhance the trail and related neighborhoods. The city chose a section that passes through a &quot;historically significant African-American neighborhood&quot;. Projects planned to improve design and sustainability include infill development, resurfacing, pedestrian improvements, environmental improvements including new trees and green-screens, and drainage improvements. In addition, many information panels have been installed, as well as several permanent public art displays that are tied to the march.
The work in Montgomery is related to a larger multi-agency effort since 2009 between the Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM), EPA and the National Park Service to improve areas along the National Historic Voting Rights Trail to enable local communities to thrive. The US 80 corridor has been described in an EPA summary as a &quot;54-mile corridor of high unemployment, health issues, lower educational and economic achievements, and severe rural isolation&quot;. Among the serious environmental issues identified by EPA has been the presence of active and abandoned gas stations along the highway, with potential contamination from petroleum leaks from underground storage sites. A site in Montgomery had been identified as a problem, and EPA conducted additional assessments since the beginning of the project. Cleanup of the Montgomery site was scheduled to be completed in 2011. In addition, the agencies have sponsored community engagement to develop plans related to community goals. Since 2010, federal teams have met with community leaders in Selma, Hayneville and Montgomery, the county seats of Dallas, Lowndes and Montgomery counties.

==Representation in media==
* &quot;State of Alabama&quot; (1965), a propaganda film made by Keitz &amp; Herndon for the Alabama State Sovereignty Commission (ASSC project)
* &quot;Eyes on the Prize&quot; (1987) is a 14-hour PBS documentary narrated by Julian Bond and produced by PBS. The sixth episode, &quot;Bridge to Freedom&quot;, explores the Selma to Montgomery marches. The series and its producer won six Emmies, the Peabody Award, and the duPont-Columbia Gold Baton award for excellence in journalism, and it was nominated for an Academy Award.
* &quot;Selma, Lord, Selma&quot; (1999), the first dramatic feature film based on events surrounding the Selma to Montgomery marches, is a Disney made-for-TV movie shown on ABC television. Critical reception varied.
* &quot;Selma&quot;, a 2014 American film directed by Ava DuVernay, features the historic figures who developed the voting rights campaign in Selma and led the Selma to Montgomery marches. The film starred David Oyelowo as Martin Luther King Jr., Tom Wilkinson as President Lyndon B. Johnson, Common as James Bevel, and Tim Roth as Governor George Wallace. It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture, won for best song, and received highly favorable reviews, despite being criticized for the inaccurate portrayal of President Johnson as obstructing the advancement of civil rights.
* &quot;March&quot; (2013) is a three-part graphic novel autobiography written by Congressman John Lewis and published by Top Shelf Productions. It begins with his and fellow civil rights activists&#x27; beating and gassing at the hands of Alabama state troopers on the Edmund Pettus Bridge. Written by Lewis and his congressional aide, Andrew Aydin, and illustrated by Nate Powell, the first book in the series was published in August 2013.

==See also==

== References ==
== External links ==

* &quot;National Voting Rights Museum and Institute&quot;. Selma, Alabama.
* Hartford, Bruce. &quot;Selma, Lord, Selma: The Voting Rights Campaign&quot;. Civil Rights Movement Archive. 
* Hartford, Bruce. &quot;The March to Montgomery&quot;. Civil Rights Movement Archive.
* Hartford, Bruce (2004). &quot;Selma &amp; the March to Montgomery: A Discussion: November–June, 2004–2005&quot;. Civil Rights Movement Archive. Tougaloo College.
* &quot;1965: Police attack Alabama marchers&quot;. BBC News, March 7, 2005.
* &quot;Selma-to-Montgomery 1965 Voting Rights March&quot;. Alabama Department of Archives &amp; History. Archived at the Internet Archive, March 16, 2009
* &quot;The Selma to Montgomery Voting Rights March: Shaking the Conscience of the Nation&quot;. National Park Service. U.S. Department of the Interior.
* &quot;Conversation with Martin Luther King and Office Secretary, January 15, 1965&quot;. Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia.
*&quot;March from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama, Commencing March 21, 1965&quot;. Federal Bureau of Investigation. March 22, 1965. Freedom of Information Act Document: &quot;FOIA: Selma March-HQ-1 thru 3&quot;. Archived at the Internet Archive.
* Thornton, J. Mills (March 14, 2007). &quot;Selma to Montgomery March&quot; (). &quot;Encyclopedia of Alabama&quot;.
* Tullos, Allen (July 28, 2008). &quot;Selma Bridge: Always Under Construction&quot;. &quot;Southern Spaces&quot;. 
* Mudge, Trey (March 2008). &quot;The Selma March Remembered&quot;. Nick Mudge: Ignition Software Consulting &amp; Development.
* Davis, Maurice (March 26, 1965). &quot;Brotherhood Postponed&quot; (). Talia, She Wrote. January 28, 2010.
* &quot;Picturing Freedom: Selma-to-Montgomery March, 1965&quot;. December 20, 2010. EDSITEment!, National Endowment for the Humanities.
* &quot;The Jack Rabin Collection on Alabama Civil Rights and Southern Activists&quot;. Penn State University Libraries.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1061891" start="4" end="31" title="Selma to Montgomery marches" label="Selma to Montgomery marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="43" end="58" title="Demonstration (protest)" label="protest marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q79941" start="97" end="111" title="Selma, Alabama" label="Selma, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="137" end="147" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="179" end="189" title="Nonviolence" label="nonviolent"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="190" end="199" title="Activism" label="activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="229" end="245" title="African Americans" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068570" start="273" end="293" title="constitutional right" label="constitutional right"/>
<link wikidata="Q189760" start="297" end="301" title="vote" label="vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="318" end="332" title="segregationist" label="segregationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="433" end="447" title="Southern United States" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="528" end="545" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="585" end="606" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="704" end="717" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="727" end="742" title="Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era" label="disenfranchised"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="807" end="825" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24061269" start="905" end="932" title="Dallas County Voters League" label="Dallas County Voters League"/>
<link wikidata="Q127723" start="948" end="989" title="Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee" label="Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="1131" end="1155" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="1252" end="1274" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q605130" start="1300" end="1340" title="Southern Christian Leadership Conference" label="Southern Christian Leadership Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199368" start="1567" end="1585" title="Jimmie Lee Jackson" label="Jimmie Lee Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129953" start="1646" end="1665" title="James Bonard Fowler" label="James Bonard Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q79706" start="1700" end="1706" title="Marion, Alabama" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920456" start="1766" end="1777" title="James Bevel" label="James Bevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355869" start="2064" end="2078" title="Amelia Boynton Robinson" label="Amelia Boynton"/>
<link wikidata="Q643273" start="2123" end="2131" title="Posse comitatus (common law)" label="possemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="2182" end="2188" title="Baton (law enforcement)" label="batons"/>
<link wikidata="Q190512" start="2193" end="2201" title="tear gas" label="tear gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339739" start="2225" end="2245" title="Edmund Pettus Bridge" label="Edmund Pettus Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061891" start="2304" end="2317" title="Selma to Montgomery marches" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141913" start="2651" end="2661" title="James Reeb" label="James Reeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705294" start="2774" end="2796" title="Alabama National Guard" label="Alabama National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="2824" end="2827" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="2832" end="2848" title="United States Marshals Service" label="federal marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q558677" start="2865" end="2873" title="Governor of Alabama" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="2874" end="2888" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q410457" start="2968" end="2981" title="U.S. Route 80" label="U.S. Route 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q473393" start="3100" end="3121" title="Alabama State Capitol" label="Alabama State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="3441" end="3458" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269549" start="3524" end="3549" title="joint session of Congress" label="joint session of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q31515787" start="3785" end="3828" title="Selma to Montgomery National Historic Trail" label="Selma to Montgomery National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="3979" end="3994" title="Disfranchisement after Reconstruction era" label="disenfranchised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="4061" end="4069" title="poll tax (United States)" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647568" start="4084" end="4097" title="literacy test" label="literacy test"/>
<link wikidata="Q488847" start="4258" end="4271" title="Dallas County, Alabama" label="Dallas County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549318" start="4285" end="4303" title="Alabama Black Belt" label="Alabama Black Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="4587" end="4600" title="sharecroppers" label="sharecroppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355869" start="4860" end="4866" title="Amelia Boynton Robinson" label="Amelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104189" start="4910" end="4924" title="J. L. Chestnut" label="J. L. Chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560237" start="4930" end="4942" title="Marie Foster" label="Marie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994541" start="5116" end="5144" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; Councils" label="White Citizens&amp;#x27; Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="5154" end="5166" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131649" start="5491" end="5518" title="Society of Saint Edmund" label="The Society of Saint Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q127723" start="5682" end="5686" title="Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee" label="SNCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="5874" end="5884" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q127723" start="5908" end="5912" title="Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee" label="SNCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893345" start="5924" end="5941" title="Bernard Lafayette" label="Bernard Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144802" start="5946" end="5968" title="Colia Clark" label="Colia Liddel Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="6107" end="6115" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Klansmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238659" start="6227" end="6239" title="Prathia Hall" label="Prathia Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875690" start="6476" end="6501" title="16th Street Baptist Church bombing" label="Birmingham church bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="6586" end="6592" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q45380" start="6764" end="6774" title="John Lewis" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q704746" start="6924" end="6936" title="James Forman" label="James Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q273210" start="7136" end="7149" title="James Baldwin (writer)" label="James Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209674" start="7186" end="7198" title="Dick Gregory" label="Dick Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="7701" end="7704" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="7822" end="7829" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="7841" end="7865" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="7927" end="7940" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q786922" start="8163" end="8179" title="Drive-in theater" label="Drive-in theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194208" start="8365" end="8389" title="Jim Clark (sheriff)" label="County Sheriff Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981588" start="8474" end="8484" title="James Hare (judge)" label="James Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894393" start="8933" end="8956" title="Frederick D. Reese" label="Frederick Douglas Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355869" start="9214" end="9228" title="Amelia Boynton Robinson" label="Amelia Boynton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920456" start="9365" end="9376" title="James Bevel" label="James Bevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271535" start="9378" end="9388" title="Diane Nash" label="Diane Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018234" start="9394" end="9406" title="James Orange" label="James Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879148" start="9881" end="9917" title="Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party" label="Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571498" start="9960" end="9995" title="1964 Democratic National Convention" label="1964 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030814" start="10161" end="10181" title="Big tent" label="Democratic coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q810220" start="10309" end="10329" title="grassroots democracy" label="grassroots democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25866" start="10429" end="10449" title="community organizing" label="community organizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992760" start="10872" end="10883" title="Fay Bellamy" label="Fay Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287074" start="11046" end="11063" title="Joseph Smitherman" label="Joseph Smitherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069547" start="11424" end="11440" title="Laurie Pritchett" label="Laurie Pritchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572457" start="11462" end="11477" title="Albany Movement" label="Albany Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194208" start="11619" end="11636" title="Jim Clark (sheriff)" label="Sheriff Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q643273" start="11708" end="11713" title="posse comitatus (common law)" label="posse"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="11760" end="11772" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978683" start="11789" end="11823" title="National States&amp;#x27; Rights Party" label="National States&amp;#x27; Rights Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976091" start="12386" end="12412" title="Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church (Selma, Alabama)" label="Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549318" start="12709" end="12719" title="Black Belt (region of Alabama)" label="Black Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271535" start="12870" end="12880" title="Diane Nash" label="Diane Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q465904" start="13637" end="13656" title="American Nazi Party" label="American Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q440145" start="13658" end="13681" title="George Lincoln Rockwell" label="George Lincoln Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355869" start="13881" end="13895" title="Amelia Boynton Robinson" label="Amelia Boynton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15512904" start="13900" end="13914" title="Hosea Williams" label="Hosea Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008021" start="14024" end="14048" title="NAACP Legal Defense Fund" label="NAACP Legal Defense Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894393" start="14288" end="14303" title="Frederick Reese" label="Frederick Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217504" start="14810" end="14823" title="Daniel Holcombe Thomas" label="Daniel Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279146" start="15081" end="15097" title="Annie Lee Cooper" label="Annie Lee Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920456" start="15579" end="15590" title="James Bevel" label="James Bevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177768" start="15755" end="15770" title="Jet (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Jet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16015" end="16033" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q545488" start="16409" end="16424" title="Ralph Abernathy" label="Ralph Abernathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018234" start="16903" end="16915" title="James Orange" label="James Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682329" start="16964" end="16982" title="Tuskegee Institute" label="Tuskegee Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125901" start="17220" end="17224" title="Congress of Racial Equality" label="CORE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="17430" end="17447" title="black nationalist" label="black nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43303" start="17455" end="17464" title="Malcolm X" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q440145" start="17494" end="17517" title="George Lincoln Rockwell" label="George Lincoln Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003840" start="17771" end="17793" title="by any means necessary" label="by any means necessary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992760" start="17801" end="17812" title="Fay Bellamy" label="Fay Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682329" start="17884" end="17902" title="Tuskegee Institute" label="Tuskegee Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915703" start="18235" end="18246" title="House Negro" label="House Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q230969" start="18387" end="18405" title="Coretta Scott King" label="Coretta Scott King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493102" start="18623" end="18658" title="Organization of Afro-American Unity" label="Organization of Afro-American Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="18748" end="18762" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q959635" start="19213" end="19225" title="Andrew Young" label="Andrew Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376143" start="19822" end="19841" title="Nicholas Katzenbach" label="Nicholas Katzenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q79941" start="20282" end="20296" title="Selma, Alabama" label="Selma, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763751" start="20305" end="20324" title="Richie Jean Jackson" label="Richie Jean Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q253538" start="20439" end="20444" title="Perry County, Alabama" label="Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q503081" start="20446" end="20452" title="Wilcox County, Alabama" label="Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q501074" start="20454" end="20461" title="Marengo County, Alabama" label="Marengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q493709" start="20463" end="20469" title="Greene County, Alabama" label="Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q501147" start="20475" end="20479" title="Hale County, Alabama" label="Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q503461" start="20524" end="20538" title="Lowndes County, Alabama" label="Lowndes County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006890" start="21411" end="21423" title="C. T. Vivian" label="C. T. Vivian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79706" start="22009" end="22015" title="Marion, Alabama" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q253538" start="22048" end="22060" title="Perry County, Alabama" label="Perry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788753" start="22169" end="22191" title="Alabama Highway Patrol" label="Alabama state troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199368" start="22378" end="22396" title="Jimmie Lee Jackson" label="Jimmie Lee Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129953" start="22501" end="22520" title="James Bonard Fowler" label="James Bonard Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="22719" end="22728" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714378" start="23030" end="23045" title="extreme poverty" label="extreme poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920456" start="23317" end="23328" title="James Bevel" label="James Bevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="23452" end="23466" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="23869" end="23890" title="United States Constitution" label="Constitutional rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998555" start="24314" end="24341" title="Wide Area Telephone Service" label="Wide Area Telephone Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710538" start="24808" end="24816" title="Albert J. Lingo" label="Al Lingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q410457" start="25028" end="25043" title="U.S. Highway 80" label="U.S. Highway 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q45380" start="25066" end="25076" title="John Lewis" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15512904" start="25102" end="25116" title="Hosea Williams" label="Hosea Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q28815601" start="25138" end="25147" title="Bob Mants" label="Bob Mants"/>
<link wikidata="Q28731794" start="25160" end="25173" title="Albert Turner (civil rights activist)" label="Albert Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339739" start="25249" end="25269" title="Edmund Pettus Bridge" label="Edmund Pettus Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194208" start="25388" end="25397" title="Jim Clark (sheriff)" label="Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="25845" end="25855" title="Baton (law enforcement)" label="nightstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q190512" start="25895" end="25903" title="tear gas" label="tear gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355869" start="26173" end="26187" title="Amelia Boynton Robinson" label="Amelia Boynton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339739" start="26319" end="26339" title="Edmund Pettus Bridge" label="Edmund Pettus Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376143" start="27454" end="27473" title="Nicholas Katzenbach" label="Nicholas Katzenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055932" start="28037" end="28051" title="Walter Reuther" label="Walter Reuther"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="29144" end="29165" title="Civil Rights Movement" label="Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q696617" start="29362" end="29373" title="court order" label="court order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488468" start="29485" end="29504" title="Frank Minis Johnson" label="Frank Minis Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q593132" start="29514" end="29531" title="restraining order" label="restraining order"/>
<link wikidata="Q162497" start="30620" end="30633" title="LeRoy Collins" label="LeRoy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="30658" end="30672" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763751" start="30720" end="30739" title="Richie Jean Jackson" label="Richie Jean Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="32408" end="32411" title="KKK" label="KKK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141913" start="32452" end="32462" title="James Reeb" label="James Reeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="32468" end="32474" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q127723" start="33404" end="33408" title="Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee" label="SNCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q509860" start="33419" end="33437" title="Stokely Carmichael" label="Stokely Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="33505" end="33511" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234042" start="33772" end="33784" title="David Garrow" label="David Garrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055932" start="34520" end="34534" title="Walter Reuther" label="Walter Reuther"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566210" start="34599" end="34617" title="Archbishop Iakovos of America" label="Archbishop Iakovos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682329" start="35038" end="35056" title="Tuskegee Institute" label="Tuskegee Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q19818216" start="35090" end="35106" title="Sammy Younge Jr." label="Sammy Younge Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q473393" start="35170" end="35191" title="Alabama State Capitol" label="Alabama State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q704746" start="35267" end="35279" title="James Forman" label="James Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920456" start="35562" end="35573" title="James Bevel" label="James Bevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="36603" end="36621" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="37506" end="37512" title="Sit-in" label="sat-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q368486" start="37829" end="37846" title="Bishop Paul Moore" label="Bishop Paul Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350750" start="37848" end="37869" title="Robert Spike" label="Reverend Robert Spike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628517" start="37895" end="37907" title="H. Rap Brown" label="H. Rap Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125901" start="38197" end="38201" title="Congress of Racial Equality" label="CORE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705294" start="38602" end="38624" title="Alabama National Guard" label="Alabama National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="38693" end="38711" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="voting rights bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355391" start="39438" end="39458" title="Battle of Appomattox" label="Battle of Appomattox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="39466" end="39484" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191264" start="39516" end="39529" title="Great Society" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="40281" end="40296" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625153" start="40397" end="40414" title="right to petition" label="right to petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="40836" end="40855" title="state&amp;#x27;s rights" label="state&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q708795" start="41443" end="41455" title="Ramsey Clark" label="Ramsey Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452514" start="42014" end="42032" title="Fred Shuttlesworth" label="Fred Shuttlesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566210" start="42049" end="42067" title="Archbishop Iakovos of America" label="Archbishop Iakovos"/>
<link wikidata="Q215833" start="42076" end="42098" title="Abraham Joshua Heschel" label="Abraham Joshua Heschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793005" start="42103" end="42116" title="Maurice Davis (rabbi)" label="Maurice Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="42135" end="42138" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="42211" end="42219" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q723772" start="42227" end="42239" title="Henri Nouwen" label="Henri Nouwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q503461" start="42381" end="42395" title="Lowndes County, Alabama" label="Lowndes County"/>
<link wikidata="Q215459" start="43339" end="43357" title="Kippah" label="&amp;quot;kippot&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q215833" start="43412" end="43419" title="Abraham Joshua Heschel" label="Heschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28856865" start="43828" end="43844" title="City of St. Jude" label="City of St. Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q214959" start="43983" end="43998" title="Harry Belafonte" label="Harry Belafonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q296729" start="44000" end="44012" title="Tony Bennett" label="Tony Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q342774" start="44014" end="44027" title="Frankie Laine" label="Frankie Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q654716" start="44029" end="44049" title="Peter, Paul and Mary" label="Peter, Paul and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q297816" start="44051" end="44066" title="Sammy Davis Jr." label="Sammy Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="44068" end="44077" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="44079" end="44090" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066305" start="44096" end="44118" title="The Chad Mitchell Trio" label="The Chad Mitchell Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q473393" start="44266" end="44288" title="Alabama State Capitol" label="State Capitol Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917911" start="44327" end="44345" title="How Long, Not Long" label="How Long, Not Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q443621" start="44989" end="45001" title="Viola Liuzzo" label="Viola Liuzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="45120" end="45132" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23008614" start="45284" end="45293" title="Gary Thomas Rowe Jr." label="Gary Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q644439" start="45321" end="45331" title="COINTELPRO" label="COINTELPRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="45394" end="45409" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q254490" start="46085" end="46108" title="William Louis Dickinson" label="William Louis Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331102" start="46187" end="46200" title="alcohol abuse" label="alcohol abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="46202" end="46209" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348156" start="46773" end="46797" title="Hammermill Paper Company" label="Hammermill Paper Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="47407" end="47422" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q234061" start="47528" end="47546" title="Erie, Pennsylvania" label="Erie, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350750" start="47589" end="47604" title="Robert W. Spike" label="Robert W. Spike"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="48683" end="48704" title="Lyndon Baines Johnson" label="Lyndon Baines Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="48723" end="48737" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="49036" end="49053" title="Voting Rights Act" label="Voting Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763751" start="49936" end="49955" title="Richie Jean Jackson" label="Richie Jean Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104189" start="50510" end="50524" title="J. L. Chestnut" label="J. L. Chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q509860" start="50953" end="50971" title="Stokely Carmichael" label="Stokely Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132235" start="50976" end="50993" title="Cleveland Sellers" label="Cleveland Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q503461" start="51040" end="51054" title="Lowndes County, Alabama" label="Lowndes County"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091196" start="51120" end="51155" title="Lowndes County Freedom Organization" label="Lowndes County Freedom Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355869" start="51263" end="51277" title="Amelia Boynton Robinson" label="Amelia Boynton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889639" start="51881" end="51918" title="United States Civil Rights Commission" label="United States Civil Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389218" start="52786" end="52849" title="SCOPE Project" label="Summer Community Organization &amp;amp; Political Education project"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194208" start="53289" end="53298" title="Jim Clark (sheriff)" label="Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53421" end="53432" title="P. H. Lewis" label="P. H. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976091" start="53444" end="53470" title="Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church (Selma, Alabama)" label="Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47469897" start="53562" end="53578" title="Joseph Ellwanger" label="Joseph Ellwanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q109381474" start="53666" end="53682" title="Walter C. Givhan" label="Walter C. Givhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15521711" start="54595" end="54611" title="Jonathan Daniels" label="Jonathan Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q31515787" start="55583" end="55626" title="Selma to Montgomery National Historic Trail" label="Selma to Montgomery National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="55666" end="55687" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q941524" start="55819" end="55843" title="Alabama State University" label="Alabama State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="55936" end="55960" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="56217" end="56227" title="US Capitol" label="US Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q45380" start="56248" end="56258" title="John Lewis" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894393" start="56263" end="56278" title="Frederick Reese" label="Frederick Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q230969" start="56567" end="56585" title="Coretta Scott King" label="Coretta Scott King"/>
<link wikidata="Q45380" start="56710" end="56720" title="John Lewis" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q127723" start="56742" end="56783" title="Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee" label="Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q959635" start="57329" end="57341" title="Andrew Young" label="Andrew Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976091" start="57442" end="57468" title="Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church (Selma, Alabama)" label="Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="57709" end="57721" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q19523127" start="57776" end="57810" title="Barack Obama Selma 50th anniversary speech" label="a speech at the foot of the bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="57854" end="57868" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355869" start="57941" end="57964" title="Amelia Boynton Robinson" label="Amelia Boynton Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58417" end="58430" title="Selma to Montgomery marches#&amp;quot;Bloody Sunday&amp;quot; events" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q115163051" start="60806" end="60825" title="Keitz &amp;amp; Herndon" label="Keitz &amp;amp; Herndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q114343375" start="60834" end="60870" title="Alabama State Sovereignty Commission" label="Alabama State Sovereignty Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385782" start="60894" end="60911" title="Eyes on the Prize" label="Eyes on the Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="60938" end="60941" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306998" start="60966" end="60977" title="Julian Bond" label="Julian Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="61127" end="61133" title="Emmy" label="Emmies"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="61139" end="61152" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722910" start="61162" end="61194" title="Alfred I. duPont–Columbia University Award" label="duPont-Columbia Gold Baton award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="61253" end="61266" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448701" start="61276" end="61294" title="Selma, Lord, Selma" label="Selma, Lord, Selma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="61407" end="61413" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="61441" end="61455" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC television"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183770" start="61492" end="61497" title="Selma (film)" label="Selma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827381" start="61538" end="61550" title="Ava DuVernay" label="Ava DuVernay"/>
<link wikidata="Q218800" start="61690" end="61703" title="David Oyelowo" label="David Oyelowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="61707" end="61729" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q211322" start="61731" end="61744" title="Tom Wilkinson" label="Tom Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="61758" end="61775" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q286022" start="61777" end="61783" title="Common (rapper)" label="Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920456" start="61787" end="61798" title="James Bevel" label="James Bevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q203804" start="61804" end="61812" title="Tim Roth" label="Tim Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="61825" end="61839" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="61866" end="61896" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18823031" start="61906" end="61915" title="Glory (Common and John Legend song)" label="best song"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096281" start="62087" end="62092" title="March (comics)" label="March"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="62122" end="62135" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45380" start="62173" end="62183" title="John Lewis" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532045" start="62201" end="62222" title="Top Shelf Productions" label="Top Shelf Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150946" start="62416" end="62428" title="Andrew Aydin" label="Andrew Aydin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968701" start="62449" end="62460" title="Nate Powell" label="Nate Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q79941" start="62634" end="62648" title="Selma, Alabama" label="Selma, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="63064" end="63072" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705241" start="63149" end="63193" title="Alabama Department of Archives &amp;amp; History" label="Alabama Department of Archives &amp;amp; History"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="63211" end="63227" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="63341" end="63362" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="63364" end="63395" title="U.S. Department of the Interior" label="U.S. Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="63488" end="63519" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="63521" end="63543" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="63626" end="63657" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500728" start="63675" end="63710" title="Freedom of Information Act Document" label="Freedom of Information Act Document"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375680" start="63876" end="63899" title="Encyclopedia of Alabama" label="Encyclopedia of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793005" start="64153" end="64167" title="Davis, Maurice" label="Davis, Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="64345" end="64356" title="EDSITEment!" label="EDSITEment!"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="64358" end="64395" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164203" start="64485" end="64516" title="Penn State University Libraries" label="Penn State University Libraries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646614" wikidata="Q1049684" url="?curid=646614" title="The Nine Billion Names of God">
<text>&quot;The Nine Billion Names of God&quot; is a 1953 science fiction short story by British writer Arthur C. Clarke. The story was among the stories selected in 1970 by the Science Fiction Writers of America as one of the best science fiction short stories published before the creation of the Nebula Awards. It was reprinted in &quot;The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume One, 1929–1964&quot;.

==Plot summary==
In a Tibetan lamasery, the monks seek to list all of the names of God. They believe the Universe was created for this purpose, and that once this naming is completed, God will bring the Universe to an end. Three centuries ago, the monks created an alphabet in which they calculated they could encode all the possible names of God, numbering about 9,000,000,000 (&quot;nine billion&quot;) and each having no more than nine characters. Writing the names out by hand, as they had been doing, even after eliminating various nonsense combinations, would take another 15,000 years; the monks wish to use modern technology to finish this task in 100 days.

They rent a computer capable of printing all the possible permutations, and hire two Westerners to install and program the machine. The computer operators are skeptical but play along. After three months, as the job nears completion, they fear that the monks will blame the computer (and, by extension, its operators) when nothing happens. The Westerners leave slightly earlier than their scheduled departure without warning the monks, so that it will complete its final print run shortly after they leave. On their way to the airfield they pause on the mountain path. Under a clear night sky they estimate that it must be just about the time that the monks are pasting the final printed names into their holy books. Then they notice that &quot;overhead, without any fuss, the stars were going out.&quot;

==Reception==
In 2004, &quot;The Nine Billion Names of God&quot; won the retrospective Hugo Award for Best Short Story for the year 1954. &quot;Kirkus Reviews&quot; called it &quot;quietly remarkable&quot;, and &quot;The Guardian&quot; considered it to be a &quot;wonderful apocalyptic rib-tickler&quot;. Stating that the story &quot;introduced many Western readers to an intriguing speculation in Oriental religions&quot;, Carl Sagan in 1978 listed &quot;The Nine Billion Names of God&quot; as among the &quot;rare few science‐fiction [stories that] combine a standard science‐fiction theme with a deep human sensitivity&quot;. In 1986 it was included in the anthology &quot;Isaac Asimov Presents The Great SF Stories 15&quot; as one of the best science fiction short stories of 1953.

Gary K. Wolfe noted that the story is &quot;patently at odds with Clarke&#x27;s scientific rationalism&quot;. Paul J. Nahin has pointed out that, due to the delay imposed by the speed of light, an omniscient God would have had to destroy all the stars in the universe years earlier so that their &quot;synchronized vanishing&quot; would be visible at exactly the time that the monks completed their task.

In 2003, Clarke reported having been told that the Dalai Lama had found the story &quot;very amusing&quot;.

==Adaptations==
&quot;The Nine Billion Names of God&quot; was adapted into a 1985 episode of the Canadian radio series &quot;Vanishing Point&quot;.

In 2011 the story was loosely adapted into a 2011 Portuguese short film, &quot;Scr1ptum&quot;, by Swiss director Matthias Fritsche. In 2018, the story was adapted into a short film by Dominique Filhol.

==See also==

* Names of God
* Brute-force attack
* Tower of Hanoi, a puzzle whose legendaria incorporate a similar end to the Universe
* &quot;The Library of Babel&quot;, a 1941 short story by Jorge Luis Borges which also deals with collecting all the possible permutations of a character string
* &quot;The Fife of Bodidharma&quot;, a 1959 short story by Cordwainer Smith, reprinted in &quot;The Rediscovery of Man&quot;
* Jorge Palma, a Portuguese singer whose 1972 song was named after and inspired by the story
* &quot;The Nine Billion Names of God&quot;, a 1984 short story by Carter Scholz about an exact replica of Clarke&#x27;s story
* Darren Aronofsky&#x27;s &quot;Pi&quot; (1998), in which a computer is used to divine the 216-character name of God
* &quot;Seventy-Two Letters&quot;, a 2000 novella by Ted Chiang
* &quot;Godfellas&quot;, a 2002 &quot;Futurama&quot; episode partially inspired by the story
* &quot;Last Contact&quot;, a 2007 short story by Stephen Baxter about humans experiencing the universe ending in a Big Rip
* &quot;Nightfall&quot;, a short story by Isaac Asimov with a similar climax

== Explanatory notes==
==References==
==External links==
*James Randi praising The Nine Billion Names of God as his favourite Clarke story Audio interview the day after Clarke&#x27;s death</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1049684" start="6" end="35" title="The Nine Billion Names of God" label="The Nine Billion Names of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="52" end="67" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="98" end="114" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="172" end="206" title="Science Fiction Writers of America" label="Science Fiction Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="293" end="305" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762563" start="334" end="389" title="The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume One, 1929–1964" label="The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume One, 1929–1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="428" end="436" title="lamasery" label="lamasery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429896" start="472" end="484" title="names of God" label="names of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1150" end="1160" title="Western world" label="Westerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="1770" end="1780" title="holy books" label="holy books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056251" start="1958" end="1989" title="Hugo Award for Best Short Story" label="Hugo Award for Best Short Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197403" start="2015" end="2029" title="Kirkus Reviews" label="Kirkus Reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="2088" end="2100" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="2295" end="2305" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075934" start="2541" end="2598" title="Isaac Asimov Presents The Great SF Stories 15 (1953)" label="&amp;quot;Isaac Asimov Presents The Great SF Stories 15&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494894" start="2658" end="2671" title="Gary K. Wolfe" label="Gary K. Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839751" start="2768" end="2781" title="Paul J. Nahin" label="Paul J. Nahin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="2836" end="2850" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="3115" end="3125" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914966" start="3298" end="3313" title="Vanishing Point (CBC)" label="Vanishing Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q107007780" start="3492" end="3502" title="The Nine Billion Names of God (film)" label="short film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429896" start="3541" end="3553" title="Names of God" label="Names of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q869370" start="3556" end="3574" title="Brute-force attack" label="Brute-force attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q213593" start="3577" end="3591" title="Tower of Hanoi" label="Tower of Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q473" start="3669" end="3689" title="The Library of Babel" label="The Library of Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="3719" end="3736" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q937000" start="3882" end="3898" title="Cordwainer Smith" label="Cordwainer Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235392" start="3919" end="3941" title="The Rediscovery of Man" label="The Rediscovery of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703902" start="3950" end="3961" title="Jorge Palma" label="Jorge Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q105905669" start="4049" end="4078" title="The Nine Billion Names of God (Scholz)" label="The Nine Billion Names of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047212" start="4108" end="4121" title="Carter Scholz" label="Carter Scholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q937762" start="4200" end="4202" title="Pi (film)" label="Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q86723338" start="4293" end="4312" title="Seventy-Two Letters" label="Seventy-Two Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q503095" start="4338" end="4348" title="Ted Chiang" label="Ted Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198899" start="4357" end="4366" title="Godfellas" label="Godfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="4387" end="4395" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q526802" start="4450" end="4462" title="Last Contact" label="Last Contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q314416" start="4492" end="4506" title="Stephen Baxter (author)" label="Stephen Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q261585" start="4558" end="4565" title="Big Rip" label="Big Rip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138091" start="4574" end="4583" title="Nightfall (Asimov novelette and novel)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="4608" end="4620" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646617" wikidata="Q5257792" url="?curid=646617" title="Denise van Outen">
<text>Denise van Outen (born Denise Kathleen Outen; 27 May 1974) is an English actress, singer, dancer and presenter. She presented &quot;The Big Breakfast&quot;, played Roxie Hart in the musical &quot;Chicago&quot; both in the West End and on Broadway and finished as runner-up in the tenth series of the BBC One dancing show &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;.

She was a judge on &quot;Any Dream Will Do&quot; in 2007, &quot;Born to Shine&quot; in 2011, and &quot;Ireland&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; which ran for two seasons (2018–2019). Van Outen also narrates the ITVBe reality television series &quot;The Only Way Is Essex&quot;.

==Early life==
Born Denise Kathleen Outen in Basildon, Essex, England, she has a brother Terry and sister Jackie. She claims that her ancestors &quot;are all Dutch&quot;, which was the reason she added &quot;van&quot; into her name. At the age of seven, she began modelling for knitting patterns, and showed an early flair for performing. This resulted in her attending the Sylvia Young Theatre School. 

In 1986, she played the young Éponine in &quot;Les Misérables&quot; (the role paid her school fees), the Anthony Newley-directed production of &quot;Stop the World - I Want to Get Off,&quot; and &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; with the Royal Shakespeare Company.

==Career==
===Early career===
As a teenager, van Outen had brief roles on a number of television dramas; these included &quot;Kappatoo&quot; and &quot;The Bill&quot;. In 1992, she appeared in a Drinking and Driving Wrecks Lives commercial. She also performed backing vocals with Melanie Blatt for the band Dreadzone. In the mid 1990s, she sang with former video game soundtrack singer Cathy Warwick in a &#x27;girl group&#x27; called Those2Girls, by which time she had become Denise van Outen. Those2Girls were signed to BMG&#x27;s Final Vinyl record label and had a minor Top 40 hit in 1995, called &quot;All I Want&quot;. Van Outen was voted &quot;Rear of the Year&quot; in 1999, and was top of a poll to find the most desired &quot;bikini body&quot; in a 2007 poll of readers of &quot;Grazia&quot; magazine.

===Acting===
During her first stint on The Big Breakfast show, she appeared as Jill in ITV1&#x27;s version of the pantomime &quot;Jack and the Beanstalk&quot; alongside Julie Walters and Neil Morrissey. Wanting to further develop her acting career, she left &quot;The Big Breakfast&quot; at the end of 1998. In 1999, she appeared on several episodes of &quot;The Bill&quot; and &quot;The Young Person&#x27;s Guide To Becoming A Rock Star&quot;, the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Murder in Mind&quot; short series of crime dramas, and on 2 series of &quot;Babes in the Wood&quot; with Karl Howman and Samantha Janus.

Van Outen has also appeared in film, initially as Maureen in the crime comedy &quot;Love, Honour and Obey&quot;. In the anthology film &quot;Tube Tales&quot;, set on the London Underground, she played the lead character of Alex in the &quot;Horny&quot; segment, directed by Stephen Hopkins. Van Outen has played a small role in the romantic comedy &quot;Are You Ready For Love?&quot;

She first played Roxie Hart on the stage in the hit musical &quot;Chicago&quot; at the Adelphi Theatre in the West End in April 2001. Her run proved a hit with theatre-goers, selling out for the entire 20 weeks. Unknown in the United States, she reprised her role on Broadway in the spring of 2002, before returning to the show&#x27;s London version in late April 2002. Late the same year, Van Outen appeared as one of many special guest stars in a performance of &quot;The Play What I Wrote&quot; once again in London&#x27;s West End.

In 2003, she returned to the London stage at the Gielgud Theatre in Andrew Lloyd Webber&#x27;s one-woman show &quot;Tell Me on a Sunday,&quot; which he reworked for her. She was a huge success and the show ran for nearly a year. She then joined the cast of the established ITV sentimental drama &quot;Where the Heart Is&quot; as one of the lead characters, playing single mother Kim Blakeney, continuing for two series.

Van Outen played Maureen in the 2007 London revival of &quot;Rent Remixed&quot; directed by William Baker until 22 December. She was forced to cancel some performances owing to a throat infection. In July 2009, van Outen played Mary in &quot;Hotel Babylon&quot; for the BBC. Her character was at the hotel for a science convention. In August 2009, van Outen made her Edinburgh Festival Fringe debut in &quot;Blondes&quot;, a show by Jackie Clune.

Van Outen took over the role of Paulette Bonafonté from Jill Halfpenny in the West End production of &quot;Legally Blonde&quot; on 25 October 2010. She continued in the role for 6 months. In 2012, Van Outen was cast in the film of the Ray Cooney farce &quot;Run for Your Wife&quot; alongside Danny Dyer, Sarah Harding and Neil Morrissey. In 2013, she co-wrote the one-woman musical play &quot;Some Girl I Used To Know&quot; with Terry Ronald, which she will tour in from January 2014.

In February 2015, it was announced that Van Outen would be joining the cast of &quot;EastEnders&quot;. Van Outen plays intelligent businesswoman Karin Smart who gets involved with Max Branning (Jake Wood), and has business history with Phil Mitchell (Steve McFadden). In August 2015, Van Outen performed the title role in a concert performance of the musical &quot;Sweet Charity&quot; at Cadogan Hall, with actor/singer Michael Xavier, her SCD co-star, ex-Girls Aloud band member Kimberley Walsh, and West End star Kerry Ellis.

In September 2018, it was announced that she would be joining the cast of the 2018 London revival of &quot;Chicago&quot; at the Phoenix Theatre in the West End as Velma Kelly. Due to start rehearsals on 10 September 2018, in preparation for her first performance on 24 September, it was discovered that Van Outen had suffered a stress fracture in her heel, postponing her return to the production with her new dates yet to be announced.

Van Outen joined the cast of Australian soap opera &quot;Neighbours&quot; as Prudence Wallace in June 2019. She filmed her first scenes alongside cast members Stefan Dennis and Rebekah Elmaloglou in London, before flying out to join the cast at the serial&#x27;s Melbourne studios. Her first scenes aired in September 2019.

===Television appearances===
In 2007, Van Outen co-presented &quot;Who Dares, Sings!&quot; with Ben Shephard and in 2008 she fronted Sky1&#x27;s &quot;&quot;. She currently narrates the ITVBe series &quot;The Only Way Is Essex&quot;.

Van Outen guest presented &quot;This Morning&quot; in 2005, &quot;The Friday Night Project&quot; in 2006, &quot;The 5 O&#x27;Clock Show&quot; in 2010, &quot;Lorraine&quot; in 2010 and 2012, and &quot;Sunday Brunch&quot; in 2013. She was a judge on the 2011 series &quot;Born to Shine&quot;. She was a guest panellist on an episode of &quot;Loose Women&quot; in 2014 and became a regular panellist on the show in September 2017.

Van Outen has been the presenter of &quot;Matalan Presents: The Show&quot; since 2016. On 30 August 2017, she was announced as one of the four judges on the first season of &quot;Ireland&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; in 2018. In 2020, she competed in the ITV singing competition &quot;The Masked Singer&quot; as &#x27;Fox&#x27;, where she placed fifth.

===Radio===
On 4 February 2008, van Outen reunited with her former &quot;Big Breakfast&quot; partner Johnny Vaughan as co-host of &quot;Capital Breakfast&quot; on Capital Radio. On 29 July 2008, she quit the show, halfway through her contract, because of TV commitments and the early mornings. However, in April 2011 van Outen said that she left the show because relations between her and Vaughan had soured. She claims Vaughan has not spoken to her since. In spring 2013, van Outen started presenting her own Saturday afternoon radio show on London&#x27;s Magic 105.4, airing between 1:00 pm and 3:00 pm.

===&quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;===
In September 2012, van Outen was announced as one of the celebrities competing on the tenth series of &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;. She partnered with professional dancer James Jordan. The couple secured top of the leaderboard 7 times. However, controversy arose when viewers criticised her participation in the competition because of the advantage of having had previous stage experience. On 20 December 2012, van Outen and Jordan finished as runners-up alongside Girls Aloud singer Kimberley Walsh &amp; Pasha Kovalev, behind winning couple, Olympic gymnast Louis Smith &amp; Flavia Cacace.
===&quot;Dancing on Ice&quot;===
On 23 September 2020, van Outen was announced as one of the celebrities competing on the thirteenth series of &quot;Dancing on Ice&quot;. She was partnered with Matt Evers. On 16 January 2021, van Outen suffered a partially dislocated shoulder and tendon damage to her left shoulder after falling during rehearsals for the launch show of series 13 of &quot;Dancing On Ice&quot;; van Outen was able to perform a modified dance routine with her professional skate partner Matt Evers on the launch show. On 26 January 2021, van Outen withdrew from the competition as a result of her dislocation, as well as three bone fractures which were confirmed after further MRI scans.

===Other work===
Van Outen has designed two collections thus far for the website Very, part of the Shop Direct Group. The first collection was a maternity range launched in March 2010 and the second an autumn/winter collection.

In 1998 and 1999, she also co-hosted the ChildLine Concert in Dublin.

In 2021, she returned to music and released a cover of the &quot;Les Misérables&quot; musical song &quot;On My Own&quot; as a charity single in aid of the Make A Difference Trust. In February 2021, she launched her first podcast alongside partner Eddie Boxshall. Before We Say I Do follows the couple as they investigate types of relationship counselling in an attempt to iron out any differences they may have before they get married. It is produced by Yahoo! UK. In September 2023, Van Outen released the duet &quot;That&#x27;s What Friends Are For&quot; with Duncan James. The single, in aid of Macmillan Cancer Support, was recorded in tribute to their friend, singer Sarah Harding, who died from breast cancer in 2021.

==Personal life==
From 1998 to 2001, she dated Jamiroquai lead singer Jay Kay. The couple were engaged, but they split up in 2001. The Jamiroquai song &quot;Little L&quot; is said to have been inspired by their break-up.

From 2009 to 2015 (separated 2013), she was married to &quot;Any Dream Will Do&quot; winner Lee Mead. They have a daughter together, Betsy, who was born in 2010. From July 2014, she was in a relationship with commodities trader Eddie Boxshall; they lived together in Chelmsford. The relationship ended in January 2022.

Van Outen has worked with charity. She actively supports Breast Cancer Care and Great Ormond Street Hospital. In 2009, Van Outen climbed Mount Kilimanjaro for &quot;Comic Relief&quot;, and in 2013 took part in a trek across the Great Wall of China for the Royal Marsden Hospital.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
==Stage credits==
==Discography==
===Albums===
===Singles===
==Bibliography==
* &quot;A Bit of Me: From Basildon to Broadway, and Back&quot; (Ebury Spotlight Books, 2022) 

==See also==
* List of &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot; contestants

==Notelist==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5257792" start="0" end="16" title="Denise van Outen" label="Denise van Outen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257792" start="23" end="44" title="Denise van Outen" label="Denise Kathleen Outen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="132" end="149" title="The Big Breakfast" label="The Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q656285" start="196" end="203" title="Chicago (musical)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="218" end="230" title="West End theatre" label="the West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="235" end="246" title="Broadway theatre" label="on Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623645" start="280" end="292" title="Strictly Come Dancing (series 10)" label="tenth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="300" end="307" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="327" end="348" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778136" start="382" end="399" title="Any Dream Will Do (TV series)" label="Any Dream Will Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946016" start="421" end="434" title="Born to Shine" label="Born to Shine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744391" start="460" end="485" title="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995238" start="559" end="564" title="ITVBe" label="ITVBe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532410" start="597" end="618" title="The Only Way Is Essex" label="The Only Way Is Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q216649" start="672" end="680" title="Basildon" label="Basildon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="682" end="687" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="785" end="790" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258618" start="835" end="838" title="Van (Dutch)" label="van"/>
<link wikidata="Q653693" start="1001" end="1028" title="Sylvia Young Theatre School" label="Sylvia Young Theatre School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748568" start="1062" end="1069" title="Éponine" label="Éponine"/>
<link wikidata="Q830581" start="1079" end="1093" title="Les Misérables (musical)" label="Les Misérables"/>
<link wikidata="Q573709" start="1137" end="1151" title="Anthony Newley" label="Anthony Newley"/>
<link wikidata="Q432351" start="1181" end="1215" title="Stop the World - I Want to Get Off" label="Stop the World - I Want to Get Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="1233" end="1263" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="1279" end="1304" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995579" start="1433" end="1441" title="Kappatoo" label="Kappatoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q929589" start="1458" end="1466" title="The Bill" label="The Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307727" start="1501" end="1534" title="Drinking and Driving Wrecks Lives" label="Drinking and Driving Wrecks Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q211213" start="1586" end="1599" title="Melanie Blatt" label="Melanie Blatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256129" start="1613" end="1622" title="Dreadzone" label="Dreadzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942364" start="1663" end="1684" title="Music of the Mother series" label="video game soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301442" start="1957" end="1973" title="Rear of the Year" label="Rear of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544126" start="2095" end="2101" title="Grazia" label="Grazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="2158" end="2175" title="The Big Breakfast" label="The Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="2233" end="2242" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455839" start="2249" end="2271" title="Jack and the Beanstalk" label="Jack and the Beanstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="2288" end="2301" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989062" start="2306" end="2320" title="Neil Morrissey" label="Neil Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q929589" start="2478" end="2486" title="The Bill" label="The Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986131" start="2503" end="2556" title="The Young Person&amp;#x27;s Guide To Becoming A Rock Star" label="The Young Person&amp;#x27;s Guide To Becoming A Rock Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2568" end="2571" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837792" start="2661" end="2678" title="Babes in the Wood (TV series)" label="Babes in the Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371914" start="2690" end="2701" title="Karl Howman" label="Karl Howman"/>
<link wikidata="Q291314" start="2706" end="2720" title="Samantha Janus" label="Samantha Janus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4266472" start="2807" end="2828" title="Love, Honour and Obey" label="Love, Honour and Obey"/>
<link wikidata="Q336144" start="2843" end="2857" title="anthology film" label="anthology film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388171" start="2864" end="2874" title="Tube Tales" label="Tube Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="2893" end="2911" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q709076" start="2997" end="3012" title="Stephen Hopkins (director)" label="Stephen Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="3055" end="3070" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788448" start="3077" end="3100" title="Are You Ready For Love?" label="Are You Ready For Love?"/>
<link wikidata="Q355319" start="3195" end="3210" title="Adelphi Theatre" label="Adelphi Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757435" start="3578" end="3599" title="The Play What I Wrote" label="The Play What I Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559772" start="3694" end="3709" title="Gielgud Theatre" label="Gielgud Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="3713" end="3732" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983042" start="3761" end="3780" title="Tell Me on a Sunday" label="Tell Me on a Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202079" start="3946" end="3964" title="Where the Heart Is (British TV series)" label="Where the Heart Is"/>
<link wikidata="Q553890" start="4127" end="4139" title="Rent Remixed" label="Rent Remixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q608555" start="4308" end="4321" title="Hotel Babylon (BBC series)" label="Hotel Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q368176" start="4433" end="4458" title="Edinburgh Festival Fringe" label="Edinburgh Festival Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072684" start="4499" end="4511" title="Jackie Clune" label="Jackie Clune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409080" start="4570" end="4584" title="Jill Halfpenny" label="Jill Halfpenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="4592" end="4600" title="West End Theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200020" start="4621" end="4635" title="Legally Blonde (musical)" label="Legally Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q939790" start="4749" end="4759" title="Ray Cooney" label="Ray Cooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="4760" end="4765" title="farce" label="farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379567" start="4772" end="4789" title="Run for Your Wife (2012 film)" label="Run for Your Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q712803" start="4806" end="4816" title="Danny Dyer" label="Danny Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q254962" start="4818" end="4831" title="Sarah Harding" label="Sarah Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704965" start="4943" end="4955" title="Terry Ronald" label="Terry Ronald"/>
<link wikidata="Q607514" start="5085" end="5095" title="EastEnders" label="EastEnders"/>
<link wikidata="Q19650306" start="5145" end="5156" title="Karin Smart" label="Karin Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794615" start="5180" end="5192" title="Max Branning" label="Max Branning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075458" start="5194" end="5203" title="Jake Wood" label="Jake Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115259" start="5236" end="5249" title="Phil Mitchell" label="Phil Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613327" start="5251" end="5265" title="Steve McFadden" label="Steve McFadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164246" start="5365" end="5378" title="Sweet Charity" label="Sweet Charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261872" start="5388" end="5400" title="Cadogan Hall" label="Cadogan Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19926134" start="5420" end="5434" title="Michael Xavier" label="Michael Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623645" start="5440" end="5443" title="Strictly Come Dancing series 10" label="SCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="5456" end="5467" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q256824" start="5480" end="5495" title="Kimberley Walsh" label="Kimberley Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q463608" start="5515" end="5526" title="Kerry Ellis" label="Kerry Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q656285" start="5636" end="5643" title="Chicago (musical)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187004" start="5657" end="5672" title="Phoenix Theatre, London" label="Phoenix Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="6024" end="6034" title="Neighbours" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q60543763" start="6044" end="6060" title="Prudence Wallace" label="Prudence Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409263" start="6126" end="6139" title="Stefan Dennis" label="Stefan Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q596776" start="6144" end="6162" title="Rebekah Elmaloglou" label="Rebekah Elmaloglou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997193" start="6359" end="6376" title="Who Dares, Sings!" label="Who Dares, Sings!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886456" start="6388" end="6400" title="Ben Shephard" label="Ben Shephard"/>
<link wikidata="Q909662" start="6425" end="6429" title="Sky1" label="Sky1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995238" start="6478" end="6483" title="ITVBe" label="ITVBe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532410" start="6497" end="6518" title="The Only Way Is Essex" label="The Only Way Is Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786162" start="6559" end="6571" title="This Morning (TV programme)" label="This Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767381" start="6593" end="6617" title="The Friday Night Project" label="The Friday Night Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711950" start="6639" end="6662" title="The 5 O&amp;#x27;Clock Show" label="The 5 O&amp;#x27;Clock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681563" start="6684" end="6692" title="Lorraine (TV programme)" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639349" start="6727" end="6740" title="Sunday Brunch" label="Sunday Brunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946016" start="6797" end="6810" title="Born to Shine" label="Born to Shine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451933" start="6867" end="6878" title="Loose Women" label="Loose Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744391" start="7135" end="7160" title="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="7205" end="7208" title="ITV (TV channel)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q81522459" start="7235" end="7252" title="The Masked Singer (British TV series)" label="The Masked Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="7377" end="7390" title="The Big Breakfast" label="Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196754" start="7405" end="7419" title="Johnny Vaughan" label="Johnny Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035494" start="7440" end="7457" title="Capital Breakfast (London)" label="Capital Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035608" start="7467" end="7480" title="Capital London" label="Capital Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12496071" start="7861" end="7872" title="Magic (UK radio station)" label="Magic 105.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623645" start="8037" end="8049" title="Strictly Come Dancing (series 10)" label="tenth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="8059" end="8080" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136972" start="8127" end="8139" title="James Jordan (dancer)" label="James Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="8421" end="8432" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q256824" start="8440" end="8455" title="Kimberley Walsh" label="Kimberley Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141940" start="8462" end="8475" title="Pasha Kovalev" label="Pasha Kovalev"/>
<link wikidata="Q639998" start="8516" end="8527" title="Louis Smith (gymnast)" label="Louis Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563684" start="8534" end="8547" title="Flavia Cacace" label="Flavia Cacace"/>
<link wikidata="Q105273934" start="8671" end="8688" title="Dancing on Ice (series 13)" label="thirteenth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274015" start="8698" end="8712" title="Dancing on Ice" label="Dancing on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788621" start="8743" end="8753" title="Matt Evers" label="Matt Evers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788621" start="9052" end="9062" title="Matt Evers" label="Matt Evers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501116" start="9353" end="9370" title="Shop Direct Group" label="Shop Direct Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241152" start="9524" end="9541" title="ChildLine Concert" label="ChildLine Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q830581" start="9619" end="9633" title="Les Misérables (musical)" label="Les Misérables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971300" start="10072" end="10104" title="That&amp;#x27;s What Friends Are For" label="That&amp;#x27;s What Friends Are For"/>
<link wikidata="Q312450" start="10116" end="10128" title="Duncan James" label="Duncan James"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724723" start="10152" end="10176" title="Macmillan Cancer Support" label="Macmillan Cancer Support"/>
<link wikidata="Q254962" start="10226" end="10239" title="Sarah Harding" label="Sarah Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="10326" end="10336" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q259691" start="10349" end="10356" title="Jay Kay" label="Jay Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328281" start="10436" end="10444" title="Little L" label="Little L"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778136" start="10562" end="10579" title="Any Dream Will Do (TV series)" label="Any Dream Will Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911045" start="10593" end="10601" title="Lee Mead" label="Lee Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q210985" start="10768" end="10778" title="Chelmsford" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959766" start="10878" end="10896" title="Breast Cancer Care" label="Breast Cancer Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349705" start="10901" end="10929" title="Great Ormond Street Hospital" label="Great Ormond Street Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296" start="10958" end="10975" title="Mount Kilimanjaro" label="Mount Kilimanjaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="10986" end="10998" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="11049" end="11068" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q50575536" start="11073" end="11099" title="the Royal Marsden Hospital" label="the Royal Marsden Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149632" start="11334" end="11387" title="List of Strictly Come Dancing contestants" label="List of &amp;quot;Strictly Come Dancing&amp;quot; contestants"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646618" wikidata="Q417240" url="?curid=646618" title="Atomoxetine">
<text>Atomoxetine, formerly sold under the brand name Strattera, is a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (sNRI) medication used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and, to a lesser extent, cognitive disengagement syndrome (CDS). It may be used alone or along with stimulant medication. It enhances the executive functions of self-motivation, sustained attention, inhibition, working memory, reaction time, and emotional self-regulation. Use of atomoxetine is only recommended for those who are at least six years old. It is taken orally. The effectiveness of atomoxetine is comparable to the commonly prescribed stimulant medication methylphenidate.

Common side effects of atomoxetine include abdominal pain, decreased appetite, nausea, feeling tired, and dizziness. Serious side effects may include angioedema, liver problems, stroke, psychosis, heart problems, suicide, and aggression. There is a lack of data regarding its safety during pregnancy; as of 2019, its safety during pregnancy and for use during breastfeeding is not certain.

It was approved for medical use in the United States in 2002. In 2022, it was the 213th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 1million prescriptions.

==Medical uses==

Atomoxetine is indicated for the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

===Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder===
Atomoxetine is approved for use in children, adolescents, and adults. However, its efficacy has not been studied in children under six years old. One of the primary differences with the standard stimulant treatments for ADHD is that it has little known abuse potential. Meta-analyses and systematic reviews have found that atomoxetine has comparable efficacy and equal tolerability to methylphenidate in children and adolescents. In adults, efficacy and tolerability are equivalent.

While its efficacy may be less than that of lisdexamphetamine, there is some evidence that it may be used in combination with stimulants. Doctors may prescribe non-stimulants including atomoxetine when a person has bothersome side effects from stimulants; when a stimulant was not effective; in combination with a stimulant to increase effectiveness; when the cost of stimulants is prohibitive; or when there is concern about the abuse potential of stimulants in a patient with a history of substance use disorder.

Atomoxetine alleviates ADHD symptoms through norepinephrine reuptake inhibition and by indirectly increasing dopamine in the prefrontal cortex, sharing 70-80% of the brain regions with stimulants in their produced effects.

Unlike α2-adrenergic receptor agonists such as guanfacine and clonidine, atomoxetine&#x27;s use can be abruptly stopped without significant withdrawal symptoms being observed.

The initial therapeutic effects of atomoxetine usually take 1 to 4 weeks to become apparent. A further 2 to 4 weeks may be required for the full therapeutic effects to be seen. Incrementally increasing response may occur up to 1 year or longer. The maximum recommended total daily dose in children and adolescents is 70 mg and adults is 100 mg.

===Other uses===

==== Cognitive disengagement syndrome ====

Atomoxetine may be used to treat cognitive disengagement syndrome (CDS), as multiple randomised controlled clinical trials (RCTs) have found that it is an effective treatment. In contrast, multiple RCTs have shown that it responds poorly to the stimulant medication methylphenidate.

==== Traumatic brain injury ====

Atomoxetine is sometimes used in the treatment of cognitive impairment and frontal lobe symptoms due to conditions like traumatic brain injury (TBI). It is used to treat ADHD-like symptoms such as sustained attentional problems, disinhibition, lack of arousal, fatigue, and depression, including symptoms from cognitive disengagement syndrome. A 2015 Cochrane review identified only one study of atomoxetine for TBI and found no positive effects. Aside from TBI, atomoxetine was found to be effective in the treatment of akinetic mutism following subarachnoid hemorrhage in a case report.

==Contraindications==
Contraindications include:

* Any cardiovascular disease including:
** Moderate to severe hypertension
** Atrial fibrillation
** Atrial flutter
** Ventricular tachycardia
** Ventricular fibrillation
** Ventricular flutter
** Advanced arteriosclerosis
* Severe cardiovascular disorders
* Uncontrolled hyperthyroidism
* Pheochromocytoma
* Concomitant treatment with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
* Narrow-angle glaucoma

== Adverse effects ==
Common side effects include abdominal pain, decreased appetite, nausea, feeling tired, dizziness and urinary retention. Serious side effects may include angioedema, liver problems, stroke, psychosis, heart problems, suicide, and aggression. A 2020 meta-analysis found that atomoxetine was associated with anorexia, weight loss, and hypertension, rating it as a &quot;potentially least preferred agent based on safety&quot; for treating ADHD. As of 2019, safety in pregnancy and breastfeeding is not clear; a 2018 review stated that, &quot;because of lack of data, the treating
physician should consider stopping atomoxetine treatment in women with ADHD during pregnancy.&quot;

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued a black box warning for suicidal behavior/ideation. Similar warnings have been issued in Australia. Unlike stimulant medications, atomoxetine does not have abuse liability or the potential to cause withdrawal effects on abrupt discontinuation.

==Overdose==
Atomoxetine is relatively non-toxic in overdose. Single-drug overdoses involving over 1500 mg of atomoxetine have not resulted in death.

== Interactions ==

Atomoxetine is a substrate for CYP2D6. Concurrent treatment with a CYP2D6 inhibitor such as bupropion, fluoxetine, or paroxetine has been shown to increase plasma atomoxetine by 100% or more, as well as increase &quot;N&quot;-desmethylatomoxetine levels and decrease plasma 4-hydroxyatomoxetine levels by a similar degree.

Atomoxetine has been found to directly inhibit hERG potassium currents with an IC50 of 6.3 μM, which has the potential to cause arrhythmia. QT prolongation has been reported with atomoxetine at therapeutic doses and in overdose; it is suggested that atomoxetine not be used with other medications that may prolong the QT interval, concomitantly with CYP2D6 inhibitors, and caution to be used in poor metabolizers.

Other notable drug interactions include:

* Antihypertensive agents, due to atomoxetine acting as an indirect sympathomimetic
* Indirect-acting sympathomimetics, such as pseudoephedrine, other norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (NRIs), or MAOIs
* Direct-acting sympathomimetics, such as phenylephrine or other α1-adrenergic receptor agonists, including vasopressors such as dobutamine or isoprenaline and β2-adrenergic receptor agonists
* Highly plasma protein-bound drugs: atomoxetine has the potential to displace these drugs from plasma proteins which may potentiate their adverse or toxic effects. &quot;In vitro&quot;, atomoxetine does not affect the plasma protein binding of aspirin, desipramine, diazepam, paroxetine, phenytoin, or warfarin

Atomoxetine prevents norepinephrine release induced by amphetamines and has been found to reduce the stimulant, euphoriant, and sympathomimetic effects of dextroamphetamine in humans.

==Pharmacology==

===Pharmacodynamics===
Atomoxetine inhibits the presynaptic norepinephrine transporter (NET), preventing the reuptake of norepinephrine throughout the brain along with inhibiting the reuptake of dopamine in specific brain regions such as the prefrontal cortex, where dopamine transporter (DAT) expression is minimal. In rats, atomoxetine increased prefrontal cortex catecholamine concentrations without altering dopamine levels in the striatum or nucleus accumbens; in contrast, methylphenidate, a dopamine reuptake inhibitor, was found to increase prefrontal, striatal, and accumbal dopamine levels to the same degree. In addition to rats, atomoxetine has also been found to induce similar region-specific catecholamine level alteration in mice.

Atomoxetine&#x27;s status as a serotonin transporter (SERT) inhibitor at clinical doses in humans is uncertain. A PET imaging study on rhesus monkeys found that atomoxetine occupied &gt;90% and &gt;85% of neural NET and SERT, respectively. However, both mouse and rat microdialysis studies have failed to find an increase in extracellular serotonin in the prefrontal cortex following acute or chronic atomoxetine treatment. Supporting atomoxetine&#x27;s selectivity, a human study found no effects on platelet serotonin uptake (a marker of SERT inhibition) and inhibition of the pressor effects of tyramine (a marker of NET inhibition).

Atomoxetine has been found to act as an NMDA receptor antagonist in rat cortical neurons at therapeutic concentrations. It causes a use-dependent open-channel block and its binding site overlaps with the Mg2+ binding site. Atomoxetine&#x27;s ability to increase prefrontal cortex firing rate in anesthetized rats could not be blocked by D1 or α1-adrenergic receptor antagonists, but could be potentiated by NMDA or an α2-adrenergic receptor antagonist, suggesting a glutaminergic mechanism. In Sprague Dawley rats, atomoxetine reduces NR2B protein content without altering transcript levels. Aberrant glutamate and NMDA receptor function have been implicated in the etiology of ADHD.

Atomoxetine also reversibly inhibits GIRK currents in &quot;Xenopus&quot; oocytes in a concentration-dependent, voltage-independent, and time-independent manner. Kir3.1/3.2 ion channels are opened downstream of M2, α2, D2, and A1 stimulation, as well as other Gi-coupled receptors. Therapeutic concentrations of atomoxetine are within range of interacting with GIRKs, especially in CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. It is not known whether this contributes to the therapeutic effects of atomoxetine in ADHD.

4-Hydroxyatomoxetine, the major active metabolite of atomoxetine in CYP2D6 extensive metabolizers, has been found to have sub-micromolar affinity for opioid receptors, acting as an antagonist at μ-opioid receptors and a partial agonist at κ-opioid receptors. It is not known whether this action at the kappa-opioid receptor leads to CNS-related adverse effects.

===Pharmacokinetics===
Orally administered atomoxetine is rapidly and completely absorbed. First-pass metabolism by the liver is dependent on CYP2D6 activity, resulting in an absolute bioavailability of 63% for extensive metabolizers and 94% for poor metabolizers. Maximum plasma concentration is reached in 1–2 hours. If taken with food, the maximum plasma concentration decreases by 10–40% and delays the tmax by 3 hours. Drugs affecting gastric pH have no effect on oral bioavailability.

Following intravenous delivery, atomoxetine has a volume of distribution of 0.85 L/kg (indicating distribution primarily in total body water), with limited partitioning into red blood cells. It is highly bound to plasma proteins (98.7%), mainly albumin, along with α1-acid glycoprotein (77%) and IgG (15%). Its metabolite &quot;N&quot;-desmethylatomoxetine is 99.1% bound to plasma proteins, while 4-hydroxyatomoxetine is only 66.6% bound.

The half-life of atomoxetine varies widely between individuals, with an average range of 4.5 to 19 hours. As atomoxetine is metabolized by CYP2D6, exposure may be increased 10-fold in CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. Among CYP2D6 extensive metabolizers, the half-life of atomoxetine averaged 5.34 hours and the half-life of the active metabolite &quot;N&quot;-desmethylatomoxetine was 8.9 hours. By contrast, among CYP2D6 poor metabolizers the half-life of atomoxetine averaged 20.0 hours and the half-life of &quot;N&quot;-desmethylatomoxetine averaged 33.3 hours. Steady-state levels of atomoxetine are typically achieved at or around day 10 of regular dosing, with trough plasma concentrations (Ctrough) residing around 30–40°ng/mL; however, both the time to steady-state levels and Ctrough are expected to vary based on a patient&#x27;s CYP2D6 profile.

Atomoxetine, &quot;N&quot;-desmethylatomoxetine, and 4-hydroxyatomoxetine produce minimal to no inhibition of CYP1A2 and CYP2C9, but inhibit CYP2D6 in human liver microsomes at concentrations between 3.6 and 17 μmol/L. Plasma concentrations of 4-hydroxyatomoxetine and &quot;N&quot;-desmethylatomoxetine at steady state are 1% and 5% that of atomoxetine in CYP2D6 extensive metabolizers, and 0.1% and 45% that of atomoxetine in CYP2D6 poor metabolizers, respectively.

Atomoxetine is excreted unchanged in urine at &lt;3% in both extensive and poor CYP2D6 metabolizers, with &gt;96% and 80% of a total dose being excreted in urine, respectively. The fractions excreted in urine as 4-hydroxyatomoxetine and its glucuronide account for 86% of a given dose in extensive metabolizers, but only 40% in poor metabolizers. CYP2D6 poor metabolizers excrete greater amounts of minor metabolites, namely &quot;N&quot;-desmethylatomoxetine and 2-hydroxymethylatomoxetine and their conjugates.

====Pharmacogenomics====
Chinese adults homozygous for the hypoactive CYP2D6*10 allele have been found to exhibit two-fold higher area-under-the-curve (AUCs) and 1.5-fold higher maximum plasma concentrations compared to extensive metabolizers.

Japanese men homozygous for CYP2D6*10 have similarly been found to experience two-fold higher AUCs compared to extensive metabolizers.

==Chemistry==
Atomoxetine, or (−)-methyl[(3&quot;R&quot;)-3-(2-methylphenoxy)-3-phenylpropylamine, is a white, granular powder that is highly soluble in water.

===Synthesis===
===Detection in biological fluids===
Atomoxetine may be quantitated in plasma, serum, or whole blood to distinguish extensive versus poor metabolizers in those receiving the drug therapeutically, to confirm the diagnosis in potential poisoning victims, or to assist in the forensic investigation in a case of fatal overdosage.

==History==
Atomoxetine is manufactured, marketed, and sold in the United States as the hydrochloride salt (atomoxetine HCl) under the brand name Strattera by Eli Lilly and Company, the original patent-filing company and current U.S. patent owner. Atomoxetine was initially intended to be developed as an antidepressant, but it was found to be insufficiently efficacious for treating depression. It was, however, found to be effective for ADHD and was approved by the FDA in 2002, for the treatment of ADHD. Its patent expired in May 2017. On 12 August 2010, Lilly lost a lawsuit that challenged its patent on Strattera, increasing the likelihood of an earlier entry of a generic into the US market. On 1 September 2010, Sun Pharmaceuticals announced it would begin manufacturing a generic in the United States. In a 29 July 2011 conference call, however, Sun Pharmaceutical&#x27;s Chairman stated &quot;Lilly won that litigation on appeal so I think [generic Strattera]&#x27;s deferred.&quot;

In 2017 the FDA approved the generic production of atomoxetine by four pharmaceutical companies.

==Society and culture==
The drug was originally known as tomoxetine. It was renamed to avoid medication errors, as the name may be confused with tamoxifen.

===Brand names===
In India, atomoxetine is sold under brand names including Axetra, Axepta, Attera, Tomoxetin, and Attentin. In Australia, Canada, Italy, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Switzerland, and the US, atomoxetine is sold under the brand name Strattera. In France, hospitals dispense atomoxetine under the brand name Strattera (it is not marketed in France). In the Czech Republic, it is sold under brand names including Mylan. In Poland, it is sold under the brand name Auroxetyn. In Iran, atomoxetine is sold under brand names including Stramox. In Brazil, it is sold under the brand name Atentah. In Turkey, it is sold under the brand names Attex, Setinox, and Atominex. In 2017, a generic version was approved in the United States.

==Research==
There has been some suggestion that atomoxetine might be a helpful adjunct in people with major depression, particularly in cases with concomitant ADHD.

Atomoxetine may be used in those with ADHD and bipolar disorder although such use has not been well established. Some benefit has also been seen in people with ADHD and autism. As with other norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors it appears to reduce anxiety and depression symptoms, although research has focused mainly on specific patient groups such as those with concurrent ADHD or methamphetamine dependence.

== References ==
== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q417240" start="0" end="11" title="Atomoxetine" label="Atomoxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q417240" start="48" end="57" title="Atomoxetine" label="Strattera"/>
<link wikidata="Q70884626" start="64" end="107" title="selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor" label="selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="140" end="180" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q519681" start="213" end="245" title="cognitive disengagement syndrome" label="cognitive disengagement syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="288" end="308" title="Stimulant" label="stimulant medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="326" end="345" title="executive functions" label="executive functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12403816" start="387" end="397" title="Cognitive inhibition" label="inhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="399" end="413" title="working memory" label="working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18907383" start="415" end="428" title="reaction time" label="reaction time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267800" start="434" end="459" title="emotional self-regulation" label="emotional self-regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q285166" start="554" end="560" title="Oral administration" label="orally"/>
<link wikidata="Q422112" start="657" end="672" title="methylphenidate" label="methylphenidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="718" end="732" title="abdominal pain" label="abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="734" end="752" title="decreased appetite" label="decreased appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="754" end="760" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916362" start="781" end="790" title="dizziness" label="dizziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129007" start="825" end="835" title="angioedema" label="angioedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="853" end="859" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="861" end="870" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="888" end="895" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q191797" start="901" end="911" title="aggression" label="aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="965" end="974" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="1035" end="1048" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q496997" start="1285" end="1294" title="indicated" label="indicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="1608" end="1617" title="psychostimulant" label="stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="1683" end="1696" title="Meta-analysis" label="Meta-analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="1701" end="1718" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q422112" start="1798" end="1813" title="methylphenidate" label="methylphenidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558704" start="1941" end="1958" title="Lisdexamfetamine" label="lisdexamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="2388" end="2410" title="drug use disorder" label="substance use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="2458" end="2472" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="2538" end="2555" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734924" start="2644" end="2675" title="Alpha-adrenergic agonist" label="α2-adrenergic receptor agonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613599" start="2684" end="2694" title="guanfacine" label="guanfacine"/>
<link wikidata="Q412221" start="2699" end="2708" title="clonidine" label="clonidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q498902" start="2777" end="2787" title="Drug withdrawal" label="withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q519681" start="3255" end="3287" title="cognitive disengagement syndrome" label="cognitive disengagement syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436668" start="3307" end="3344" title="Randomized controlled trial" label="randomised controlled clinical trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q422112" start="3488" end="3503" title="methylphenidate" label="methylphenidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141203" start="3590" end="3610" title="cognitive impairment" label="cognitive impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="3615" end="3627" title="frontal lobe" label="frontal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995526" start="3660" end="3682" title="traumatic brain injury" label="traumatic brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="3737" end="3756" title="attention" label="sustained attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q379784" start="3792" end="3799" title="arousal" label="arousal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="3801" end="3808" title="fatigue (medical)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="3814" end="3824" title="depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q519681" start="3850" end="3882" title="cognitive disengagement syndrome" label="cognitive disengagement syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105187" start="3891" end="3906" title="Cochrane review" label="Cochrane review"/>
<link wikidata="Q418522" start="4061" end="4076" title="akinetic mutism" label="akinetic mutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q693442" start="4087" end="4110" title="subarachnoid hemorrhage" label="subarachnoid hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782326" start="4116" end="4127" title="case report" label="case report"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="4186" end="4208" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="4242" end="4254" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q815819" start="4258" end="4277" title="Atrial fibrillation" label="Atrial fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506572" start="4281" end="4295" title="Atrial flutter" label="Atrial flutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q56002" start="4299" end="4322" title="Ventricular tachycardia" label="Ventricular tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q848662" start="4326" end="4350" title="Ventricular fibrillation" label="Ventricular fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q460864" start="4354" end="4373" title="Ventricular flutter" label="Ventricular flutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184559" start="4386" end="4402" title="arteriosclerosis" label="arteriosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499" start="4452" end="4467" title="hyperthyroidism" label="hyperthyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q536269" start="4470" end="4486" title="Pheochromocytoma" label="Pheochromocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q410954" start="4516" end="4544" title="monoamine oxidase inhibitors" label="monoamine oxidase inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q159701" start="4568" end="4576" title="glaucoma" label="glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="4628" end="4642" title="abdominal pain" label="abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="4644" end="4662" title="decreased appetite" label="decreased appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="4664" end="4670" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916362" start="4687" end="4696" title="dizziness" label="dizziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="4701" end="4718" title="urinary retention" label="urinary retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129007" start="4753" end="4763" title="angioedema" label="angioedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="4781" end="4787" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="4789" end="4798" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="4816" end="4823" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="4905" end="4913" title="Anorexia (symptom)" label="anorexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q718113" start="4915" end="4926" title="weight loss" label="weight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="4932" end="4944" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="5064" end="5073" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="5078" end="5091" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="5287" end="5315" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q879952" start="5335" end="5352" title="black box warning" label="black box warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q944142" start="5357" end="5383" title="Suicidal ideation" label="suicidal behavior/ideation"/>
<link wikidata="Q498902" start="5531" end="5541" title="Drug withdrawal" label="withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119506" start="5766" end="5775" title="substrate (biochemistry)" label="substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271142" start="5780" end="5786" title="CYP2D6" label="CYP2D6"/>
<link wikidata="Q834280" start="5841" end="5850" title="bupropion" label="bupropion"/>
<link wikidata="Q422244" start="5852" end="5862" title="fluoxetine" label="fluoxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q408471" start="5867" end="5877" title="paroxetine" label="paroxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q905000" start="6120" end="6124" title="hERG" label="hERG"/>
<link wikidata="Q286779" start="6152" end="6156" title="IC50" label="IC50"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="6201" end="6211" title="Heart arrhythmia" label="arrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011252" start="6213" end="6228" title="QT prolongation" label="QT prolongation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011252" start="6358" end="6402" title="Drug-induced QT prolongation" label="medications that may prolong the QT interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q575890" start="6532" end="6548" title="Antihypertensive" label="Antihypertensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q598405" start="6632" end="6647" title="sympathomimetic" label="sympathomimetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q263958" start="6658" end="6673" title="pseudoephedrine" label="pseudoephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q899668" start="6681" end="6715" title="norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors" label="norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q410954" start="6727" end="6732" title="Monoamine oxidase inhibitor" label="MAOIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q421910" start="6775" end="6788" title="phenylephrine" label="phenylephrine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6798" end="6829" title="Alpha-1 adrenergic receptor#Ligands" label="α1-adrenergic receptor agonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511166" start="6841" end="6853" title="vasopressors" label="vasopressors"/>
<link wikidata="Q422782" start="6862" end="6872" title="dobutamine" label="dobutamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415550" start="6876" end="6888" title="isoprenaline" label="isoprenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q423482" start="6893" end="6924" title="Beta2-adrenergic agonist" label="β2-adrenergic receptor agonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="7170" end="7177" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q423288" start="7179" end="7190" title="desipramine" label="desipramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="7192" end="7200" title="diazepam" label="diazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q408471" start="7202" end="7212" title="paroxetine" label="paroxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410400" start="7214" end="7223" title="phenytoin" label="phenytoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368879" start="7228" end="7236" title="warfarin" label="warfarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="7259" end="7273" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q97358913" start="7293" end="7304" title="amphetamine-type stimulant" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="7339" end="7348" title="stimulant" label="stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="7350" end="7360" title="euphoriant" label="euphoriant"/>
<link wikidata="Q598405" start="7366" end="7381" title="sympathomimetic" label="sympathomimetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706418" start="7393" end="7410" title="dextroamphetamine" label="dextroamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874257" start="7501" end="7527" title="norepinephrine transporter" label="norepinephrine transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271947" start="7708" end="7728" title="dopamine transporter" label="dopamine transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="7789" end="7806" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q271663" start="7807" end="7820" title="catecholamine" label="catecholamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="7853" end="7861" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319792" start="7876" end="7884" title="striatum" label="striatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476178" start="7888" end="7905" title="nucleus accumbens" label="nucleus accumbens"/>
<link wikidata="Q422112" start="7920" end="7935" title="methylphenidate" label="methylphenidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q899647" start="7939" end="7966" title="dopamine reuptake inhibitor" label="dopamine reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q410142" start="8220" end="8241" title="serotonin transporter" label="serotonin transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="8303" end="8314" title="Positron emission tomography" label="PET imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q156606" start="8324" end="8337" title="rhesus monkey" label="rhesus monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856966" start="8457" end="8470" title="microdialysis" label="microdialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="8528" end="8537" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511166" start="8768" end="8775" title="Antihypotensive agent" label="pressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q165930" start="8787" end="8795" title="tyramine" label="tyramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044974" start="8867" end="8891" title="NMDA receptor antagonist" label="NMDA receptor antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035393" start="9164" end="9166" title="D1 receptor" label="D1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11679764" start="9170" end="9203" title="alpha-1 blocker" label="α1-adrenergic receptor antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q632856" start="9234" end="9238" title="NMDA" label="NMDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734893" start="9245" end="9278" title="alpha-2 blocker" label="α2-adrenergic receptor antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089676" start="9321" end="9340" title="Laboratory rat" label="Sprague Dawley rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q18026519" start="9362" end="9366" title="GRIN2B" label="NR2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="9505" end="9509" title="ADHD" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001168" start="9549" end="9553" title="GIRK" label="GIRK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342298" start="9566" end="9593" title="Xenopus" label="&amp;quot;Xenopus&amp;quot; oocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q62536" start="9685" end="9696" title="ion channel" label="ion channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17861931" start="9723" end="9725" title="Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M2" label="M2"/>
<link wikidata="Q288084" start="9727" end="9729" title="Alpha-2 adrenergic receptor" label="α2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15335165" start="9731" end="9733" title="Dopamine receptor D2" label="D2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14888579" start="9739" end="9741" title="Adenosine A1 receptor" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q24719569" start="9772" end="9774" title="Gi alpha subunit" label="Gi"/>
<link wikidata="Q421797" start="10163" end="10178" title="opioid receptor" label="opioid receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911924" start="10208" end="10226" title="Mu opioid receptor" label="μ-opioid receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q14897645" start="10252" end="10270" title="Kappa opioid receptor" label="κ-opioid receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271142" start="10518" end="10524" title="CYP2D6" label="CYP2D6"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="10551" end="10575" title="bioavailability" label="absolute bioavailability"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="10783" end="10787" title="Pharmacokinetics" label="tmax"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="10878" end="10898" title="Intravenous therapy" label="intravenous delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332167" start="10918" end="10940" title="volume of distribution" label="volume of distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605224" start="11868" end="11880" title="Steady state (biochemistry)" label="Steady-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846541" start="11970" end="11998" title="Trough (pharmacology)" label="trough plasma concentrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846541" start="12000" end="12007" title="Trough (pharmacology)" label="Ctrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271142" start="12143" end="12149" title="CYP2D6" label="CYP2D6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737406" start="12270" end="12276" title="CYP1A2" label="CYP1A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014962" start="12281" end="12287" title="CYP2C9" label="CYP2C9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124842" start="13130" end="13140" title="Drug metabolism" label="conjugates"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833590" start="13273" end="13293" title="Area under the curve (pharmacokinetics)" label="area-under-the-curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q420060" start="14117" end="14130" title="hydrochloride" label="hydrochloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q632240" start="14188" end="14209" title="Eli Lilly and Company" label="Eli Lilly and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="14224" end="14230" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198549" start="14318" end="14327" title="drug development" label="developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q460433" start="15215" end="15231" title="medication error" label="medication error"/>
<link wikidata="Q412178" start="15267" end="15276" title="tamoxifen" label="tamoxifen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506319" start="15967" end="15974" title="generic medication" label="generic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="16122" end="16138" title="major depression" label="major depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="16233" end="16249" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="16355" end="16361" title="autism" label="autism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646621" wikidata="Q27838038" url="?curid=646621" title="Silver fox">
<text>Silver fox or Silver Fox may refer to:
==Animals==
* Silver fox (animal), a melanistic form of the red fox 

==Arts and entertainment==
* Silver Fox (character), in Marvel Comics 
* &quot;Silver Fox&quot;, a song by RJD2 from the 2002 album &quot;Deadringer&quot; 

==Military==
* Operation Silver Fox, a German-Finnish World War II military campaign
* BAE Systems Silver Fox, an unmanned aerial vehicle

==People with the nickname==
* Ayaz Memon (born 1955), Indian sports writer
* Basdeo Panday (born 1933), former actor and Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago
* Anderson Cooper (born 1967), CNN News anchor
* Barbara Bush (1925–2018), former first lady of the United States
* Peter Costa (poker player) (born 1956), British poker player
* Mel Judah (born 1947), Australian poker player
* Ed Kelly (born 1948), Irish-American former soccer player
* Jim Northrup (baseball) (1939–2011), American Major League Baseball player
* Jesse Petty (1894–1971), American Major League Baseball pitcher
* Charlie Rich (1932–1995), American singer
* Ray Knight (born 1952), American baseball player, manager and broadcaster
* David Pearson (racing driver) (1934–2018), NASCAR driver
* Duke Snider (1926–2011), American baseball player
* Robert L. Stephens (1921–1984), United States Air Force test pilot
* David Taylor (snooker player) (born 1943), English snooker player
* Eduard Shevardnadze (1928–2014), Soviet politician and former president of Georgia
* Chase Utley (born 1978), American baseball player 

==Other uses==
* Silver Fox Island, Newfoundland, Canada
* Regina Silver Foxes, a former Canadian Junior &quot;A&quot; ice hockey team
* Silver Foxes, a former name of the Kent State Golden Flashes football team
* &quot;Silver Fox&quot;, an LNER Class A4 steam locomotive 
* Silver Fox, in Miwok mythology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27838038" start="0" end="10" title="Silver fox" label="Silver fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q27838038" start="14" end="24" title="Silver fox" label="Silver Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574250" start="53" end="72" title="Silver fox (animal)" label="Silver fox (animal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608804" start="138" end="160" title="Silver Fox (character)" label="Silver Fox (character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q970935" start="247" end="257" title="Deadringer (album)" label="Deadringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q313442" start="281" end="301" title="Operation Silver Fox" label="Operation Silver Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834530" start="353" end="375" title="BAE Systems Silver Fox" label="BAE Systems Silver Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q24951958" start="436" end="446" title="Ayaz Memon" label="Ayaz Memon"/>
<link wikidata="Q809814" start="483" end="496" title="Basdeo Panday" label="Basdeo Panday"/>
<link wikidata="Q316997" start="567" end="582" title="Anderson Cooper" label="Anderson Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="614" end="626" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173403" start="681" end="707" title="Peter Costa (poker player)" label="Peter Costa (poker player)"/>
<link wikidata="Q348456" start="744" end="753" title="Mel Judah" label="Mel Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335021" start="793" end="801" title="Ed Kelly" label="Ed Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197206" start="853" end="876" title="Jim Northrup (baseball)" label="Jim Northrup (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186738" start="930" end="941" title="Jesse Petty" label="Jesse Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q563057" start="996" end="1008" title="Charlie Rich" label="Charlie Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420530" start="1040" end="1050" title="Ray Knight" label="Ray Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q946583" start="1116" end="1145" title="David Pearson (racing driver)" label="David Pearson (racing driver)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204653" start="1175" end="1186" title="Duke Snider" label="Duke Snider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346650" start="1227" end="1245" title="Robert L. Stephens" label="Robert L. Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069811" start="1296" end="1325" title="David Taylor (snooker player)" label="David Taylor (snooker player)"/>
<link wikidata="Q151929" start="1364" end="1383" title="Eduard Shevardnadze" label="Eduard Shevardnadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152810" start="1449" end="1460" title="Chase Utley" label="Chase Utley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516030" start="1518" end="1535" title="Silver Fox Island" label="Silver Fox Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237913" start="1560" end="1579" title="Regina Silver Foxes" label="Regina Silver Foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814673" start="1673" end="1707" title="Kent State Golden Flashes football" label="Kent State Golden Flashes football"/>
<link wikidata="Q938253" start="1742" end="1755" title="LNER Class A4" label="LNER Class A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883766" start="1791" end="1806" title="Miwok mythology" label="Miwok mythology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646622" wikidata="Q5550721" url="?curid=646622" title="Gerhard Lindblom">
<text>Karl Gerhard Lindblom (26 August 1887 – 8 June 1969) was an ethnographer from Sweden who worked in East Africa in the 1910s. He was the principal author of materials on the Akamba peoples. Additionally, he worked as the Director of the Museum of Stockholm beginning in 1928 and in 1935 he became a professor at the University of Stockholm.

== Bibliography ==
*&quot;Outlines of a Tharaka Grammar, with a list of words and specimens of the language&quot;, 1914
*&quot;The Akamba in British East Africa : an ethnological monograph&quot;, 1916, PhD dissertation at Uppsala University, Sweden, 2nd edition, enlarged, 1918–1920, facsimile 1969
*&quot;Notes on Kamba grammar : with two appendices: Kamba names of persons, places, animals and plants - salutations&quot;, 1926
*&quot;Die Beschneidung bei den Akamba,&quot; 1927
*&quot;Die Schleuder in Afrika und Anderwärts,&quot; 1927
*&quot;Fighting-bracelets and Kindred Weapons in Africa, 1927&quot;
*&quot;The Use of Stilts : especially in Africa and America,&quot; 1927
*&quot;Further notes on the use of stilts,&quot; 1928
*&quot;Kamba folklore&quot;, 3 volumes, 1928-1935
*&quot;String figures in Africa,&quot; 1930
*&quot;The use of oxen as pack riding animals in Africa,&quot; 1931
*&quot;Notes ethnographiques sur le Kavirondo septentrional et la colonie du Kenya&quot;, 1932
*&quot;Spears and staffs with two or more points, in Africa&quot;, 1937
*&quot;Wire-drawing, especially in Africa,&quot; 1939
*&quot;Ethnological and anthropological studies in Sweden during the war&quot;, 194

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5550721" start="0" end="21" title="Gerhard Lindblom" label="Karl Gerhard Lindblom"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="60" end="72" title="ethnographer" label="ethnographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="78" end="84" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143929" start="173" end="179" title="Akamba" label="Akamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q221645" start="315" end="338" title="University of Stockholm" label="University of Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="563" end="581" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646624" wikidata="Q7087184" url="?curid=646624" title="Olive Osmond">
<text>Olive May Osmond (née Davis; May 4, 1925 – May 9, 2004) was the matriarch of the American Osmond singing family.

==Life and career==
She was born in Malad City, Idaho, to Vera Ann (née Nichols) and Thomas Martin Davis. After high school, she moved to Ogden, Utah. She met George Osmond at Defense Depot Ogden where he was stationed, and she worked as a secretary. They married on December 1, 1944. Both were devout members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Their first two children, Virl and Tom, were born with a degenerative condition which left them nearly deaf. Doctors warned the couple that future children had a higher chance of having hearing loss, but George and Olive wanted a large family. The other children, Alan, Wayne, Merrill, Jay, Donny, Marie, and Jimmy, were born able to hear.

George formed a barbershop quartet consisting of Alan, Wayne, Merrill, and Jay, and eventually got them booked at Disneyland, where the boys caught the attention of Walt Disney himself, and Andy Williams&#x27;s father. From 1962 to 1971, the Osmond Brothers appeared on &quot;The Andy Williams Show&quot;. Donny made his debut on the program the day after his sixth birthday.

The brothers eventually left &quot;Williams&quot; and were regulars on the second incarnation of &quot;The Jerry Lewis Show&quot; (1967-1969) before launching a successful recording career. The siblings - including Donny, Marie, and Jimmy as solo artists - scored several hits, The Osmonds&#x27; biggest being &quot;One Bad Apple&quot;, which climbed to #1. From 1976 to 1979, Donny and Marie hosted &quot;The Donny and Marie Show&quot;.

Olive&#x27;s role in the family was largely that of being the children&#x27;s mother, ensuring the children were properly homeschooled through correspondence courses and that they were protected from predatory media coverage; she developed a strong working relationship with Ann Moses, the reporter from &quot;Tiger Beat&quot; assigned to the Osmond family beat. Other teen magazines were not always as fortunate: Olive was reportedly furious when &quot;16&quot; magazine photographer Gloria Staver had managed to photograph Donny shirtless. Olive was, as Moses recalled, a &quot;business wizard&quot; but largely left the business side of the family operation to her husband, George. In the early years of the Osmond Brothers, she also handled the vocal arrangements until Wayne, who was found to have perfect pitch, was old enough to take that responsibility.

Marie played Olive in 1982&#x27;s &quot;Side by Side: The True Story of the Osmond Family&quot;. 2001&#x27;s &quot;Inside the Osmonds&quot; (produced by Jimmy) depicted the siblings&#x27; egos and their frustration at not being taken seriously as artists by the music industry, George&#x27;s fiscal mismanagement, and the quest to establish a &quot;new Hollywood&quot; in Utah as leading to the family&#x27;s downfall.

In 2001, Osmond experienced a stroke. She faced complications from the condition for the rest of her life and died in Provo, on May 9, 2004. She was 79 years old.

==Children==
George and Olive Osmond had nine children:

*(George) Virl Osmond Jr. (born October 19, 1945) 
*Thomas Rulon &quot;Tom&quot; Osmond (born October 26, 1947)
*Alan Ralph Osmond (born June 22, 1949)
*(Melvin) Wayne Osmond (August 28, 1951-January 1, 2025)
*Merrill Davis Osmond (born April 30, 1953)
*Jay Wesley Osmond (born March 2, 1955)
*Donald &quot;Donny&quot; Clark Osmond (born December 9, 1957)
*Olive &quot;Marie&quot; Osmond (born October 13, 1959)
*James Arthur &quot;Jimmy&quot; Osmond (born April 16, 1963)

== References ==
==External links==
* Official Osmond Family Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7087184" start="0" end="16" title="Olive Osmond" label="Olive May Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087184" start="22" end="27" title="Olive Osmond" label="Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543041" start="90" end="111" title="The Osmonds" label="Osmond singing family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516548" start="150" end="167" title="Malad City, Idaho" label="Malad City, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q52471" start="252" end="263" title="Ogden, Utah" label="Ogden, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543060" start="273" end="286" title="George Osmond" label="George Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251372" start="290" end="309" title="Defense Depot Ogden" label="Defense Depot Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q80687" start="354" end="363" title="secretary" label="secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="427" end="474" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817129" start="512" end="515" title="Tom Osmond" label="Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133" start="580" end="584" title="deafness" label="deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658587" start="741" end="745" title="Alan Osmond" label="Alan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976514" start="747" end="752" title="Wayne Osmond" label="Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922035" start="754" end="761" title="Merrill Osmond" label="Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167000" start="763" end="766" title="Jay Osmond" label="Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q386053" start="768" end="773" title="Donny Osmond" label="Donny"/>
<link wikidata="Q465641" start="775" end="780" title="Marie Osmond" label="Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689414" start="786" end="791" title="Jimmy Osmond" label="Jimmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715189" start="834" end="852" title="barbershop quartet" label="barbershop quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="932" end="942" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="983" end="994" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q214548" start="1008" end="1021" title="Andy Williams" label="Andy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543041" start="1060" end="1075" title="The Osmonds" label="Osmond Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713728" start="1094" end="1116" title="The Andy Williams Show" label="The Andy Williams Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376478" start="1298" end="1318" title="The Jerry Lewis Show" label="The Jerry Lewis Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296720" start="1601" end="1625" title="Donny &amp;amp; Marie (1976 TV series)" label="The Donny and Marie Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801388" start="1944" end="1954" title="Tiger Beat" label="Tiger Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q379755" start="2389" end="2400" title="arrangement" label="arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q213250" start="2437" end="2450" title="absolute pitch" label="perfect pitch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2537" end="2586" title="Side by Side: The True Story of the Osmond Family" label="Side by Side: The True Story of the Osmond Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363645" start="2612" end="2630" title="Inside the Osmonds" label="Inside the Osmonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="2947" end="2953" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23443" start="3035" end="3040" title="Provo, Utah" label="Provo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817129" start="3190" end="3225" title="Tom Osmond" label="Thomas Rulon &amp;quot;Tom&amp;quot; Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658587" start="3251" end="3268" title="Alan Osmond" label="Alan Ralph Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976514" start="3291" end="3312" title="Wayne Osmond" label="(Melvin) Wayne Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922035" start="3348" end="3368" title="Merrill Osmond" label="Merrill Davis Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167000" start="3392" end="3409" title="Jay Osmond" label="Jay Wesley Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q386053" start="3432" end="3469" title="Donny Osmond" label="Donald &amp;quot;Donny&amp;quot; Clark Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q465641" start="3495" end="3525" title="Marie Osmond" label="Olive &amp;quot;Marie&amp;quot; Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689414" start="3551" end="3588" title="Jimmy Osmond" label="James Arthur &amp;quot;Jimmy&amp;quot; Osmond"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646632" wikidata="Q1394697" url="?curid=646632" title="Jan Wils">
<text>Jan Wils (Alkmaar, 22 February 1891 – Voorburg, 11 February 1972) was a Dutch architect known for his design of the Olympic Stadium for the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam.

Wils joined Johan Mutters&#x27;s office in The Hague in 1914 but left two years later to start his own firm.

Wils was one of the founding members of the De Stijl movement, which also included artists as Piet Mondrian, Theo van Doesburg and Gerrit Rietveld. His work evolved into the style of the New Hague School.

Among other works, Wils designed the Olympic Stadium for the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam. His design was also entered in the Olympic art competition, and won the gold medal. he also designed the Papaverhof housing complex, now a Rijksmonument (Dutch national heritage site).

==References==
==External links==
* Short biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1394697" start="0" end="8" title="Jan Wils" label="Jan Wils"/>
<link wikidata="Q972" start="10" end="17" title="Alkmaar" label="Alkmaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q809821" start="38" end="46" title="Voorburg" label="Voorburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="78" end="87" title="architecture" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q503319" start="116" end="131" title="Olympic Stadium (Amsterdam)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8138" start="140" end="160" title="1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="164" end="173" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974426" start="188" end="201" title="Johan Mutters" label="Johan Mutters"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="219" end="228" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q207445" start="330" end="338" title="De Stijl" label="De Stijl"/>
<link wikidata="Q151803" start="380" end="393" title="Piet Mondrian" label="Piet Mondrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160422" start="395" end="412" title="Theo van Doesburg" label="Theo van Doesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q160435" start="417" end="432" title="Gerrit Rietveld" label="Gerrit Rietveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314870" start="473" end="489" title="New Hague School (architecture)" label="New Hague School"/>
<link wikidata="Q673767" start="623" end="646" title="Art competitions at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympic art competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829447" start="693" end="719" title="Papaverhof" label="Papaverhof housing complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q916333" start="727" end="740" title="Rijksmonument" label="Rijksmonument"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646643" wikidata="Q3770794" url="?curid=646643" title="Woodworm">
<text>A woodworm is the wood-eating larva of many species of beetle. It is also a generic description given to the infestation of a wooden item (normally part of a dwelling or the furniture in it) by these larvae.

==Types of woodworm==
Woodboring beetles with larvae commonly known as woodworm include:

*Ambrosia beetles (weevils of the subfamilies Scolytinae and Platypodinae)
*Woodboring weevils (&quot;Pentarthrum huttoni&quot; and &quot;Euophryum confine&quot;)
*Bark borer beetle or waney edge borer (&quot;Ernobius mollis&quot;) 
*Common furniture beetle (&quot;Anobium punctatum&quot;)
*Deathwatch beetle (&quot;Xestobium rufovillosum&quot;)
*House longhorn beetle (&quot;Hylotrupes bajulus&quot;)
*Powderpost beetle (&quot;Lyctus brunneus&quot;)
*Wharf borer (&quot;Narcerdes melanura&quot;)

==Manifestation==

Signs of woodworm usually consist of holes in the wooden item, with live infestations showing powder (faeces), known as frass, around the holes. The size of the holes varies, but they are typically in diameter for the most common household species, although they can be much larger in the case of the house longhorn beetle. Adult beetles that emerge from wood may also be found in the summer months.
Typically the adult beetles lay eggs on or just under the surface of a wooden item. The resulting grubs then feed on the wooden item causing both structural and cosmetic damage. They then pupate and hatch as beetles that then breed, lay eggs and repeat the process, causing further damage.

As these beetles are accustomed to consuming decaying wood in forests, most grubs will prefer wooden items that contain a higher moisture content than that of typical household items.

A building with a woodworm problem in its structure or furniture may also have a problem with excess moisture. The issue could be the result of a lack of ventilation in a roof space, cellar or other enclosed space within an otherwise dry building.

Whilst moisture is a leading factor resulting in a woodworm infestation, some species of woodboring insects, such as the woodboring weevil, are only found where fungal rot has already begun.

==Treatment==

Depending on the species involved, woodworm infestation is generally controlled with insecticides. However, some woodworm conditions, such as those caused by the waney edge borer (&quot;Ernobius mollis&quot;), require no treatment at all because the insect will have been killed in the preparation of the wood. Only active infestations require treatment, so it is important to ascertain whether an infestation is still active before treatment is carried out. It is also advisable to investigate and solve possible dampness issues, as dry wood is not usually affected, and wood that remains damp may be reinfected at a later date.

Electrical insect killers, which attract and kill adult beetles before they can breed, may be used along with conventional chemical treatments to kill adult beetles before they can breed, but the effectiveness of such an approach is unknown.

Freezing treatments are quite effective but are costly, take two to three weeks to work and may cause damage. Low-oxygen treatment is also effective but is costly and very time-consuming, taking as long as eight weeks to treat the problem.

==Consumption==
In places such as Cambodia, South Africa, the Philippines and Papua New Guinea, woodworms may be considered edible delicacies.

==See also==
* Bookworm (insect)
* List of common household pests
* Ptinidae
* Shipworm
* Woodboring beetle

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3770794" start="2" end="10" title="Woodworm" label="woodworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032385" start="231" end="248" title="Woodboring beetle" label="Woodboring beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20972612" start="300" end="315" title="Ambrosia beetle" label="Ambrosia beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q383963" start="318" end="324" title="weevil" label="weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q720458" start="345" end="355" title="Scolytinae" label="Scolytinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392058" start="360" end="372" title="Platypodinae" label="Platypodinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165049" start="401" end="420" title="Pentarthrum huttoni" label="Pentarthrum huttoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q15736528" start="437" end="454" title="Euophryum confine" label="Euophryum confine"/>
<link wikidata="Q602516" start="463" end="480" title="Ernobius mollis" label="Bark borer beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27925" start="533" end="556" title="Common furniture beetle" label="Common furniture beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074662" start="590" end="607" title="Deathwatch beetle" label="Deathwatch beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21121" start="646" end="667" title="hylotrupes" label="House longhorn beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q639794" start="702" end="719" title="Lyctus brunneus" label="Powderpost beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469939" start="751" end="762" title="Wharf borer" label="Wharf borer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116618011" start="936" end="941" title="frass" label="frass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="1404" end="1410" title="Pupa" label="pupate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165049" start="2062" end="2079" title="Pentarthrum huttoni" label="woodboring weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q602516" start="2334" end="2349" title="Ernobius mollis" label="Ernobius mollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="3297" end="3305" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3307" end="3319" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3325" end="3336" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="3341" end="3357" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249808" start="3422" end="3439" title="Bookworm (insect)" label="Bookworm (insect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612075" start="3442" end="3472" title="List of common household pests" label="List of common household pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q17504738" start="3475" end="3483" title="Ptinidae" label="Ptinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q547125" start="3486" end="3494" title="Teredo navalis" label="Shipworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032385" start="3497" end="3514" title="Woodboring beetle" label="Woodboring beetle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646645" wikidata="Q2399498" url="?curid=646645" title="Digital display advertising">
<text>Digital display advertising is online graphic advertising through banners, text, images, video, and audio. The main purpose of digital display advertising is to post company ads on third-party websites. A display ad is usually interactive (i.e. clickable), which allows brands and advertisers to engage deeper with the users. A display ad can also be a companion ad for a non-clickable video ad.

According to eMarketer, Facebook and Twitter were set to take 33 percent of display ad spending market share by 2017. 
Desktop display advertising eclipsed search ad buying in 2014, with mobile ad spending overtaking display in 2015.

==Overview==
Digital display advertising is an online form of advertising in which the company&#x27;s promotional messages appear on third-party sites or search engine results pages such as publishers or social networks. There is an evidence showing that this advertising can increase the number of website page view of a company from most types of customers except from the non-authenticated visitors who visited the website before. The main purpose of display advertising is to support brand awareness (Robinson et al., 2007) and it also helps to increase the purchase intention of consumers.

Social media is used by many organizations. One example is, in 2014, ASOS and Nike collaborated with Google Hangouts to create the first shoppable video web chat on Google+. The video is an example of display advertising used for commemorating 27 years of Nike&#x27;s Air Max shoes. The video advertising aimed at creating brand awareness among users and convincing them to watch the Hangout and purchase products from the display advertising itself. Consumers were able to shop by clicking the display advertising. According to an ASOS statement, display advertising has contributed to an increase in both the number of users visiting its website and downloads of the ASOS App by 28 percent, with users having then visited the website eight times a month, on average.

==History==
Since the early advent of technology, the Internet has completely changed the way people relate to advertisements. As computers prices decreased, online content became accessible to a large portion of the world&#x27;s population. This change has modified the way people are exposed to media and advertising and has led to the creation of online channels through which advertisements can reach users.

The first type of relationship between a website and an advertiser was a straightforward, direct partnership. This partnership model implies that the advertiser promoting a product or service pays the website (also known as a publisher) directly for a certain amount of ad impressions. The first digital ad, called a banner ad, was run in 1994 by AT&amp;T on a site called HotWired.

As time went on, publishers began creating thousands of websites, leading to millions of pages with unsold ad space. This gave rise to a new set of companies called Ad Networks. The ad network acted as a broker, buying unsold ad space from multiple publishers and packaged them into audiences to be sold to advertisers. This second wave of advertiser-publisher relationships rapidly gained popularity as it was convenient and useful for buyers who often found themselves paying a lower price yet receiving enhanced targeting capabilities through ad networks.

The third and most recent major development that shaped the advertiser-publisher ecosystem started occurring in the late 2000s when widespread adoption of RTB (real time bidding) technology took place. Also referred to as programmatic bidding, RTB allowed companies representing buyers and sellers to bid on the price to show an ad to a user every time a banner ad is loading. When a page loads during a user visit, there are thousands of bids occurring from advertisers to serve an ad to that user, based on each company&#x27;s individual algorithms. With this most recent change in the industry, more and more ads are being sold on a single-impression basis, as opposed to in bulk purchases.

===Programmatic, Real time bidding (RTB)===
Programmatic display advertising, or real time bidding (RTB), transformed the way digital display advertising is bought and managed in recent years. Rather than placing a booking for advertising directly with a website, advertisers will manage their activity through a (demand side platform), and bid to advertise to people in real time, across multiple websites, based on targeting criteria. This method of advertising quickly gained popularity, as it allows for more control for the advertiser (or agency), including of the individual target audience, rather than just the website. It has become a threat to website operators and generally the cost paid for advertising in this way is less than the old method and so the earning potential for them is reduced.

Programmatic is not without its drawbacks, as without the appropriate management adverts can appear against unsavoury content or inappropriate news topics. This issue became front-page news in February 2017, when advertisers on YouTube were found displayed on terror group websites and fake news sites. As a result, a number of major advertisers paused all of their online advertising until they could put the appropriate measures in place to prevent this occurring again.

Other issues can arise from this method of buying display ads, for example since DSPs mostly buy from inventory on the public ad exchanges, the quality of the impressions bought can often be questionable and low value. in response to this, in the past few years we have seen the proliferation and use of private deals through PMPs.

===First online advertisement===
The birthday of the first banner display on the World Wide Web was on 27 October 1994. It appeared on HotWired, the first commercial web magazine.

The COCONET online service had graphical online banner ads starting in 1988 in San Diego, California.

The PRODIGY service, launched also in 1988, had banner ads as well.

==Operations==
===Accounts department===
The accounts department meet with the client to define campaign goals and translate those goals into a creative brief to be forwarded to the creative department.

===Creative department===
The role of the creative team is to conceptualise and create the advert. They have to develop a creative execution that will be compelling enough to drive a customer to buy a product or a service. The team often consists of a mix of copy writers and graphic designers who use their respective skillsets to communicate via copy and visuals.

===Media planner===
People have to test in which way the user experiences all the information of a data visualization. For this reason, they have to study the users&#x27; response to sounds, image, and motion. They have to be aware of everything that is digitally consumed, to know all the newest technologies and media solutions, and to help all the other departments to find the best way to reach the object&#x27;s campaign.

===Ad operations===
Ad Operations, or &#x27;Ad ops&#x27;, are the people who ensure that the ad is physically delivered to the correct website at the correct time. They do this by uploading the ad into the advertiser&#x27;s ad server so that it can be delivered to the website and displayed to the end user who will see it. They are also responsible of delivering 100% of the advertiser&#x27;s budget in an ad campaign by regularly tracking the ad campaign performance and optimizing it towards the advertiser&#x27;s KPIs.

===Ad server===
Ad servers helps manage digital display advertisements. It is an advertising technology (ad tech) tool that, throughout a platform, administrates the ads and their distribution. It is basically a service or technology for a company that takes care of all the ad campaign programs and by receiving the ad files it is able to allocate them in different websites. The ad server is responsible for things such as the dates by which the campaign has to run on a website; the rapidity in which an ad as to be spread and where (geographic location targeting, language targeting.. ); controlling that an ad is not overseen by a user by limiting the number of visualisations; proposing an ad on past behaviour targeting.

There are different types of ad servers. There is an ad server for publishers that helps them to launch a new ad on a website by listing the highest ads&#x27; price on its and to follow the ad&#x27;s growth by registering how many users it has reached. There is an ad server for advertisers that helps them by sending the ads in the form of HTML codes to each publisher. In this way, it is possible to open the ad in every moment and make changes of frequency for example, at all times. Lastly, there is an ad server for ad networks that provides information as in which network the publisher is registering an income and which is the daily revenue.

===Importance of formats of display ads===
Two students of the &quot;Amsterdam school of Communication Research ASCor&quot; have run studies about the audience reactions to different display advertising formats. In particular, they took into consideration two different types of format (sponsored content and banner advertising) to demonstrate that people react and perceive formats in different ways, positive and negative. For this reason, it is important to choose the right format because it will help to make the most of the medium. It is also possible to add:
* Video;
* Rich Media Ads (Expandables): flash files that may expand when the user interacts on mouseover (polite), or auto- initiated (non-polite);
* Overlays: ads that appear above content and that are possible to remove by clicking on a close button;
* Interstitials: Ads that are displayed on web pages before expected content (before the target page is displayed on the user&#x27;s screen);
* Sponsorship: including a logo or adding a brand to the design of a website. This can also can fall under Native advertising, which is an ad that can seem like Editorial, or &quot;In-Feed&quot;, but has really been paid for by the advertiser

To help to better select the right format for the type of ad, Interactive Advertising Bureau has realized a Display Standard Ad Unit Portfolio that works as a guideline that can be followed by the creatives. The IAB ad sizes as of 2007 are :

*Rectangles and Pop-Ups
**Medium rectangle: 300 x 250
**codice_1
**codice_2
**codice_3
**Rectangle: 180 x 150
**codice_4
**codice_5
*Banners and Buttons
**codice_6
**codice_7
**Micro bar: 88 x 31
**codice_8
**Button 2: 120 x 60
**codice_9
**codice_10
**Leaderboard: 728 x 90
*Skyscrapers
**Wide skyscraper: 160 x 600
**codice_11
**Half-page: 300 x 600

Those sizes that are bold above are part of the Universal Ad Package.codice_12 entries were delisted after the update in 2011. Standard banner ad sizes are constantly evolving due to consumer creative fatigue and banner blindness. Ad companies consistently test performance of ad units to ensure maximum performance for their clients. IAB has updated its guideline bi-annually.

In 2015, IAB announced advertising creative guidelines for display &amp; mobile, considering HTML5.

In 2017 IAB also introduced the new guidelines, featuring adjustable ad formats, as well as the guidelines for new digital content experiences such as augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), social media, mobile video, emoji ad messaging, and 360-degree video ads.

Fixed size ad spec is:

==== Ad Fatigue or Ads boredom ====
Display advertising Fatigue is the term used to describe the state in which consumers lose their sensitivity to or responsiveness to display advertising as a result of prolonged exposure to them. This may lead to poorer click-through rates (CTR), lower engagement rates, and a general decline in the efficacy of ad campaigns. Digital advertising strategies that largely rely on Re-targeting or repetitive exposure across websites and platforms are more likely to face the issue of display ad fatigue. Most common example of ad fatigue is Youtube Ads, Published by Google Ads Advertisers around the world.

===== Reasons for Fatigue from Display Ads =====
Overexposure: If users see the same advertisements too often, they may grow irritated or stop noticing them altogether.

Lack of Variety: Users may become disinterested if they always encounter the same messaging or creatives ads.

Inadequate Targeting: Users may become disengaged or uninterested in ads that are not tailored or relevant to them.

==See also==
* Web banner
* Internet marketing
* Online advertising
* Mobile advertising
* Native advertising
* Pop-up ad
* Interstitial webpage
* Interactive media
* Hover ad
* Affiliate marketing
* Pay per click
*Site Retargeting

==Notes==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2399498" start="0" end="27" title="Digital display advertising" label="Digital display advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q194430" start="227" end="238" title="Interactive advertising" label="interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q111937543" start="353" end="365" title="companion ad" label="companion ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927890" start="386" end="394" title="Video advertising" label="video ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323664" start="410" end="419" title="eMarketer" label="eMarketer"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="421" end="429" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="434" end="441" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="1228" end="1240" title="Social media" label="Social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q211951" start="1297" end="1301" title="ASOS.com" label="ASOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="1306" end="1310" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q13231451" start="1329" end="1344" title="Google Hangouts" label="Google Hangouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q356" start="1393" end="1400" title="Google+" label="Google+"/>
<link wikidata="Q385354" start="2728" end="2737" title="banner ad" label="banner ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914704" start="2960" end="2971" title="Advertising network" label="Ad Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628411" start="3310" end="3319" title="Targeted advertising" label="targeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134714" start="3510" end="3544" title="Real-time bidding" label="RTB (real time bidding) technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134714" start="4131" end="4154" title="Real-time bidding" label="real time bidding (RTB)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255019" start="4364" end="4384" title="demand side platform" label="demand side platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="5085" end="5092" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255019" start="5412" end="5416" title="Demand-side platform" label="DSPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678196" start="5457" end="5468" title="ad exchange" label="ad exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255019" start="5657" end="5661" title="Private marketplace" label="PMPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141057" start="5799" end="5807" title="HotWired" label="HotWired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186952" start="9497" end="9507" title="Rich Media" label="Rich Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800646" start="9742" end="9755" title="Interstitial webpage" label="Interstitials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980087" start="9989" end="10007" title="Native advertising" label="Native advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057268" start="10188" end="10218" title="Interactive Advertising Bureau" label="Interactive Advertising Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q385354" start="12553" end="12563" title="Web banner" label="Web banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323528" start="12566" end="12584" title="Internet marketing" label="Internet marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q624902" start="12587" end="12605" title="Online advertising" label="Online advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916781" start="12608" end="12626" title="Mobile advertising" label="Mobile advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980087" start="12629" end="12647" title="Native advertising" label="Native advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q723906" start="12650" end="12659" title="Pop-up ad" label="Pop-up ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800646" start="12662" end="12682" title="Interstitial webpage" label="Interstitial webpage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186952" start="12685" end="12702" title="Interactive media" label="Interactive media"/>
<link wikidata="Q723906" start="12705" end="12713" title="Hover ad" label="Hover ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q382453" start="12716" end="12735" title="Affiliate marketing" label="Affiliate marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q29778" start="12738" end="12751" title="Pay per click" label="Pay per click"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170668" start="12753" end="12769" title="Site retargeting" label="Site Retargeting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646649" wikidata="Q549365" url="?curid=646649" title="Ron Clarke">
<text>Ronald William Clarke, AO, MBE (21 February 1937 – 17 June 2015) was an Australian athlete, writer, and the Mayor of the Gold Coast from 2004 to 2012. He was one of the best-known middle- and long-distance runners in the 1960s, notable for setting seventeen world records.

== Early life and family ==
Clarke was born 21 February 1937 in Melbourne, Victoria. He attended Essendon Primary School, Essendon High School (now part of Essendon Keilor College) and Melbourne High School. His brother Jack Clarke and father Tom played Australian rules football in the Victorian Football League with Essendon. He was a qualified accountant.

In 1956, when Clarke was still a promising 19-year-old, he was chosen to light the Olympic Flame in the Melbourne Cricket Ground during the opening ceremonies of the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne.

== Athletic career ==
During the 1960s, Clarke won 9 Australian championships and 12 Victorian track championships ranging from 1500 m to .
He won the bronze medal in the 10,000 metre (m) race at the 1964 Summer Olympics when he was upset by Billy Mills, and never won an Olympic gold medal. However, Emil Zátopek gave him one of his own gold medals, which Clarke described as one of his most cherished presents. At the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City, Clarke collapsed and nearly died from altitude sickness sustained during the gruelling 10,000 m race final. Despite training in the Alps to get acclimatised to high altitudes at Mexico City, this could not put him on par with many opponents from Africa, who had always run at high altitude (with the notable exception of 5,000 m gold medalist and 10,000 m bronze medalist Mohammed Gammoudi of Tunisia, who was born and lived not far above sea level). Clarke finished in sixth place, but remembered nothing of the last lap. He recovered sufficiently to compete in the 5,000 metre heats a few days later.

In the 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games, he won silver in the 3-mile event, and in the 1966 Games he won silver medals in the and events.

During a 44-day European tour in 1965, he competed 18 times and broke 12 world records, including the 20,000 m (12.4 miles). On 10 July, at London&#x27;s White City Stadium, he became the first man to run 3 miles in under 13 minutes, lowering the world record to 12:52.4. Four days later, in Oslo, he lowered his own 10,000 m world record by 36.2 seconds to 27:39.4, becoming the first man to break the 28 minute barrier.

===World records===

In 1965, Clarke beat the 10,000-metre world record in Turku, Finland, with a time of 28:14.0; however, it was never ratified, as it was said that permission to run was requested too late.

== Political career ==
He was elected mayor of the Gold Coast in 2004, defeating incumbent Gary Baildon. Clarke and his wife, Helen, first came to the Gold Coast for a holiday in 1957. The couple returned almost every year thereafter, and in 1995, after 14 years abroad, mainly in Europe, came back for good. He was re-elected in 2008.

Clarke resigned as Mayor of the Gold Coast on 27 February 2012, when he announced his nomination to run as an independent candidate for the seat of Broadwater in the 2012 Queensland state election. Clarke failed in this campaign, coming fourth and recording only a 4.6% primary vote.

Former Australian Football League CEO Andrew Demetriou stated that Clarke as Mayor of the Gold Coast played a major role in the AFL establishing a new team Gold Coast Suns on the Gold Coast.

In 2011, Clarke was part of the lobbying team that secured the 2018 Commonwealth Games for the Gold Coast, Queensland.

==Honours==
In 1966, Clarke was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) &quot;In recognition of service to athletics&quot;.

In 2000, he was awarded the Australian Sports Medal for &quot;Significant contribution as a competitor (Athletics)&quot;.

In 2001, he was awarded the Centenary Medal for &quot;Distinguished service to the eco-tourism industry&quot;.

In the 2013 Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours List, he was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia (AO) &quot;for distinguished service to the community through a range of leadership roles with local government and philanthropic organisations, and to the promotion of athletics.&quot;

== Awards and recognition ==
* 1965 – awarded the Prix Du President by the French Sports Academy
* 1965 – Helms Award for Australasia
* 1965 – ABC&#x27;s Sportsman of the Year
* 1965 – Track &amp; Field News Male Athlete of the Year
* 1965 – BBC Sportsman of the Year – Overseas Personality
* 1965 – World Sportsman of the Year by the International Association of Sports Writers
* 1982 – awarded Victorian Father of the Year.
* 1985 – inaugural inductee into the Sport Australia Hall of Fame
* 2000 – inaugural inductee into the Athletics Australia Hall of Fame in 2000.
* 2022 - Sport Australia Hall of Fame Legend

In 2005, Geelong Athletics honoured Clarke with an athletics meet to commemorate the 40th anniversary of his breaking the world record for the 20,000 metres and his one-hour run at Landy Field in October 1965. This meet is held annually as part of the Athletics Australia National Meet Series.

On 15 March 2006, Ron Clarke was one of the final four runners who carried the Queen&#x27;s Baton around the MCG stadium during the 2006 Commonwealth Games Opening Ceremony in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Emil Zátopek had great respect for Ron Clarke. In 1966 (often erroneously noted as 1968), he invited the Australian to Czechoslovakia, and as a parting gift he gave him his 1952 Olympic 10,000-metre gold medal with the following words: &quot;Not out of friendship but because you deserve it.&quot;

==Death==
Clarke died of kidney failure on 17 June 2015 at Allamanda Hospital in Southport, Queensland. Clarke is survived by his wife Helen and sons Marcus and Nicolas. His daughter Monique died of breast cancer in 2009.

Prime Minister Tony Abbott and Opposition Leader Bill Shorten paid tribute to Clarke in Parliament on the day of his death by stating that a great Australian had been lost with his death. Herb Elliott, an Australian 1500-metre Olympic gold medallist, said &quot;Ron was a great man. His contribution to athletics was enormous. He was also a wonderful contributor to public health through lifestyle programs and gymnasiums and the communities in which he lived. Ron will be greatly missed&quot;.
John Landy, who famously helped Clarke when he fell during a mile race at the 1956 Australian Championships, said, &quot;Ron Clarke, by his running feats inspired Australian distance runners and in a world sense, demonstrated the potential athletics achievements possible.&quot; Frank Shorter, the 1972 Olympic marathon gold medallist, said: &quot;Ron Clarke was my idol. I grew up seeing Ron Clarke in the dark blue singlet with the V on it – to me that was the symbol of running.&quot;

==Bibliography==
* &quot;The Measure of Success : a personal perspective&quot;. South Melbourne, Vic. : Lothian Books, 2004.
* &quot;Run Easy&quot;. Melbourne : Information Australia, 2001.
* &quot;Never Say Never : Couran Cove Resort from dream to reality&quot;. Avalon, N.S.W. : Banyan Tree Creative Services, 1999.
* &quot;Fixing the Olympics&quot;. Melbourne : Information Australia, 1999.
* &quot;Enjoying Life : a champion&#x27;s guide to the good life&quot;. Melbourne : Information Australia, 1999. 
* &quot;Total Living : for everyone who wants to be fitter, trimmer and smarter&quot;. London : Pavilion, 1995. 
* &quot;Ron Clarke&#x27;s Running Book&quot;. Collingwood, Vic. : Outback Press, 1979.
* &quot;Successful Athletics : from beginner to expert in forty lessons&quot;, with Raelene Boyle. Melbourne : Thomas Nelson, 1976. 
* &quot;Ron Clarke Talks Track&quot; edited by Jon Hendershott. Los Altos, California : Tafnews, 1972. 
* &quot;Athletics the Australian Way&quot;. Melbourne : Lansdowne, 1971.
* &quot;The Lonely Breed&quot;, with Norman Harris. London : Pelham, 1967.
* &quot;The Unforgiving Minute&quot;, as told to Alan Trengrove. London : Pelham, 1966.

==See also==
*Olympic medalists in athletics
*Mayor of the Gold Coast

== References ==
==External links==
* 
* Ron Clarke at the Athletics Australia Hall of Fame
* Ron Clarke at Australian Athletics Historical Results
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q549365" start="0" end="21" title="Ron Clarke" label="Ronald William Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="23" end="25" title="Officer of the Order of Australia" label="AO"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="27" end="30" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="MBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797856" start="108" end="131" title="Mayor of the Gold Coast" label="Mayor of the Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="258" end="270" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="338" end="347" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="349" end="357" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399485" start="430" end="453" title="Essendon Keilor College" label="Essendon Keilor College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811796" start="459" end="480" title="Melbourne High School (Victoria)" label="Melbourne High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015103" start="494" end="505" title="Jack Clarke (Australian footballer, born 1933)" label="Jack Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815332" start="517" end="520" title="Tom Clarke (Australian footballer)" label="Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="561" end="586" title="Victorian Football League (1897–1989)" label="Victorian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q251090" start="592" end="600" title="Essendon Football Club" label="Essendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075529" start="704" end="712" title="List of people who have lit the Olympic Cauldron" label="to light"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="717" end="730" title="Olympic Flame" label="Olympic Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q330136" start="738" end="762" title="Melbourne Cricket Ground" label="Melbourne Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q8411" start="800" end="820" title="1956 Summer Olympics" label="1956 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="824" end="833" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="1036" end="1056" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q436062" start="1078" end="1089" title="Billy Mills" label="Billy Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q52589" start="1137" end="1149" title="Emil Zátopek" label="Emil Zátopek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="1256" end="1276" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="1280" end="1291" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q624497" start="1331" end="1348" title="altitude sickness" label="altitude sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="1425" end="1429" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q345439" start="1665" end="1682" title="Mohammed Gammoudi" label="Mohammed Gammoudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q919193" start="1904" end="1946" title="1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games" label="1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933185" start="1969" end="1981" title="Athletics at the 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games – Men&amp;#x27;s 3 miles" label="3-mile event"/>
<link wikidata="Q919207" start="1994" end="2004" title="1966 British Empire and Commonwealth Games" label="1966 Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q876286" start="2200" end="2218" title="White City Stadium" label="White City Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="2544" end="2549" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797856" start="2717" end="2740" title="mayor of the Gold Coast" label="mayor of the Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q125457867" start="2744" end="2748" title="2004 Gold Coast City Council election" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q125216522" start="2770" end="2782" title="Gary Baildon" label="Gary Baildon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124372749" start="3009" end="3013" title="2008 Gold Coast City Council election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355162" start="3164" end="3174" title="Electoral district of Broadwater" label="Broadwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271078" start="3182" end="3212" title="2012 Queensland state election" label="2012 Queensland state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="3308" end="3334" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756787" start="3339" end="3355" title="Andrew Demetriou" label="Andrew Demetriou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094295" start="3457" end="3472" title="Gold Coast Suns" label="Gold Coast Suns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294383" start="3556" end="3579" title="2018 Commonwealth Games" label="2018 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="3588" end="3610" title="Gold Coast, Queensland" label="Gold Coast, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="3657" end="3698" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="Member of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649458" start="3786" end="3809" title="Australian Sports Medal" label="Australian Sports Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393205" start="3909" end="3924" title="Centenary Medal" label="Centenary Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="3964" end="3975" title="Ecotourism" label="eco-tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951939" start="4005" end="4039" title="Birthday Honours" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="4061" end="4094" title="Order of Australia" label="Officer of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970339" start="4388" end="4415" title="World Trophy for Australasia" label="Helms Award for Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870496" start="4425" end="4457" title="ABC Sports Award of the Year" label="ABC&amp;#x27;s Sportsman of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632824" start="4467" end="4514" title="Track &amp;amp; Field News Athlete of the Year" label="Track &amp;amp; Field News Male Athlete of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271575" start="4745" end="4773" title="Sport Australia Hall of Fame" label="Sport Australia Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869069" start="4811" end="4830" title="Athletics Australia" label="Athletics Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="5021" end="5033" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485299" start="5080" end="5091" title="Landy Field" label="Landy Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869069" start="5151" end="5170" title="Athletics Australia" label="Athletics Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269933" start="5273" end="5291" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Baton Relay" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Baton"/>
<link wikidata="Q330136" start="5303" end="5306" title="Melbourne Cricket Ground" label="MCG"/>
<link wikidata="Q659207" start="5326" end="5349" title="2006 Commonwealth Games" label="2006 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="5370" end="5379" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="5381" end="5389" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q52589" start="5403" end="5415" title="Emil Zátopek" label="Emil Zátopek"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="5727" end="5741" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002144" start="5783" end="5804" title="Southport, Queensland" label="Southport, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="5901" end="5914" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="5925" end="5939" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q348577" start="5940" end="5951" title="Tony Abbott" label="Tony Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460433" start="5956" end="5973" title="List of Australian Leaders of the Opposition" label="Opposition Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910865" start="5974" end="5986" title="Bill Shorten" label="Bill Shorten"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="6013" end="6023" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q472503" start="6113" end="6125" title="Herb Elliott" label="Herb Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353311" start="6420" end="6430" title="John Landy" label="John Landy"/>
<link wikidata="Q508407" start="6699" end="6712" title="Frank Shorter" label="Frank Shorter"/>
<link wikidata="Q268123" start="7701" end="7714" title="Raelene Boyle" label="Raelene Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q836212" start="8105" end="8135" title="Olympic medalists in athletics (men)" label="Olympic medalists in athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797856" start="8137" end="8160" title="Mayor of the Gold Coast" label="Mayor of the Gold Coast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646651" wikidata="Q866300" url="?curid=646651" title="Bisection method">
<text>In mathematics, the bisection method is a root-finding method that applies to any continuous function for which one knows two values with opposite signs. The method consists of repeatedly bisecting the interval defined by these values and then selecting the subinterval in which the function changes sign, and therefore must contain a root. It is a very simple and robust method, but it is also relatively slow. Because of this, it is often used to obtain a rough approximation to a solution which is then used as a starting point for more rapidly converging methods. The method is also called the interval halving method, the [[Binary search algorithm|binary search method]], or the dichotomy method.

For polynomials, more elaborate methods exist for testing the existence of a root in an interval (Descartes&#x27; rule of signs, Sturm&#x27;s theorem, Budan&#x27;s theorem). They allow extending the bisection method into efficient algorithms for finding all real roots of a polynomial; see Real-root isolation.

== The method ==
The method is applicable for numerically solving the equation &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) = 0 for the real variable &quot;x&quot;, where &quot;f&quot; is a continuous function defined on an interval [&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;] and where &quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;) and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;b&quot;) have opposite signs. In this case &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; are said to bracket a root since, by the intermediate value theorem, the continuous function &quot;f&quot; must have at least one root in the interval (&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;).

At each step the method divides the interval in two parts/halves by computing the midpoint &quot;c&quot; = (&quot;a&quot;+&quot;b&quot;) / 2 of the interval and the value of the function &quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;) at that point. If &quot;c&quot; itself is a root then the process has succeeded and stops. Otherwise, there are now only two possibilities: either &quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;) and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;) have opposite signs and bracket a root, or &quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;) and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;b&quot;) have opposite signs and bracket a root. The method selects the subinterval that is guaranteed to be a bracket as the new interval to be used in the next step. In this way an interval that contains a zero of &quot;f&quot; is reduced in width by 50% at each step. The process is continued until the interval is sufficiently small.

Explicitly, if &quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;)=0 then &quot;c&quot; may be taken as the solution and the process stops. Otherwise, if &quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;) and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;) have opposite signs, then the method sets &quot;c&quot; as the new value for &quot;b&quot;, and if &quot;f&quot;(&quot;b&quot;) and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;) have opposite signs then the method sets &quot;c&quot; as the new &quot;a&quot;. In both cases, the new &quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;) and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;b&quot;) have opposite signs, so the method is applicable to this smaller interval.

=== Iteration tasks ===
The input for the method is a continuous function &quot;f&quot;, an interval [&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;], and the function values &quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;) and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;b&quot;). The function values are of opposite sign (there is at least one zero crossing within the interval). Each iteration performs these steps:
# Calculate &quot;c&quot;, the midpoint of the interval, &quot;c&quot; = .
# Calculate the function value at the midpoint, &quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;).
# If convergence is satisfactory (that is, &quot;c&quot; − &quot;a&quot; is sufficiently small, or |&quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;)| is sufficiently small), return &quot;c&quot; and stop iterating.
# Examine the sign of &quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;) and replace either (&quot;a&quot;, &quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;)) or (&quot;b&quot;, &quot;f&quot;(&quot;b&quot;)) with (&quot;c&quot;, &quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;)) so that there is a zero crossing within the new interval.

When implementing the method on a computer, there can be problems with finite precision, so there are often additional convergence tests or limits to the number of iterations. Although &quot;f&quot; is continuous, finite precision may preclude a function value ever being zero. For example, consider ; there is no floating-point value approximating that gives exactly zero. Additionally, the difference between &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; is limited by the floating point precision; i.e., as the difference between &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; decreases, at some point the midpoint of will be numerically identical to (within floating point precision of) either &quot;a&quot; or &quot;b&quot;.

===Algorithm===
The method may be written in pseudocode as follows:
 input: Function &quot;f&quot;, 
 endpoint values &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, 
 tolerance &quot;TOL&quot;, 
 maximum iterations &quot;NMAX&quot;
 conditions: &quot;a&quot; &lt; &quot;b&quot;, 
 either &quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;) &lt; 0 and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;b&quot;) &gt; 0 or &quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;) &gt; 0 and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;b&quot;) &lt; 0
 output: value which differs from a root of &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) = 0 by less than &quot;TOL&quot;
 &quot;N&quot; ← 1
 while &quot;N&quot; ≤ &quot;NMAX&quot; do &quot;// limit iterations to prevent infinite loop&quot;
 &quot;c&quot; ← (&quot;a&quot; + &quot;b&quot;)/2 &quot;// new midpoint&quot;
 if &quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;) = 0 or (&quot;b&quot; – &quot;a&quot;)/2 &lt; &quot;TOL&quot; then &quot;// solution found&quot;
 Output(&quot;c&quot;)
 Stop
 end if
 &quot;N&quot; ← &quot;N&quot; + 1 &quot;// increment step counter&quot;
 if sign(&quot;f&quot;(&quot;c&quot;)) = sign(&quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;)) then &quot;a&quot; ← &quot;c&quot; else &quot;b&quot; ← &quot;c&quot; &quot;// new interval&quot;
 end while
 Output(&quot;Method failed.&quot;) &quot;// max number of steps exceeded&quot;

=== Example: Finding the root of a polynomial ===
Suppose that the bisection method is used to find a root of the polynomial 
:formula_1
First, two numbers formula_2 and formula_3 have to be found such that formula_4 and formula_5 have opposite signs. For the above function, formula_6 and formula_7 satisfy this criterion, as 
:formula_8
and
:formula_9
Because the function is continuous, there must be a root within the interval [1, 2].

In the first iteration, the end points of the interval which brackets the root are formula_10 and formula_11, so the midpoint is
:formula_12
The function value at the midpoint is formula_13. Because formula_14 is negative, formula_6 is replaced with formula_16 for the next iteration to ensure that formula_17 and formula_18 have opposite signs. As this continues, the interval between formula_2 and formula_3 will become increasingly smaller, converging on the root of the function. See this happen in the table below.

After 13 iterations, it becomes apparent that there is a convergence to about 1.521: a root for the polynomial.

== Analysis ==
The method is guaranteed to converge to a root of &quot;f&quot; if &quot;f&quot; is a continuous function on the interval [&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;] and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;) and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;b&quot;) have opposite signs. The absolute error is halved at each step so the method converges linearly. Specifically, if &quot;c&quot;1 = is the midpoint of the initial interval, and &quot;c&quot;&quot;n&quot; is the midpoint of the interval in the &quot;n&quot;th step, then the difference between &quot;c&quot;&quot;n&quot; and a solution &quot;c&quot; is bounded by
:formula_21
This formula can be used to determine, in advance, an upper bound on the number of iterations that the bisection method needs to converge to a root to within a certain tolerance.
The number &quot;n&quot; of iterations needed to achieve a required tolerance ε (that is, an error guaranteed to be at most ε), is bounded by
:formula_22
where the initial bracket size formula_23 and the required bracket size formula_24 The main motivation to use the bisection method is that over the set of continuous functions, no other method can guarantee to produce an estimate cn to the solution c that in the &quot;worst case&quot; has an formula_25 absolute error with less than n1/2 iterations. This is also true under several common assumptions on function f and the behaviour of the function in the neighbourhood of the root.

However, despite the bisection method being optimal with respect to worst case performance under absolute error criteria it is sub-optimal with respect to &quot;average performance&quot; under standard assumptions as well as &quot;asymptotic performance&quot;. Popular alternatives to the bisection method, such as the secant method, Ridders&#x27; method or Brent&#x27;s method (amongst others), typically perform better since they trade-off worst case performance to achieve higher orders of convergence to the root. And, a strict improvement to the bisection method can be achieved with a higher order of convergence without trading-off worst case performance with the ITP Method.
== Generalization to higher dimensions ==
The bisection method has been generalized to multi-dimensional functions. Such methods are called generalized bisection methods. 

=== Methods based on degree computation ===
Some of these methods are based on computing the topological degree, which for a bounded region formula_26 and a differentiable function formula_27 is defined as a sum over its roots:
:formula_28,
where formula_29 is the Jacobian matrix, formula_30, and
:formula_31
is the sign function. In order for a root to exist, it is sufficient that formula_32, and this can be verified using a surface integral over the boundary of formula_33.

=== Characteristic bisection method ===
The characteristic bisection method uses only the signs of a function in different points. Lef &quot;f&quot; be a function from Rd to Rd, for some integer &quot;d&quot; ≥ 2. A characteristic polyhedron (also called an admissible polygon) of &quot;f&quot; is a polytope in R&quot;d&quot;, having 2d vertices, such that in each vertex v, the combination of signs of &quot;f&quot;(v) is unique and the topological degree of &quot;f&quot; on its interior is not zero (a necessary criterion to ensure the existence of a root). For example, for &quot;d&quot;=2, a characteristic polyhedron of &quot;f&quot; is a quadrilateral with vertices (say) A,B,C,D, such that:

* , that is, &quot;f&quot;1(A)&lt;0, &quot;f&quot;2(A)&lt;0.
* , that is, &quot;f&quot;1(B)&lt;0, &quot;f&quot;2(B)&gt;0.
* , that is, &quot;f&quot;1(C)&gt;0, &quot;f&quot;2(C)&lt;0.
* , that is, &quot;f&quot;1(D)&gt;0, &quot;f&quot;2(D)&gt;0.
A proper edge of a characteristic polygon is an edge between a pair of vertices, such that the sign vector differs by only a single sign. In the above example, the proper edges of the characteristic quadrilateral are AB, AC, BD and CD. A diagonal is a pair of vertices, such that the sign vector differs by all &quot;d&quot; signs. In the above example, the diagonals are AD and BC.

At each iteration, the algorithm picks a proper edge of the polyhedron (say, AB), and computes the signs of &quot;f&quot; in its mid-point (say, M). Then it proceeds as follows:

* If , then A is replaced by M, and we get a smaller characteristic polyhedron.
* If , then B is replaced by M, and we get a smaller characteristic polyhedron.
* Else, we pick a new proper edge and try again.

Suppose the diameter (= length of longest proper edge) of the original characteristic polyhedron is . Then, at least formula_34 bisections of edges are required so that the diameter of the remaining polygon will be at most . If the topological degree of the initial polyhedron is not zero, then there is a procedure that can choose an edge such that the next polyhedron also has nonzero degree.

== See also ==
*Binary search algorithm
*Lehmer–Schur algorithm, generalization of the bisection method in the complex plane
*Nested intervals

== References ==

==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==
*
* Bisection Method Notes, PPT, Mathcad, Maple, Matlab, Mathematica from Holistic Numerical Methods Institute</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q866300" start="20" end="36" title="Bisection method" label="bisection method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085860" start="42" end="61" title="Root-finding algorithm" label="root-finding method"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="82" end="101" title="continuous function" label="continuous function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128632" start="188" end="197" title="Bisection" label="bisecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="202" end="210" title="Interval (mathematics)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="335" end="339" title="Root of a function" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q866300" start="598" end="614" title="Bisection method" label="interval halving"/>
<link wikidata="Q866300" start="627" end="675" title="Bisection method" label="[[Binary search algorithm|binary search method]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q866300" start="684" end="700" title="Bisection method" label="dichotomy method"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="707" end="717" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379344" start="801" end="830" title="Descartes&amp;#x27; rule of signs" label="Descartes&amp;#x27; rule of signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632301" start="832" end="852" title="Sturm&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Sturm&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527026" start="854" end="874" title="Budan&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Budan&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790239" start="993" end="1012" title="Real-root isolation" label="Real-root isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1135" end="1139" title="Real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="1189" end="1208" title="continuous function" label="continuous function"/>
<link wikidata="Q245098" start="1442" end="1468" title="intermediate value theorem" label="intermediate value theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q189224" start="4768" end="4778" title="pseudocode" label="pseudocode"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="7134" end="7153" title="continuous function" label="continuous function"/>
<link wikidata="Q865920" start="7292" end="7306" title="approximation error" label="absolute error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783502" start="7344" end="7362" title="Rate of convergence" label="converges linearly"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915286" start="8778" end="8791" title="secant method" label="secant method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864934" start="8793" end="8813" title="Ridders&amp;#x27; method" label="Ridders&amp;#x27; method"/>
<link wikidata="Q905988" start="8817" end="8836" title="Brent&amp;#x27;s method" label="Brent&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783502" start="8942" end="8963" title="Rate of convergence" label="orders of convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880843" start="9130" end="9140" title="ITP Method" label="ITP Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825029" start="9408" end="9426" title="topological degree" label="topological degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q506041" start="9580" end="9595" title="Jacobian matrix" label="Jacobian matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q236813" start="9632" end="9645" title="sign function" label="sign function"/>
<link wikidata="Q598146" start="9744" end="9760" title="surface integral" label="surface integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q747980" start="10095" end="10103" title="polytope" label="polytope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10234" end="10285" title="Degree of a continuous mapping#Maps from closed region" label="topological degree of &amp;quot;f&amp;quot; on its interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q36810" start="10441" end="10454" title="quadrilateral" label="quadrilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q243754" start="11925" end="11948" title="Binary search algorithm" label="Binary search algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518935" start="11950" end="11972" title="Lehmer–Schur algorithm" label="Lehmer–Schur algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638245" start="12035" end="12051" title="Nested intervals" label="Nested intervals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646652" wikidata="Q6485360" url="?curid=646652" title="Lane College">
<text>Lane College is a private historically black college associated with the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church and located in Jackson, Tennessee. It offers associate and baccalaureate degrees in the arts and sciences.

== History ==
Lane College was founded in 1882 by the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church (C.M.E.; now known as Christian Methodist Episcopal Church) as the C.M.E. High School. It was named after Methodist Bishop Isaac Lane, who co-founded the school. Planning for the school had begun in 1878, but the establishment was delayed by a yellow fever epidemic in the region in 1878. Its primary purpose was the education of newly freed enslaved persons, and the original curriculum focused on the preparation of &quot;teachers and preachers.&quot; It became Lane Institute in 1883. 

In 1887, Rev. T. F. Saunders, a White former enslaver, and a member of the Memphis Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, was appointed the first president of Lane Institute. In 1896 the college department was formed, and the Board of Trustees voted to change the name to Lane College. Around 1902, many letters were written calling for a Black president for Lane College to the &quot;Christian Index&quot;, a magazine published by the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church. In 1903, James Albert Bray, a Black graduate of Atlanta University (now Clark Atlanta University) was elected president of Lane College, after T. F. Saunders resignation. 

== Presidents ==
== Academics ==
Lane College is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools to award associate&#x27;s and bachelor&#x27;s degrees.

==Athletics==

The Lane College Department of Athletics sponsors men&#x27;s intercollegiate baseball, basketball, football, cross country, and tennis, along with women&#x27;s intercollegiate softball, basketball, cross country, volleyball, and tennis. The school&#x27;s athletic teams are nicknamed the Dragons and compete in Division II of the NCAA. The athletic teams compete in the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference.

Former Lane football player Jacoby Jones became the first player in history to score a receiving touchdown and a return touchdown in a Super Bowl as a member of the Baltimore Ravens.

==Notable alumni==






== Namesake ==
, a World War II Victory Ship, one of the few surviving, was named for Lane College. It is now docked in San Pedro, California (which is part of the commercial harbor area of Los Angeles to the south of downtown). It is now open as a museum.

==References==
==External links==
* Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6485360" start="0" end="12" title="Lane College" label="Lane College"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="18" end="25" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="26" end="52" title="Historically black colleges and universities" label="historically black college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081108" start="73" end="109" title="Christian Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Christian Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q985409" start="125" end="143" title="Jackson, Tennessee" label="Jackson, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076653" start="430" end="440" title="Isaac Lane" label="Isaac Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="551" end="563" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="649" end="664" title="slavery in the United States" label="enslaved person"/>
<link wikidata="Q839112" start="898" end="931" title="Methodist Episcopal Church, South" label="Methodist Episcopal Church, South"/>
<link wikidata="Q123025904" start="1294" end="1311" title="James Albert Bray" label="James Albert Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572296" start="1333" end="1351" title="Atlanta University" label="Atlanta University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569646" start="1555" end="1599" title="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="1609" end="1625" title="Associate degree" label="associate&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1630" end="1652" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="1945" end="1953" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="1982" end="1993" title="NCAA Division II" label="Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="2001" end="2005" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570039" start="2041" end="2085" title="Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q110362947" start="2095" end="2108" title="Lane College Dragons football" label="Lane football"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2316" end="2328" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613775" start="2329" end="2341" title="Victory Ship" label="Victory Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q290356" start="2417" end="2438" title="San Pedro, California" label="San Pedro, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646655" wikidata="Q652781" url="?curid=646655" title="All We Got Iz Us">
<text>All We Got Iz Us is the second studio album by American hip hop group Onyx, released on October 24, 1995, by JMJ Records and Rush Associated Labels. The album was produced by Onyx. The album features guest appearances from rap group All City and rapper from Queens, Panama P.I.

&quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot; debuted at number 22 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and number 2 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip Hop Albums chart. The album has sold over 500,000 copies. However, it did not approach the success of the first album.

Two charting singles were released from the album, &quot;Last Dayz&quot; which made it to 89 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and 10 on the Hot Rap Singles and &quot;Live Niguz&quot;, also known as &quot;Live!!!&quot;, made it to 17 on the Hot Rap Singles and 81 on the R&amp;B charts. &quot;Live Niguz&quot; appeared in the soundtrack to the 1995&#x27;s documentary &quot;The Show&quot; and &quot;Last Dayz&quot; was used in the film &quot;8 Mile&quot;.

== Background ==
In March 1994, when Fredro Starr was on the set of Dangerous Minds, Lyor Cohen came to him and offered him a million dollars for recording a new album, &quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot;. Big DS left the group at the same time to start a solo career. Onyx recorded 25 songs for this album, but only 15 of them were included on the album by Jam Master Jay&#x27;s decision.

In the same year members of Onyx have formed a label, Armee Records, and have signed production and distribution deals with Capitol Records and Mercury Records. Onyx signed contracts with the artists All City (Greg Valentine and J. Mega) and Panama P.I., who featured on Onyx&#x27;s sophomore set, &quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot;, Gang Green and singer Choclatt (Jared Crawford).

== Aliases ==
On the album two group members came up with new aliases:
* Fredro Starr: Never.
* Suave: Sonee Seeza. Sonsee

== Conception of album title ==
The title &quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot; came up because it was a state of mind for Onyx at that time. &quot;...We made that title one day at the studio. At that time niggas was on the knees, crying, praying almost like &#x27;I love you my nigga&#x27; and that&#x27;s how All We Got Iz Us album came about. That album was pain. Now you got to run around with a Mac-12 in your trunk, bulletproof vest, mad money niggas, you think that niggas going to kill you, so this was our frame of mind.&quot;

== Lyrics ==
&quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot; this name was chosen because it is much more grimy than &quot;Bacdafucup&quot;. It is widely considered to be a great follow up to their debut &quot;Bacdafucup&quot; with many fans actually citing it as Onyx&#x27;s best album. Turning away from the more humorous approach of their debut, &quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot; had an overall darker and more serious tone, dealing with subjects such as suicide, heavy substance abuse and racism. For example, the intro/opening track features a split-personality monologue: Sticky Fingaz threatening himself at gunpoint, eventually committing suicide.

== Album cover ==
For the cover of the album &quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot;, Sticky and Fredro just wanted to paint a cracked mad face. Probably, it was a bad idea, because it was the beginning, when the sales of Onyx albums started to &quot;crack&quot;. The cover for &quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot; was a 6-inch metal plate, and the photographer just took a picture of this plate, and the mad face that you see on the back cover of the album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; was a real lump of metal.

== Singles ==
Two singles were released from this album: &quot;Live Niguz&quot; and &quot;Last Dayz&quot;.

The first single, &quot;Live Niguz&quot;, also known by its censored title &quot;Live!!!&quot;, was released on July 18, 1995, as a single from Def Jam&#x27;s &quot;The Show: The Soundtrack&quot; and as the first single from Onyx&#x27;s second album, &quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot;. Produced by 8-Off Assassin and all three members of Onyx, &quot;Live!!!&quot; only found minor success on the R&amp;B and rap charts, becoming the group&#x27;s first single not to reach the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100.

The second single, &quot;Last Dayz&quot; was released on October 3, 1995. Produced by 8-Off Assassin and Onyx, &quot;Last Dayz&quot; making it to number 89 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. Instrumental of this song was used in the film 8 Mile for the rap battle between Lotto and B-Rabbit. In 2013, the song was re-recorded by Fredro Starr and Sticky Fingaz, and released on a compilation album &quot;Songs of the 90&#x27;s&quot;.

Music videos were released for the tracks &quot;Last Dayz&quot;, &quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot;, &quot;Walk In New York&quot; and &quot;Live Niguz&quot;.

== Appearance in movies and on television ==
* In 1995, &quot;Betta Off Dead&quot; was used in the movie &quot;The Addiction&quot;.
* In 1995, the song &quot;Shout&quot; appeared on the promo soundtrack for the movie &quot;Bad Boys&quot;.
* In 1995, the song &quot;Live Niguz&quot; appeared in the soundtrack to the documentary &quot;The Show&quot;
* In 2002, the instrumental of &quot;Last Dayz&quot; was used in the film &quot;8 Mile&quot; during the rap battle scenes.

==Critical response==

&quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot; was met with generally positive reviews from music critics. Raymond Cunningham of &quot;The Source&quot; gave the album three and a half stars out of five, saying &quot;...Although the LP is packed with sure shots, there are a few sure misses. &quot;Shout&quot;, which has no business being on the LP, has a solid beat. But the hook is as corny as the Onyx comic book. Then there&#x27;s &quot;All We Got&quot;, a song that discusses the streets and isn&#x27;t all bad, again, until the cheesy chorus. It may be a case where the quality of the other songs brings these down. In any event, they definitely stand out as weaker representations of the group&#x27;s efforts.&quot;

&quot;Q&quot; gave the album three stars out of five, saying &quot;...The lyrics are quickfire and the sound is dense...&quot;

Bonz Malone of &quot;Vibe&quot; said &quot;...Now, after a two-year hiatus, they&#x27;re back with All We Got Iz Us, and the shit is hardcore. &quot;Purse Snatchers&quot; and &quot;Better Off Dead&quot; are probably the wildest. It&#x27;s made by thugs for thugs...spits the real poison as seen on the streets. It&#x27;s intended for immature audiences, so they&#x27;ll wise up and realize that all we do have is one another. People need to hear these interesting characters.&quot;

&quot;NME&quot; gave the album seven stars out of ten, saying &quot;although there&#x27;s nothing to rock the Wu&#x27;s place at the top of the NY tree, Onyx sound convincingly with it. They still paint pictures of NY that turn it into a warscape, but they&#x27;ve deliberated their moves so as not to re-emerge as the latest rap washouts...&quot;.

Rowald Pruyn of &quot;RapReviews&quot; gave the album nine and a half stars out of ten, saying &quot;...In Onyx&#x27; New World Order, everything is upside-down. Black is white, bad is good. Suicide? No ultimate shame, but an honorable way out of a shitty situation. People? Either bitchassniggas or punkmotherfuckas. The first group can get a bullet in the back, the second can get it in their grills. History? Miserable Slavery and rape of great-grandmothers by greedy plantation owners. Music? Selling drugs to your own people is more profitable. Future? Drop the microphone. Drop your principals. Who needs morals when you&#x27;re living in hell already?&quot;

==Accolades==
In 1995, the album is broken down track-by-track by Onyx in Hip-Hop Connection magazine, issue #79 (September 1995). In 1996, CMJ New Music Monthly placed the album in their list &quot;25 Best Hip-Hop Albums of 1995&quot;. In 2008, Keith Murphy of Vibe named it the best-produced album of 1995 and selected as one of the magazine&#x27;s &quot;24 Lost Rap Classics&quot;. In 2012, Ernest Baker of Complex placed the album in his list &quot;A$AP Yams&#x27; 42 Favorite Albums&quot;. In 2015, Christopher Pierznik of Medium placed the album in his list &quot;The 20 Best Hip-Hop Albums of 1995&quot;. In 2016, Dustin J. Seibert of The Root listed the album in his list &quot;15 Truly Underrated Hip-Hop Albums&quot;. 
In 2016, Cis Van Beers of &quot;Hip Hop Golden Age&quot; placed the album in his list &quot;Top 40 Hip Hop Albums 1995&quot;. In 2018, Stitcher Radio dedicated an episode of their program &quot;BUMS&quot; to review Onyx&#x27;s 1995 album, &quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot;.

== Track listing ==


== Leftover tracks ==
Onyx recorded 25 songs for this album, but only 15 of them were included on the album by Jam Master Jay&#x27;s decision.
* &quot;Kidz From Queens&quot; (feat. Still Livin&#x27;)
* &quot;Shoot Stab Kill&quot; (Burn Unit Mix) (feat. Who$ane) 
* &quot;The Ghetto Way Of Thinking&quot;
* &quot;To All Ya&#x27;ll Crews, Whatever&quot;
* &quot;Walk In New York&quot; (Jam Master Jay Remix)
* &quot;Purse Snatchaz&quot; (original version) (without Greg Valentine)
* &quot;Purse Snatchaz&quot; (8-Off Remix)
* &quot;Punkmotherfukaz&quot; (Full Length)
* &quot;Live Niguz&quot; (original version with different intro)
* &quot;Fight&quot;
* &quot;Purse Snatchaz, Pt. 2&quot; (feat. Smooth Da Hustler, Trigger The Gambler &amp; DV Alias Khrist)
* &quot;Evil Streets (Remix)&quot; (feat. Method Man &amp; Panama P.I.)
* &quot;Evil Streets (Remix)&quot; (feat. Method Man &amp; Panama P.I.) (original 1994 version)
* &quot;Shout&quot; (Remix)
* &quot;Theme From Sunset Park&quot;
* &quot;Thangz Changed&quot;
* &quot;Thangz Changed&quot; (movie &quot;end credits&quot; version)
== Personnel ==
* Onyx - performer, vocals, producer
* Fredro Starr - performer, vocals, producer
* Sticky Fingaz - performer, vocals, producer
* Sonee Seeza - performer, vocals, scratches
* Panama P.I. - performer, vocals
* Greg Valentine - performer, vocals
* All City - performer, vocals
* Jason Mizell - executive producer
* Randy Allen - executive producer
* 8-Off The Assassin - co-producer
* Don Elliott - mix engineer
* Rich Keller - mix engineer
* Flamboyant - scratches (&quot;2 Wrongs&quot; and &quot;Walk In New York&quot;)
* Tony Dawsey - mastering
* Jaye Battle - project coordinator
==Charts==
===Weekly charts===
==References==
== External links ==
*All We Got Iz Us at RapGenius
*All We Got Iz Us at Discogs
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q652781" start="0" end="16" title="All We Got Iz Us" label="All We Got Iz Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q936693" start="70" end="74" title="Onyx (hip hop group)" label="Onyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127073" start="109" end="120" title="JMJ Records" label="JMJ Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q654283" start="125" end="147" title="Rush Associated Labels" label="Rush Associated Labels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728661" start="233" end="241" title="All City (rap group)" label="All City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="258" end="264" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="339" end="364" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="386" end="412" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494310" start="579" end="588" title="Last Dayz" label="Last Dayz"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="622" end="651" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322696" start="666" end="681" title="Rap Songs" label="Hot Rap Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6655317" start="692" end="702" title="Live Niguz" label="Live Niguz"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="881" end="892" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764003" start="899" end="907" title="The Show (1995 film)" label="The Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q196665" start="967" end="973" title="8 Mile (film)" label="8 Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q730261" start="1019" end="1031" title="Fredro Starr" label="Fredro Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q579359" start="1050" end="1065" title="Dangerous Minds" label="Dangerous Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q10321870" start="1067" end="1077" title="Lyor Cohen" label="Lyor Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="1490" end="1505" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="1510" end="1525" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728661" start="1566" end="1574" title="All City (rap group)" label="All City"/>
<link wikidata="Q730261" start="1817" end="1829" title="Fredro Starr" label="Fredro Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067765" start="1840" end="1845" title="Sonny Seeza" label="Suave"/>
<link wikidata="Q568341" start="2587" end="2597" title="Bacdafucup" label="Bacdafucup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933266" start="3474" end="3492" title="Shut &amp;#x27;Em Down (album)" label="Shut &amp;#x27;Em Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q6655317" start="3658" end="3668" title="Live Niguz" label="Live Niguz"/>
<link wikidata="Q654283" start="3778" end="3792" title="Def Jam Recordings" label="Def Jam&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355961" start="3799" end="3823" title="The Show (soundtrack)" label="The Show: The Soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691146" start="3927" end="3941" title="Agallah" label="8-Off Assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="4105" end="4134" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494310" start="4162" end="4171" title="Last Dayz" label="Last Dayz"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="4303" end="4332" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q196665" start="4381" end="4387" title="8 Mile (film)" label="8 Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q730261" start="4472" end="4484" title="Fredro Starr" label="Fredro Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q704742" start="4489" end="4502" title="Sticky Fingaz" label="Sticky Fingaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521217" start="4841" end="4854" title="The Addiction" label="The Addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q460379" start="4953" end="4961" title="Bad Boys (1995 film)" label="Bad Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6655317" start="4995" end="5005" title="Live Niguz" label="Live Niguz"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="5046" end="5057" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764003" start="5064" end="5072" title="The Show (1995 film)" label="The Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494310" start="5116" end="5125" title="Last Dayz" label="Last Dayz"/>
<link wikidata="Q196665" start="5159" end="5165" title="8 Mile (film)" label="8 Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591288" start="5300" end="5313" title="music critics" label="music critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140254" start="5343" end="5353" title="The Source" label="The Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="5937" end="5938" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q266786" start="6080" end="6084" title="Vibe (magazine)" label="Vibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="6548" end="6551" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767887" start="7632" end="7650" title="Hip-Hop Connection" label="Hip-Hop Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012897" start="7698" end="7719" title="CMJ New Music Monthly" label="CMJ New Music Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q266786" start="7820" end="7824" title="Vibe (magazine)" label="Vibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156550" start="7968" end="7975" title="Complex (magazine)" label="Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186120" start="8086" end="8092" title="Medium (website)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761502" start="8200" end="8208" title="The Root (magazine)" label="The Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617643" start="8422" end="8436" title="Stitcher Radio" label="Stitcher Radio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646659" wikidata="Q3400803" url="?curid=646659" title="Jon Ronson">
<text>Jon Ronson (born 10 May 1967) is a British-American journalist, author, and filmmaker. He is known for works such as &quot;&quot; (2001), &quot;The Men Who Stare at Goats&quot; (2004), and &quot;The Psychopath Test&quot; (2011). 

He has been described as a gonzo journalist, becoming a &quot;faux-naïf&quot; character in his stories. He produces informal but sceptical investigations of controversial fringe politics and science. He has published nine books and his work has appeared in publications such as &quot;The Guardian&quot;, &quot;City Life&quot; and &quot;Time Out&quot;. He has made several BBC Television documentary films and two documentary series for Channel 4.

== Early life ==
Ronson was born in Cardiff on 10 May 1967. He attended Cardiff High School and later worked for CBC Radio in Cardiff, before moving to London to study for a media degree at the Polytechnic of Central London.

== Career ==
=== Writing ===
Ronson gained fame writing a column for &quot;Time Out&quot;, consisting of a series of challenges he set himself. He later adapted this into a television series, &quot; The Ronson Mission&quot;, for BBC2 in 1993.
Ronson&#x27;s first book, &quot;Clubbed Class&quot; (1994), is a travelogue in which he bluffs his way into a jet set lifestyle, in search of the world&#x27;s finest holiday.

His second book, &quot;&quot; (2001), chronicles his experiences with people labelled as extremists. Subjects featured in the book include David Icke, Randy Weaver, Omar Bakri Muhammad, Ian Paisley, Alex Jones, and Thomas Robb. Ronson also follows independent investigators of secretive groups such as the Bilderberg Group. The narrative tells of Ronson&#x27;s attempts to infiltrate the &quot;shadowy cabal&quot; fabled, by these conspiracy theorists, to rule the world. &quot;Publishers Weekly&quot; noted: &quot;It is how he reveals the all-too-real machinations of Western society&#x27;s radical fringe and its various minions that makes this enjoyable work rather remarkable.&quot; The book was described by Louis Theroux as a &quot;funny and compulsively readable picaresque adventure through a paranoid shadow world.&quot; &quot;Variety&quot; magazine announced in September 2005 that &quot;Them&quot; had been purchased by Universal Pictures for a feature film.

Ronson contributed the memoir &quot;A Fantastic Life&quot; to the Picador anthology &quot;Truth or Dare&quot;, in 2004.

Ronson&#x27;s third book, &quot;The Men Who Stare at Goats&quot; (2004), deals with the secret New Age unit within the United States Army called the First Earth Battalion. Ronson investigates people such as Major General Albert Stubblebine III, former head of intelligence, who believed that people can walk through walls with the right mental preparation, and that goats can be killed simply by staring at them. Much was based on the ideas of Lt. Col. Jim Channon, ret., who wrote the &quot;First Earth Battalion Operations Manual&quot; in 1979, inspired by the emerging Human Potential Movement of California. The book suggests that these New Age military ideas mutated over the decades to influence interrogation techniques at Guantanamo Bay. An eponymous film of the book was released in 2009, in which Ronson&#x27;s investigations were fictionalised and structured around a journey to Iraq. Ronson is played by the actor Ewan McGregor in the film.

Ronson&#x27;s fourth book, &quot;Out of the Ordinary: True Tales of Everyday Craziness&quot; (2006; Picador and Guardian Books), is a collection of his &quot;Guardian&quot; articles, mostly those concerning his domestic life. A companion volume was &quot;What I Do: More True Tales of Everyday Craziness&quot; (2007).

&quot;The Psychopath Test: A Journey Through the Madness Industry&quot; (2011) is Ronson&#x27;s fifth book. In it, he explores the nature of psychopathic behaviour, learning how to apply the Hare Psychopathy Checklist, and investigating its reliability. He interviews people in facilities for the criminally insane as well as potential psychopaths in corporate boardrooms. The book&#x27;s findings have been rejected by The Society for the Scientific Study of Psychopathy and by Robert D. Hare, creator of the Hare Psychopathy Checklist. Hare described the book as &quot;frivolous, shallow, and professionally disconcerting&quot;. 

&quot;Lost at Sea: The Jon Ronson Mysteries&quot; (2012), Ronson&#x27;s sixth book, is a collection of previously published articles by him.

Ronson&#x27;s book &quot;So You&#x27;ve Been Publicly Shamed&quot; (2015) concerns the effects of public humiliation in the internet age.

=== Radio ===
Ronson&#x27;s main radio work is the production and presentation of a BBC Radio 4 programme, &quot;Jon Ronson on...&quot; The programme has been nominated for a Sony award four times. In August 2008, Radio 4 aired &quot;Robbie Williams and Jon Ronson Journey to the Other Side&quot;, a documentary by Jon Ronson about pop star Williams&#x27; fascination with UFOs and the paranormal.

In the early 1990s, Ronson was offered the position of sidekick on Terry Christian&#x27;s Show on Manchester radio station KFM. Ronson also co-presented a KFM show with Craig Cash, who went on to write and perform in &quot;The Royle Family&quot; and &quot;Early Doors&quot;.

Ronson contributes to Public Radio International in the United States, particularly the program &quot;This American Life&quot;. , he has contributed segments to 13 episodes including &quot;Them&quot; (#201), &quot;Naming Names&quot; (#211), &quot;Family Physics&quot; (#214), &quot;Habeas Schmabeas&quot; (#310), &quot;It&#x27;s Never Over&quot; (#314), &quot;The Spokesman&quot; (#338), &quot;Pro Se&quot; (#385), &quot;First Contact&quot; (#411), &quot;The Psychopath Test&quot; (#436), &quot;Secret Identity&quot; (#506), &quot;Tarred and Feathered&quot; (#522), &quot;To Be Real&quot; (#620), &quot;Beware the Jabberwock&quot; (#670).

Ronson hosted and wrote the podcast &quot;The Butterfly Effect&quot;, which was released in November 2017 by Audible and was subsequently made available on other podcasting platforms. The show concerns internet pornography, and Fabian Thylmann and PornHub&#x27;s effect on the industry. Ronson subsequently also hosted and wrote the podcast &quot;The Last Days of August&quot;, released in January 2019. Its subject is the 2017 death of pornographic actress August Ames.

Ronson returned to the BBC in 2021 with &quot;Things Fell Apart&quot;: a podcast on the culture wars for BBC Sounds in a similar format to his previous works for Amazon.

=== Music ===
In the late 1980s, Ronson replaced Mark Radcliffe as the keyboard player for the Frank Sidebottom band for a number of performances.

Ronson was the manager of the Manchester indie band The Man from Delmonte (band).

=== Television ===
Ronson presented the late nineties talk show &quot;For the Love of...&quot;, in which each week he would interview a gathering of guests and experts on different phenomena and conspiracy theories. Ronson has also appeared as a guest on various shows, including &quot;Alan Davies: As Yet Untitled&quot;.

=== Films ===
Ronson sold the film rights to &quot;The Men Who Stare at Goats&quot;, and subsequently a film of the same name was released in 2009 as a comedy war film directed by Grant Heslov and written by Peter Straughan. According to Ronson&#x27;s DVD-commentary, the journalist-character Bob Wilton (Ewan McGregor) did experience some elements of Ronson&#x27;s self-recounted story from the book. However, unlike Ronson, Wilton was an American from Ann Arbor. Also, unlike Ronson, Wilton went to Iraq.

In the process of visiting the set during the shoot, Ronson began a collaborative writing project with Straughan. This was the screenplay for &quot;Frank&quot;, a 2014 black comedy inspired in part by Ronson&#x27;s time in Frank Sidebottom&#x27;s band.

With Bong Joon-ho, Ronson wrote the screenplay for the 2017 Netflix film &quot;Okja&quot;.

== Personal life ==
Ronson and his wife Elaine have one son.

Ronson is Jewish and is a &quot;distinguished supporter&quot; of Humanists UK. He is a fan of the football team Arsenal FC and has spoken of his &quot;adoration&quot; of the club.

In an interview for Louis Theroux&#x27;s &quot;Grounded&quot; podcast, Ronson states that he became a naturalised American citizen in early 2020.

== Works ==
=== Books ===
=== Filmography ===
* &quot;The Ronson Mission&quot; (1993), BBC 2
* &quot;New York to California: A Great British Odyssey&quot; (1996), Channel 4
* &quot;Hotel Auschwitz&quot; (1996), BBC Radio 4
* &quot;Tottenham Ayatollah&quot; (1997), Channel 4
* &quot;Critical Condition&quot; (1997), Channel 4
* &quot;Dr Paisley, I Presume&quot; (1998), Channel 4
* &quot;New Klan&quot; (1999) Channel 4
* &quot;The Secret Rulers of the World&quot; (2001), Channel 4
* &quot;The Double Life of Jonathan King&quot; (2002), Channel 4
* &quot;Kidneys for Jesus&quot; (2003) Channel 4
* &quot;I Am, Unfortunately, Randy Newman&quot; (2004) Channel 4
* &quot;Crazy Rulers of the World&quot; (2004), Channel 4
** Part 1: &quot;The Men Who Stare at Goats&quot;
** Part 2: &quot;Funny Torture&quot;
** Part 3: &quot;The Psychic Footsoldiers&quot;
* &quot;Death in Santaland&quot; (2007), More 4, about a foiled school shooting plot in the Christmas-themed town of North Pole, Alaska.
* &quot;Reverend Death&quot; (2008), Channel 4, about George Exoo, an advocate of euthanasia.
* &quot;Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s Boxes&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Revelations&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Escape and Control&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Frank&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Okja&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Comrade Detective&quot; (2017) as Himself

=== Theatre ===

* &quot;Life and Trust&quot; (2024)

== References ==
== External links ==
* Picador UK publisher&#x27;s author page
* Jon Ronson On... radio programme
* Ronson&#x27;s Column Archive, &quot;The Guardian&quot;
* 
* &quot;In Depth&quot; interview with Ronson, 3 May 2015

;Interviews
* My friend the extremist: Omar Bakri, &quot;This American Life&quot;, 7 December 2001
* Interview, Joanna Smith Rakoff, &quot;Salon.com&quot;, 14 March 2002
* Interview, Andrew Lawless, &quot;threemonkeysonline.com&quot;, February 2005
* Interview, &quot;rinf.com&quot;, February 2005
* Biographical Interview, Anthony Brockway, &quot;ntlworld.com&quot;, May 2005
* Video interview, Robert Llewellyn on &quot;Carpool&quot;, &quot;blip.tv&quot;
* Jon Ronson audio interviews (2005–2009), &quot;littleatoms.com&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3400803" start="0" end="10" title="Jon Ronson" label="Jon Ronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q932306" start="144" end="170" title="The Men Who Stare at Goats" label="The Men Who Stare at Goats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758672" start="195" end="214" title="The Psychopath Test" label="The Psychopath Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q374313" start="258" end="274" title="Gonzo journalism" label="gonzo journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q281108" start="293" end="302" title="faux-naïf" label="faux-naïf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="515" end="527" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123259" start="541" end="550" title="City Life (magazine)" label="City Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="567" end="575" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="603" end="617" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="667" end="676" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="715" end="722" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038430" start="751" end="770" title="Cardiff High School" label="Cardiff High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309533" start="792" end="801" title="Capital South Wales" label="CBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="831" end="837" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247544" start="873" end="902" title="University of Westminster" label="Polytechnic of Central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="980" end="988" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="1134" end="1138" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259750" start="1258" end="1265" title="jet set" label="jet set"/>
<link wikidata="Q466439" start="1413" end="1423" title="extremists" label="extremists"/>
<link wikidata="Q333118" start="1463" end="1473" title="David Icke" label="David Icke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15521633" start="1475" end="1487" title="Randy Weaver" label="Randy Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362148" start="1489" end="1508" title="Omar Bakri Muhammad" label="Omar Bakri Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q296597" start="1510" end="1521" title="Ian Paisley" label="Ian Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q319121" start="1523" end="1533" title="Alex Jones" label="Alex Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525523" start="1539" end="1550" title="Thomas Robb (Ku Klux Klan)" label="Thomas Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q184937" start="1630" end="1646" title="Bilderberg Group" label="Bilderberg Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="1755" end="1775" title="conspiracy theorists" label="conspiracy theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096635" start="1802" end="1819" title="Publishers Weekly" label="Publishers Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q979131" start="2037" end="2050" title="Louis Theroux" label="Louis Theroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q44563" start="2094" end="2104" title="picaresque" label="picaresque"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="2160" end="2167" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="2255" end="2273" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190491" start="2361" end="2368" title="Picador (imprint)" label="Picador"/>
<link wikidata="Q932306" start="2448" end="2474" title="The Men Who Stare at Goats" label="The Men Who Stare at Goats"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="2511" end="2518" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2535" end="2553" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072932" start="2565" end="2586" title="First Earth Battalion" label="First Earth Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711284" start="2637" end="2655" title="Albert Stubblebine" label="Albert Stubblebine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194135" start="2869" end="2880" title="Jim Channon" label="Jim Channon"/>
<link wikidata="Q567981" start="2988" end="3012" title="Human Potential Movement" label="Human Potential Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q357" start="3146" end="3160" title="Guantanamo Bay detainment camp" label="Guantanamo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164779" start="3165" end="3179" title="The Men Who Stare at Goats (film)" label="eponymous film"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="3306" end="3310" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q165518" start="3342" end="3355" title="Ewan McGregor" label="Ewan McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111774" start="3403" end="3422" title="Out of the Ordinary" label="Out of the Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190491" start="3470" end="3477" title="Picador (imprint)" label="Picador"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="3482" end="3496" title="Guardian Books" label="Guardian Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758672" start="3695" end="3714" title="The Psychopath Test" label="The Psychopath Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="3830" end="3840" title="psychopath" label="psychopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033930" start="3880" end="3906" title="Hare Psychopathy Checklist" label="Hare Psychopathy Checklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345479" start="4025" end="4060" title="Psychopathy in the workplace" label="psychopaths in corporate boardrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q974718" start="4168" end="4182" title="Robert D. Hare" label="Robert D. Hare"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4328" end="4365" title="Lost at Sea: The Jon Ronson Mysteries" label="Lost at Sea: The Jon Ronson Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895954" start="4489" end="4524" title="So You&amp;#x27;ve Been Publicly Shamed" label="So You&amp;#x27;ve Been Publicly Shamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567104" start="4562" end="4580" title="online shaming" label="public humiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="4687" end="4698" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562517" start="4778" end="4788" title="Radio Academy Awards" label="Sony award"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="4837" end="4852" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="4976" end="4979" title="UFO" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="4989" end="4999" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704215" start="5069" end="5084" title="Terry Christian" label="Terry Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="5100" end="5110" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329130" start="5125" end="5128" title="KFM Radio" label="KFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665366" start="5171" end="5181" title="Craig Cash" label="Craig Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398704" start="5225" end="5241" title="The Royle Family" label="The Royle Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326641" start="5258" end="5269" title="Early Doors" label="Early Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116341" start="5300" end="5326" title="Public Radio International" label="Public Radio International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421465" start="5380" end="5398" title="This American Life" label="This American Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q366651" start="6027" end="6034" title="Audible (store)" label="Audible"/>
<link wikidata="Q797817" start="6146" end="6161" title="Fabian Thylmann" label="Fabian Thylmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q936394" start="6166" end="6173" title="PornHub" label="PornHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q19559884" start="6376" end="6387" title="August Ames" label="August Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480226" start="6478" end="6490" title="culture wars" label="culture wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q57416399" start="6495" end="6505" title="BBC Sounds" label="BBC Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118229" start="6610" end="6624" title="Mark Radcliffe (radio broadcaster)" label="Mark Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075651" start="6632" end="6647" title="keyboard player" label="keyboard player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077742" start="6656" end="6672" title="Frank Sidebottom" label="Frank Sidebottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="6739" end="6749" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746334" start="6761" end="6789" title="The Man from Delmonte (band)" label="The Man from Delmonte (band)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7078" end="7106" title="Alan Davies: As Yet Untitled" label="Alan Davies: As Yet Untitled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709045" start="7145" end="7156" title="film rights" label="film rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164779" start="7219" end="7240" title="The Men Who Stare at Goats (film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q369747" start="7274" end="7282" title="war film" label="war film"/>
<link wikidata="Q710180" start="7295" end="7307" title="Grant Heslov" label="Grant Heslov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177144" start="7323" end="7338" title="Peter Straughan" label="Peter Straughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165518" start="7420" end="7433" title="Ewan McGregor" label="Ewan McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="7569" end="7578" title="Ann Arbor" label="Ann Arbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082474" start="7771" end="7776" title="Frank (film)" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="7791" end="7803" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077742" start="7846" end="7862" title="Chris Sievey" label="Frank Sidebottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q495980" start="7882" end="7894" title="Bong Joon-ho" label="Bong Joon-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q23932553" start="7956" end="7960" title="Okja" label="Okja"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="8041" end="8047" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q656542" start="8096" end="8108" title="Humanists UK" label="Humanists UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="8143" end="8153" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q979131" start="8232" end="8245" title="Louis Theroux" label="Louis Theroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="8446" end="8451" title="BBC 2" label="BBC 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="8522" end="8531" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="8570" end="8581" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763082" start="8787" end="8817" title="The Secret Rulers of the World" label="The Secret Rulers of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219852" start="9255" end="9261" title="More 4" label="More 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q473853" start="9278" end="9293" title="school shooting" label="school shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q79494" start="9331" end="9349" title="North Pole, Alaska" label="North Pole, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539061" start="9405" end="9416" title="George Exoo" label="George Exoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="9433" end="9443" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599731" start="9453" end="9481" title="Stanley Kubrick&amp;#x27;s Boxes" label="Stanley Kubrick&amp;#x27;s Boxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082474" start="9576" end="9581" title="Frank (film)" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q23932553" start="9603" end="9607" title="Okja" label="Okja"/>
<link wikidata="Q39057535" start="9629" end="9646" title="Comrade Detective" label="Comrade Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421465" start="10016" end="10034" title="This American Life" label="This American Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998648" start="10355" end="10371" title="Robert Llewellyn" label="Robert Llewellyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045863" start="10381" end="10388" title="Carpool (web series)" label="Carpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037777" start="10402" end="10409" title="blip.tv" label="blip.tv"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646660" wikidata="Q6601531" url="?curid=646660" title="List of United Kingdom censuses">
<text>The [[census in the United Kingdom]] is decennial, that is, held every ten years, although there is provision in the Census Act 1920 for a census to take place at intervals of five years or more. There are actually three separate censuses in the United Kingdom – in England and Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland – although they are often co-ordinated. From 1821 to 1911, the census included the whole of Ireland.

There have only been three occasions in Great Britain where the census has not been decennial: There was no census in 1941 due to the Second World War; a mini-census using a ten per cent sample of the population was conducted on 24 April 1966; and the planned Scottish 2021 census was delayed to 2022 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. No census was held in Ireland in 1921, as a consequence of the Irish War of Independence; instead, Northern Ireland carried out a census in 1926, the first there for fifteen years. No census was carried out in Northern Ireland in 1931, but one was carried out in 1937.

==Past censuses==

===Published censuses===
The census records which have been published relate to the occupants of each household, as enumerated for the dates given below:

*United Kingdom Census 1801 - Tuesday, 10 March 
*United Kingdom Census 1811 - Monday, 27 May
*United Kingdom Census 1821 - Monday, 28 May 
*United Kingdom Census 1831 - Monday, 30 May
*United Kingdom Census 1841 - Sunday, 6 June
*United Kingdom Census 1851 - Sunday, 30 March
*United Kingdom Census 1861 - Sunday, 7 April
*United Kingdom Census 1871 - Sunday, 2 April
*United Kingdom Census 1881 - Sunday, 3 April
*United Kingdom Census 1891 - Sunday, 5 April
*United Kingdom Census 1901 - Sunday, 31 March
*United Kingdom Census 1911 - Sunday, 2 April
*United Kingdom Census 1921 - Sunday, 19 June
*National Registration Act 1939 - Friday, 29 September Second World War

===Unpublished censuses===
Under the 100-year closure rule established after the 1911 census was taken, only summary results for censuses after 1939though with significant statistical detailare published in the months following the enumeration dates given below; the full information (individual household entries) in later censuses will not be released until the dates stated, a century after each later census was conducted.

*Northern Ireland Census 1926 - Sunday, 18 April: The census returns were not transferred to the Public Record Office in Northern Ireland, and are believed to have been destroyed without authorisation, possibly as part of a World War II waste-paper campaign.
*United Kingdom Census 1931 - Sunday, 26 April: carried out in England, Wales, and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland. The England and Wales census returns were destroyed in an accidental fire in 1942; the Scottish census returns were stored in Edinburgh, and survived. The scheduled publication date for the Scottish returns is 1 January 2032
*Northern Ireland Census 1937 - Sunday, 28 February: Unlike the 1926 Northern Ireland census, the 1937 census records survive. (scheduled publication date 1 January 2038)
*&lt;del&gt;United Kingdom Census 1941&lt;/del&gt; - no census taken due to World War II.
*United Kingdom Census 1951 - Sunday, 8 April (scheduled publication date 1 January 2052)
*United Kingdom Census 1961 - Sunday, 23 April (scheduled publication date 1 January 2062)
*United Kingdom Census 1966 - Sunday, 24 April mini-census using a ten per cent sample (publication date 1 January 2067)
*United Kingdom Census 1971 - Sunday, 25 April (scheduled publication date 1 January 2072)
*United Kingdom Census 1981 - Sunday, 5 April (scheduled publication date 1 January 2082)
*United Kingdom Census 1991 - Sunday, 21 April (scheduled publication date 1 January 2092)
*United Kingdom Census 2001 - Sunday, 29 April (scheduled publication date 1 January 2102)
*United Kingdom Census 2011 - Sunday, 27 March (scheduled publication date 1 January 2112)
*United Kingdom Census 2021 - carried out in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland only on Sunday, 21 March (scheduled publication date 1 January 2122). The census in Scotland was carried out on 20 March 2022. (scheduled publication date 1 January 2123)

==See also==
*Census of Ireland, 1911

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6601531" start="4" end="36" title="List of United Kingdom censuses" label="[[census in the United Kingdom]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062856" start="40" end="49" title="decennial" label="decennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058957" start="117" end="132" title="Census Act 1920" label="Census Act 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="266" end="283" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="285" end="293" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="299" end="315" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="408" end="415" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="744" end="761" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="826" end="851" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058956" start="1208" end="1234" title="Census Act 1800" label="United Kingdom Census 1801"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1257" end="1283" title="United Kingdom Census 1811" label="United Kingdom Census 1811"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1302" end="1328" title="United Kingdom Census 1821" label="United Kingdom Census 1821"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1348" end="1374" title="United Kingdom Census 1831" label="United Kingdom Census 1831"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887918" start="1393" end="1419" title="United Kingdom Census 1841" label="United Kingdom Census 1841"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887919" start="1438" end="1464" title="United Kingdom Census 1851" label="United Kingdom Census 1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887920" start="1485" end="1511" title="United Kingdom Census 1861" label="United Kingdom Census 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q21279771" start="1531" end="1557" title="United Kingdom Census 1871" label="United Kingdom Census 1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887922" start="1577" end="1603" title="United Kingdom Census 1881" label="United Kingdom Census 1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q21279764" start="1623" end="1649" title="United Kingdom Census 1891" label="United Kingdom Census 1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887924" start="1669" end="1695" title="United Kingdom Census 1901" label="United Kingdom Census 1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q21279761" start="1716" end="1742" title="United Kingdom Census 1911" label="United Kingdom Census 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q21279755" start="1762" end="1788" title="United Kingdom Census 1921" label="United Kingdom Census 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581512" start="1808" end="1838" title="National Registration Act 1939" label="National Registration Act 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1862" end="1878" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2309" end="2337" title="Northern Ireland Census 1926" label="Northern Ireland Census 1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2532" end="2544" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q21279717" start="2568" end="2594" title="United Kingdom Census 1931" label="United Kingdom Census 1931"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2912" end="2940" title="Northern Ireland Census 1937" label="Northern Ireland Census 1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q21274978" start="3173" end="3199" title="United Kingdom Census 1951" label="United Kingdom Census 1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q21274975" start="3263" end="3289" title="United Kingdom Census 1961" label="United Kingdom Census 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046144" start="3354" end="3380" title="United Kingdom Census 1966" label="United Kingdom Census 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q21274971" start="3475" end="3501" title="United Kingdom Census 1971" label="United Kingdom Census 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q21274970" start="3566" end="3592" title="United Kingdom Census 1981" label="United Kingdom Census 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887926" start="3656" end="3682" title="United Kingdom Census 1991" label="United Kingdom Census 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="3747" end="3773" title="United Kingdom Census 2001" label="United Kingdom Census 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="3838" end="3864" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="United Kingdom Census 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="3929" end="3955" title="United Kingdom Census 2021" label="United Kingdom Census 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058982" start="4196" end="4219" title="Census of Ireland, 1911" label="Census of Ireland, 1911"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646664" wikidata="Q845354" url="?curid=646664" title="Sai (weapon)">
<text>The sai (Japanese: , ; Chinese: , ) is a pointed melee weapon from Okinawa. It was historically utilized in martial arts such as Okinawan kobudō and southern Chinese martial arts, and has been absorbed into the curriculum of many modern martial arts. Although similar weapons can be found in other parts of Asia, the sai is the Okinawan take on the basic concept and should not be confused with the other weapons. The sai is primarily used for stabbing, striking, parrying and disarming opponents. It consists of a pointed metal main prong, that projects from a one-handed handle, two shorter metal side prongs, which project from the opposite sides of the base of the main prong and point in the same direction as it, and a blunt metal pommel fixed to the bottom end of the handle. The sai came to international attention when Okinawan kobudō and karate reached international popularity in the mid-20th Century. 

==History==

Before the creation of the sai in Okinawa, similar weapons were already being used in other Asian countries including India, Thailand, China, Vietnam, Malaysia, and Indonesia. The basic concept of this kind of weapon was brought to Okinawa over time from one or several of these places. However, the sai is the Okinawan take on this weapon concept, and should not be mixed with the other similar weapons.

Some sources theorize that this weapon concept may be based on the Indian trisula, an ancient Hindu-Buddhist symbol that may have spread along with Hinduism and Buddhism into South-East Asia. The word &quot;trisula&quot; itself can refer to either a long or short-handled trident.
In Okinawa the &quot;sai&quot; was used by the domestic police (&quot;ufuchiku&quot;) to arrest criminals and for crowd control. Use of the &quot;sai&quot; in Okinawan kobudō was approved in 1668 by Moto Chohei, an Okinawan prince.

Japan had a similar weapon, the &quot;jitte&quot;, which was originally used as a blunt weapon by guards in the Shogun&#x27;s palace, and was subsequently issued to senior officials as a badge of office. Edo period examples of the &quot;jitte&quot; typically have only a single hook. The relationship between the &quot;sai&quot; and &quot;jitte&quot; is unclear.

==Parts (in Okinawan)==

*&quot;&quot;, the metal main prong of the &quot;sai&quot;, that is either round or faceted.
*&quot;&quot;, the sharp point of the main prong.
*&quot;&quot;, the two shorter metal side prongs of the &quot;sai&quot;, which usually point in the same direction as the main prong, with the exception of the &quot;manji sai&quot; developed by Taira Shinken, which has the direction of one of the side prongs reversed, causing the weapon to be reminiscent of a swastika (&quot;manji&quot;).

*&quot;&quot;, the sharp point of the two side prongs.
*&quot;&quot;, the center point between the two side prongs.
*&quot;&quot;, the one-handed handle of the &quot;sai&quot;, which is usually wrapped with different materials or given different treatments to add more grip to it.
*&quot;&quot;, the blunt metal pommel of the &quot;sai&quot;.

==Technique==

The &quot;sai&quot; is a weapon typically wielded in pairs, with one in each hand. In modern Okinawan Kobudo, five &quot;kata&quot; (choreographed patterns of movements in martial arts) are commonly taught, including two &quot;kihon kata.&quot; 

The utility of the &quot;sai&quot; is given away by its distinctive trident-like shape. It is a weapon primarily used for fast stabbing and striking, but being very versatile, it has many other uses as well. These include a variety of blocks, parries and captures against attackers from all directions and height levels. Use of the sharp points, the main prong and the pommel is emphasized, as well as rapid grip changes for multiple fast stabs and strikes.

One commonly depicted technique in &quot;sai&quot; kata is to use of one of the &quot;sai&quot;″s side prongs to entrap an opponent&#x27;s weapon and then disarm them of it. Some variations of the &quot;sai&quot; have the two side prongs pointing inwards towards the main prong to facilitate this maneuver. While this does not completely immobilize the attacker, it encumbers them in close quarters.

Because there is no morphological plural in Japanese, the word &quot;&quot;sai&quot; refers to either a single weapon or multiple. &quot;Nicho sai&quot; refers to a &quot;kata&quot; that uses two &quot;sai&quot;, while &quot;sancho sai kata&quot; refers to &quot;kata&quot; using three &quot;sai&quot;.

==See also==

* Okinawan kobudō
* &quot;Nunti Bō&quot;
* Trident
* Trishula

==References==
== Further reading ==

==External links==

* How to Use Sai Instructional Video
* Mr. Yoong Swee Yin - Double Sai - Shuang Chai 雙 釵—video</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="9" end="17" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="23" end="30" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q600614" start="67" end="74" title="Okinawa Island" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622124" start="129" end="144" title="Okinawan kobudō" label="Okinawan kobudō"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622124" start="828" end="843" title="Okinawan kobudō" label="Okinawan kobudō"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="848" end="854" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="962" end="969" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575049" start="1046" end="1051" title="Indian martial arts" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1053" end="1061" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1063" end="1068" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="1070" end="1077" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1079" end="1087" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="1093" end="1102" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="1160" end="1167" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539698" start="1408" end="1415" title="trisula" label="trisula"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="1482" end="1490" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="1495" end="1503" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="1618" end="1625" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622124" start="1774" end="1789" title="Okinawan kobudō" label="Okinawan kobudō"/>
<link wikidata="Q773214" start="1886" end="1891" title="jitte" label="jitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q723832" start="2575" end="2588" title="Taira Shinken" label="Taira Shinken"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="2692" end="2700" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q40795" start="3203" end="3207" title="kata" label="kata"/>
<link wikidata="Q777114" start="3309" end="3314" title="kihon" label="kihon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622124" start="4509" end="4524" title="Okinawan kobudō" label="Okinawan kobudō"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4533" end="4541" title="Okinawan kobudō#Nunti Bo" label="Nunti Bō"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="4550" end="4557" title="Trident" label="Trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539698" start="4560" end="4568" title="Trishula" label="Trishula"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646666" wikidata="Q6506386" url="?curid=646666" title="LeMoyne–Owen College">
<text>LeMoyne–Owen College (LOC or &quot;LeMoyne-Owen&quot;) is a private historically black college affiliated with the United Church of Christ and located in Memphis, Tennessee. It resulted from the 1968 merger of historically black colleges and other schools established by northern Protestant missions during and after the American Civil War.

==History==
LeMoyne Normal and Commercial School was founded in 1862, when the American Missionary Association (AMA) sent Lucinda Humphrey to open an elementary school at Camp Shiloh (Tennessee) for free blacks and escaped slaves. This was one of more than ten schools founded by the AMA, an integrated organization led by black and white Congregational, Methodist and Presbyterian ministers.

The school was established soon after the occupation of Memphis by Federal troops during the Civil War; they were based at Camp Shiloh outside the city limits to the south. First known as Lincoln Chapel, the school relocated into Memphis proper in 1863 from south of the city. In 1866 it was destroyed during white race riots that broke out following the withdrawal of federal troops.
The school was rebuilt, and in 1867 it reopened with 150 students and six teachers. In 1870, Francis Julius LeMoyne (1798–1879), a Washington, Pennsylvania doctor, donated $20,000 (~$ in ) to the American Missionary Association to build an elementary and secondary school for prospective teachers. LeMoyne, who was a notable abolitionist, traveled from his Pennsylvania home to visit the new school. He donated a clock for the school&#x27;s tower. In 1871, the school opened in a new building at 284 Orleans Street and was named LeMoyne Normal and Commercial School.

The Memphis yellow fever epidemic started in 1873 and took a toll on many school personnel.

Under the leadership of the third principal, Andrew J. Steele, the school enjoyed three decades of growth and development.

In 1914 the school moved from Orleans Street to its present site on Walker Avenue. Steele Hall, the first building on the new campus, was erected that same year. LeMoyne became a junior college in 1924. After developing a four-year curriculum, it became a four-year college in 1930. The LeMoyne College was chartered by the State of Tennessee four years later. Steele Hall was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979, and the core of the college&#x27;s campus was listed on the National Register in 2005.

Owen College was established as a junior college in 1947, when the Tennessee Baptist Missionary and Educational Convention bought property for that purpose on Vance Avenue. After they developed the facility, S. A. Owen Junior College opened at that location in 1954.
LeMoyne–Owen College was formed through the 1968 merger of LeMoyne College and Owen College, both private, historically black, church-affiliated colleges.

In 2007, LeMoyne-Owen had management and accreditation problems due to a lack of financial resources. The Southern Association of Colleges and Schools placed the college on probation for two years. In August 2007, the City of Memphis ensured the college would open for the fall 2007 semester by pledging $3 million in taxpayer funds to be added to other substantial pledges from the United Negro College Fund, Cummins, radio host Tom Joyner and the United Church of Christ. The donation pledge, approved by the City Council, aroused controversy. City councilmembers defended their actions as contributing to the city and its residents. The college&#x27;s president Johnnie B. Watson said that the college has reaffirmed its accreditation. It had increased its endowment to 20 million dollars in 2014.

In July 2020, LeMoyne-Ownen College received the largest donation in its history. A $40 million pledge from the Community Foundation of Greater Memphis quadrupled the college&#x27;s endowment. LeMoyne-Ownen&#x27;s president called the gift &quot;transformative&quot; for all that the college does and can do. The Community Foundation will give approximately $2 million annually.
== Historic district ==

The LeMoyne College Historic District is a historic district which was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2005. It includes four contributing buildings and the 1936 campus quadrangle as a contributing site. It is roughly bounded by Walker, Hollis Price, Crown and alley to rear of Sweeney Hall.

It includes Steel Hall, built in 1914, the oldest and original building on this campus, which was designed by Tandy &amp; Foster and is separately listed on the National Register. It includes two Colonial Revival buildings, Brownlee and Sweeney halls, which were designed by George Awsumb along with the quadrangle in 1936. Sweeney Hall is named for Frank J. Sweeney, college president during 1929–1942, and originally served as the president&#x27;s residence.

It includes the three-story Modernist-style Hollis F. Price Library, built in 1963, designed by architects Gassner-Nathan-Browne, named for Hollis F. Price, college president during 1943–1970.

==Athletics==

The college sponsors athletic teams (nicknamed &quot;Magicians&quot;) that participate in the Division II level, in the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SIAC) conference of the NCAA. The LeMoyne–Owen College Department of Athletics sponsors men&#x27;s intercollegiate baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, and tennis along with women&#x27;s intercollegiate softball, basketball, cross country, volleyball and tennis. Men&#x27;s volleyball was added in the 2025 season (2024–25 school year). The school&#x27;s mascot is the Magicians.

In 1975, the LeMoyne–Owen College men&#x27;s basketball team won the NCAA Men&#x27;s Division III Basketball Championship. the school was then a member of Division III level of the NCAA. Up to this day, LeMoyne-Owen has been the only HBCU to win a national championship at that level.

LeMoyne–Owen College golfer Dominique Worthen was the first player in SIAC history to win the SIAC Player of the Year award, earn a selection to the All Conference Team, and earn the SIAC Conference Championship MVP award, and an All Tournament First Team award, all in one week. Worthen of LeMoyne-Owen also won the 2015 PGA Minority Collegiate Championship.

==Notable alumni==
== List of presidents ==

* Johnnie B. Watson
* Andrea Lewis Miller (2015–2019) first female and second alumnus
* Carol Johnson-Dean (2019–2021) interim
* Vernell Bennett-Fairs

==See also==
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Shelby County, Tennessee

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6506386" start="0" end="20" title="LeMoyne–Owen College" label="LeMoyne–Owen College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506386" start="22" end="25" title="LeMoyne–Owen College" label="LOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="68" end="94" title="historically black college" label="historically black college"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="115" end="138" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="154" end="172" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="210" end="237" title="historically black colleges" label="historically black colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="321" end="339" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316008" start="354" end="390" title="LeMoyne Normal and Commercial School" label="LeMoyne Normal and Commercial School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744443" start="421" end="452" title="American Missionary Association" label="American Missionary Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="513" end="536" title="Camp Shiloh (Tennessee)" label="Camp Shiloh (Tennessee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="829" end="838" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815868" start="1045" end="1061" title="Memphis 1866 race riot" label="white race riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455909" start="1214" end="1236" title="Francis Julius LeMoyne" label="Francis Julius LeMoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q594697" start="1252" end="1276" title="Washington, Pennsylvania" label="Washington, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="1446" end="1458" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="1701" end="1713" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633937" start="1989" end="2000" title="Steele Hall (Memphis, Tennessee)" label="Steele Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="2297" end="2333" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569646" start="2960" end="3004" title="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q735469" start="3237" end="3262" title="United Negro College Fund" label="United Negro College Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q173476" start="3264" end="3271" title="Cummins" label="Cummins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816377" start="3284" end="3294" title="Tom Joyner" label="Tom Joyner"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="3303" end="3326" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="4103" end="4120" title="historic district (United States)" label="historic district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4145" end="4181" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="4208" end="4230" title="contributing buildings" label="contributing buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="4267" end="4284" title="contributing site" label="contributing site"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633937" start="4387" end="4397" title="Steele Hall (Memphis, Tennessee)" label="Steel Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682521" start="4485" end="4503" title="Tandy &amp;amp; Foster" label="Tandy &amp;amp; Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148367" start="4571" end="4587" title="Colonial Revival architecture" label="Colonial Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q52017577" start="4650" end="4663" title="George Awsumb" label="George Awsumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="4865" end="4874" title="Modernist architecture" label="Modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="5140" end="5151" title="NCAA Division II" label="Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570039" start="5166" end="5210" title="Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="5236" end="5240" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3653937" start="5668" end="5720" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division III Basketball Championship" label="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division III Basketball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6293" end="6310" title="Johnnie B. Watson" label="Johnnie B. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123518496" start="6313" end="6332" title="Andrea Lewis Miller" label="Andrea Lewis Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q123531148" start="6379" end="6397" title="Carol Johnson-Dean" label="Carol Johnson-Dean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6420" end="6441" title="Vernell Bennett-Fairs" label="Vernell Bennett-Fairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371784" start="6457" end="6530" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Shelby County, Tennessee" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Shelby County, Tennessee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646671" wikidata="Q346996" url="?curid=646671" title="Front">
<text>Front may refer to:
==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Films ===
* &quot;The Front&quot; (1943 film), a 1943 Soviet drama film
* &quot;The Front&quot;, 1976 film

===Music===
*The Front (band), an American rock band signed to Columbia Records and active in the 1980s and early 1990s
*The Front (Canadian band), a Canadian studio band from the 1980s

===Periodicals===
* &quot;Front&quot; (magazine), a British men&#x27;s magazine
* &quot;Front Illustrated Paper&quot;, a publication of the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army

===Television===
* Front TV, a Toronto broadcast design and branding firm
* &quot;The Front&quot; (&quot;The Blacklist&quot;), a 2014 episode of the TV series &quot;The Blacklist&quot;
* &quot;The Front&quot; (&quot;The Simpsons&quot;), a 1993 episode of the TV series &quot;The Simpsons&quot;

==Military==
* Front (military), a geographical area where armies are engaged in conflict
* Front (military formation), roughly, an army group, especially in eastern Europe

==Places==
* Front, Piedmont, an Italian municipality
* The Front, now part of the Delaware Park-Front Park System, in Buffalo, New York, United States
* The transition area between a mountain and a plain, possibly related to the notion of a frontslope; for example:
** Rocky Mountain Front
** Wasatch Front

==Science and technology==
* Front (oceanography), a place where two water masses come together in the ocean
* Front (physics), a solution connecting two steady states
* Front (sociology), or mask, in dramaturgy
* Front and back, descriptors of phonemes in linguistics
* Front vowel, a class of vowel sounds, in linguistics
* Ice front of a glacier
* Weather front, a boundary separating air masses, and the cause of most weather phenomena

==Other uses==
* Front organization, any entity set up by and controlled by another organization
* Front (Polish party), Polish political party
* Rebecca Front (born 1964), English comedy actress
* Grill (jewelry), also known as &quot;front&quot;, jewelry for teeth

==See also==
* 
* 
* Front end (disambiguation)
* Fronting (disambiguation)
* National Front (disambiguation)
* Full Frontal (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q346996" start="0" end="5" title="Front" label="Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493025" start="70" end="103" title="The Front (1943 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Front&amp;quot; (1943 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197204" start="138" end="147" title="The Front" label="The Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735356" start="179" end="195" title="The Front (band)" label="The Front (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213436" start="287" end="312" title="The Front (Canadian band)" label="The Front (Canadian band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505781" start="373" end="401" title="Front (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Front&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505789" start="441" end="464" title="Front Illustrated Paper" label="Front Illustrated Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427073" start="541" end="549" title="Front TV" label="Front TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023177" start="598" end="647" title="The Front (The Blacklist)" label="&amp;quot;The Front&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Blacklist&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578618" start="709" end="757" title="The Front (The Simpsons)" label="&amp;quot;The Front&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Simpsons&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q842332" start="832" end="848" title="Front (military)" label="Front (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q899192" start="909" end="935" title="Front (military formation)" label="Front (military formation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9370" start="1004" end="1019" title="Front, Piedmont" label="Front, Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253332" start="1074" end="1105" title="Delaware Park-Front Park System" label="Delaware Park-Front Park System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438029" start="1261" end="1281" title="Rocky Mountain Front" label="Rocky Mountain Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q623465" start="1285" end="1298" title="Wasatch Front" label="Wasatch Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196576" start="1329" end="1349" title="Front (oceanography)" label="Front (oceanography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28458702" start="1411" end="1426" title="Front (physics)" label="Front (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271527" start="1470" end="1487" title="Front (sociology)" label="Front (sociology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505848" start="1514" end="1528" title="Front and back" label="Front and back"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505949" start="1571" end="1582" title="Front vowel" label="Front vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q556920" start="1626" end="1635" title="Ice front" label="Ice front"/>
<link wikidata="Q189796" start="1651" end="1664" title="Weather front" label="Weather front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470315" start="1758" end="1776" title="Front organization" label="Front organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q132775382" start="1840" end="1860" title="Front (Polish party)" label="Front (Polish party)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944303" start="1887" end="1900" title="Rebecca Front" label="Rebecca Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q960689" start="1939" end="1954" title="Grill (jewelry)" label="Grill (jewelry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505855" start="2029" end="2055" title="Front end (disambiguation)" label="Front end (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506074" start="2058" end="2083" title="Fronting (disambiguation)" label="Fronting (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q224231" start="2086" end="2117" title="National Front (disambiguation)" label="National Front (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508055" start="2120" end="2149" title="Full Frontal (disambiguation)" label="Full Frontal (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646672" wikidata="Q930344" url="?curid=646672" title="Wānaka">
<text>Wānaka () is a popular ski and summer resort town in the Otago region of the South Island of New Zealand. At the southern end of Lake Wānaka, it is at the start of the Clutha River and is the gateway to Mount Aspiring National Park.

Wānaka is primarily a resort town with both summer and winter seasons. Its economy is based on the many outdoor opportunities this offers.

Historically, Māori visited the Wānaka area to hunt and fish in summer, or on their way to seek (greenstone) on the West Coast. Ngāi Tahu abandoned their seasonal camps after a raid by a North Island war party in 1836.

The current town was founded as Pembroke during the gold rush of the 19th century, and renamed to Wanaka in 1940. Along with the rest of the Queenstown-Lakes District, Wānaka is growing rapidly, with the population increasing by 50% between 2005 and 2015.

==Names==

&quot;Wānaka&quot; is the South Island dialect pronunciation of , which means &#x27;sacred knowledge or a place of learning&#x27;. The New Zealand Gazetteer cites the meaning as &quot;the lore of the tohunga or priest&quot;.

While the name could also be a variation of Ō-Anake or Ō-Anaka, a proper name. The Ngāi Tahu Atlas dismisses this variation as a simple spelling mistake.

A Kāti Māmoe settlement at the site of modern Wānaka was or . was a Kāi Tahu (settlement) at the southern end of Lake Wānaka, including Ruby Island.

The town was named Wanaka when it was first surveyed in 1863, but renamed Pembroke within a month of the surveyor returning his books to Dunedin. Pembroke was the family name of the Hon Sydney Herbert, a UK Cabinet Minister and member of the Canterbury Association.

The town&#x27;s name reverted to Wanaka on 1 September 1940 to reduce confusion between the names of the town and the lake. The official name of the lake was updated from Lake Wanaka to Lake Wānaka in 2019, and the town to Wānaka in 2021.

==History==
A Kāti Māmoe settlement at the site of modern Wānaka was named . 

The area was invaded by the Ngāi Tahu in the early 18th century. Ngāi Tahu visited annually, seeking greenstone in the mountains above the Haast River and hunting eels and birds over summer, then returning to the east coast by descending the Clutha River in reed boats called mōkihi. Their settlement included a pā and a (food-gathering site) where pora (&#x27;Māori turnip&#x27;), , tuna (eels), and weka were gathered. Eels and birds were gathered at a lagoon on the Hāwea side of The Neck, which also supported gardens of potato and turnips. 

Ngāi Tahu use of the land was ended by attacks by North Island tribes. In 1836, the Ngāti Tama chief Te Pūoho led a 100-person war party, armed with muskets, down the West Coast and over the Haast Pass. They fell on the Ngāi Tahu encampment between Lake Wānaka and Lake Hāwea, capturing ten people and killing and eating two children. Some of the Ngāi Tahu fled down the Waitaki river to the coast. Te Puoho took his captives over the Crown Range to Lake Wakatipu and thence to Southland where he was killed and his war party destroyed by the southern Ngāi Tahu leader Tūhawaiki.

The first European to visit the area was Nathanael Chalmers, who was guided inland by Chiefs Reko and Kaikōura in 1853. Reko and Kaikōura showed Chalmers the rock bridge Whatatorere at Roaring Meg, which was the only place that the Kawarau River could be jumped over, and returned him down the Clutha in a reed boat – arguably the first recorded instance of adventure tourism in the region.

European settlement began in the Upper Clutha River Valley in the 1850s, with the establishment of sheep stations by . The first station was at Albert Town, the only place where settlers could ford the Clutha River. The present site of Wānaka was first surveyed in 1863. Gold was discovered in the nearby Cardrona valley in 1862 with many joining the gold rush. Settlement increased in Pembroke during the 1870s because of timber milling in the Matukituki Valley that used Lake Wānaka for transport.

Mass tourism began in 1867 when Theodore Russell opened the first hotel, and with the world&#x27;s first sheepdog trials. The first school in the area was opened in Albert Town in 1868. The Pembroke post office opened in 1873; the Pembroke school opened in 1880 (it became the Wanaka District High School in 1940). In 1885 the Commercial Hotel opened in Pembroke, and in 1887 the Wanaka Library opened on Ardmore Street. In 1922, the First Wānaka Hotel was destroyed by fire and was replaced the following year by the Wanaka Public Hall. Wānaka was connected to the national electricity grid in 1940.

Wānaka proved a very popular tourist destination because of its borderline continental climate and easy access to snow and water. With the development of Treble Cone (1968) and Cardrona ski fields (1980), Wānaka grew in popularity as a winter destination.

==Geography==
The town of Wānaka is at the southern end of Lake Wānaka, surrounded by mountains. To the southwest are the Crown and Criffel Ranges and town of Queenstown, away. To the north the Haast Pass cuts through the Southern Alps near Makarora. To the northeast are the towns of Omarama and Twizel. Lake Wānaka comes within 1 km of the slightly smaller Lake Hāwea; they are separated only by rocky ridge called &quot;The Neck&quot;. South of Wānaka, the wide Upper Clutha valley leads to Cromwell at the junction of the Kawarau and Clutha rivers.

Glendhu Bay is on the lake&#x27;s western shore, close to the Matukituki River valley which gives access to the Mount Aspiring National Park.

The centre of the town lies on flat land beside Roy&#x27;s Bay. The town has expanded into the hills surrounding the centre and in both directions along the lake shore. The lakeside area of the town is prone to occasional flooding in spring when heavy rain and snowmelt can cause the lake to rise quickly, as in November 1999.

===Climate===

Despite New Zealand&#x27;s mostly oceanic climate, Wānaka is one of the few areas in the country to enjoy a semi-continental climate, with four distinct seasons. The weather is fairly dry, with spring (September–December) being the wettest season. Annual rainfall is 682 mm which is half the national average. Wānaka&#x27;s summers are warm, with temperatures reaching the high 20s and an average summer maximum of . Wānaka&#x27;s highest-ever temperature of was recorded in January 2018.

Winter can be extreme by New Zealand standards with temperature mostly in the single digits during the day time followed by cold and frosty nights and frequent snowfalls.

==Demography==
Wānaka covers and had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km2. It is the country&#x27;s 43rd-largest urban area and the fifth-largest urban area in Otago behind Dunedin, Queenstown, Mosgiel and Oamaru.

Wānaka had a population of 9,552 at the 2018 New Zealand census, an increase of 3,078 people (47.5%) since the 2013 census, and an increase of 4,509 people (89.4%) since the 2006 census. There were 3,480 households, comprising 4,719 males and 4,842 females, giving a sex ratio of 0.97 males per female, with 1,662 people (17.4%) aged under 15 years, 1,611 (16.9%) aged 15 to 29, 4,599 (48.1%) aged 30 to 64, and 1,695 (17.7%) aged 65 or older.

Ethnicities were 92.7% European/Pākehā, 5.2% Māori, 0.5% Pasifika, 4.5% Asian, and 2.5% other ethnicities. People may identify with more than one ethnicity.

The percentage of people born overseas was 28.9, compared with 27.1% nationally.

Although some people chose not to answer the census&#x27;s question about religious affiliation, 60.7% had no religion, 31.2% were Christian, 1.0% were Hindu, 0.2% were Muslim, 0.5% were Buddhist and 1.7% had other religions.

Of those at least 15 years old, 2,340 (29.7%) people had a bachelor&#x27;s or higher degree, and 720 (9.1%) people had no formal qualifications. 1,641 people (20.8%) earned over $70,000 compared to 17.2% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 4,386 (55.6%) people were employed full-time, 1,323 (16.8%) were part-time, and 72 (0.9%) were unemployed.

==Government==
Wānaka is in the Waitaki electorate, represented by the New Zealand National Party&#x27;s Miles Anderson since 2023.

Wānaka&#x27;s local governments are the Queenstown-Lakes District Council and the Otago Regional Council.

==Wānaka wine sub-region==
The area around Wānaka is a formal sub-region of the Central Otago wine region with several top wineries and vineyards. As with other parts of the wine region, the main grape variety in the area is pinot noir.

==Attractions==
 With its lake and mountain views, Wānaka has become a popular tourist resort, considered less commercialised than Queenstown.

Wānaka boasts a growing number of restaurants, cafes and a diverse nightlife. Other attractions in the town include Puzzling World and the Paradiso Cinema. Puzzling World contains a maze, optical illusions and a leaning clocktower. The Paradiso is a classic old cinema, with seating consisting of old couches and an in-theatre Morris Minor. There are several wineries in the area. Just out of town next to the Wānaka Airport is the National Transport and Toy Museum.

In winter, Wānaka is an excellent place to see the Southern Lights.

A number of mountains surrounding Wānaka can be climbed, including Roys Peak, Mount Iron, Mount Grand and the Pisa Range, all of which provide views of the surrounding area.

&quot;That Wānaka Tree&quot; – a willow growing just inside the lake – is a tourist attraction in its own right, featuring on many tourists&#x27; Instagram feeds. The tree had its lower branches cut by vandals in 2020.

===Festivals===

*The biennial Warbirds over Wanaka airshow is a major attraction for national and international guests.
*Wanakafest
*NZ Freeski Open
*The biennial New Zealand music Rippon Festival
*Challenge Wanaka Triathlon Festival
*The &quot;Festival of Colour&quot; is a biennial multi disciplinary arts festival featuring theatre, music, dance and visual arts. Held every second April, it alternates with the ideas festival &quot;Aspiring Conversations&quot;; both are organised by the Southern Lakes Arts Festival Trust. 
* Rhythm &amp; Alps
*The Wānaka agricultural and pastoral show has been held since 1934 at the showgrounds in Wānaka. Thirty to forty thousand people were expected at the 85th edition in March 2022. 
*The Wanaka Rodeo is normally held each summer but was forced to cancel the 2022 edition due to &quot;uncertainty around Covid-19 and new regulations&quot;.

===Film locations===
Films made in the Wānaka region include &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, &quot;The Hobbit&quot;, the &quot;Legend of S&quot;, and &quot;A Wrinkle in Time&quot;.

===Summer===

Wānaka is host to outdoor recreation and tourism activities with hiking, mountain biking, mountaineering, rock climbing, fishing, paragliding, kayaking, rafting, jetboating, and environmental activities. Wānaka has a sunny climate and serves as an access point to the highest New Zealand mountain outside of the Aoraki / Mount Cook region: Mount Aspiring / Tititea.

Mount Aspiring National Park is popular for mountaineering and hiking. Tourists enjoy day trips into the park and many tourists go hiking in the park for up to a week at a time. Parts of the Matukituki Valley on the road to the park are popular for rock climbing, and for day walks.

Lake Wānaka itself is popular for waterskiing, wakeboarding and sailing. This along with the local rivers provide many opportunities for fishing. There is a dedicated mountain biking area made by volunteers in a local pine forest. Adjacent to the bike park is an 18-hole disc golf course. All the local ski resorts are open for mountain biking and hiking in the summer.

===Winter===
Wānaka has the broadest range of snow activity choices of any town in New Zealand. These include Treble Cone, Cardrona Alpine Resort and Snow Farm, some of New Zealand&#x27;s premier commercial ski fields. Wānaka is the main accommodation provider for these resorts and so is very busy in high season (July–September).

Winter in Wānaka is also the home to a variety of winter sporting events including everything from the annual free Winter Games to the Merino Muster.

Treble Cone has good lift-accessed terrain and for this reason has become popular amongst visitors, &#x27;ConeHeads&#x27;. It also catches some of the better snow in the area, with its location and orientation getting more snow from NW storms.

Cardrona is more attractive to families and beginners, though an attempt has been made at the park riding population in competition with SnowPark. Snowpark is a dedicated 100% artificial terrain park for advanced riders. Snow Farm is New Zealand&#x27;s only commercial cross-country ski field.

Cardrona also hosts one of the few Olympic-sized half-pipes in the world and has been used for practice for Olympic competition.

== Amenities ==
=== Swimming pool ===
The Wānaka Recreation Centre has a 25 metre lap pool, a 20 metre learners pool and hot pool for adults. It is located at 41 Sir Tim Wallis Drive. The swimming complex was opened in 2018 and cost $12.8 million.

=== Wānaka Community Hub ===
The Wānaka Community Hub is home to 25 community organisations. The building includes a hall, foyer and offices. The build cost $3.8 million and was opened in October 2021.

=== Library ===
The Wānaka Library is in Dunmore Street. As well as an extensive collection of books and ebooks, audiobooks and newspapers, the library provides Wi-Fi, printing, copying and computer facilities. After issues with freedom campers in 2016, signs in the Wānaka Library ask people not to bathe or wash dishes in the toilets.

=== Golf course ===
The Wānaka golf course, located on Ballantye Road, was established in 1922. A further nine holes were added to the course in 1967 to make it an 18 hole golf course. The Wanaka Golf Club has around 950 members.

=== Tititea/Mount Aspiring National Park visitor centre ===
The Tititea/Mount Aspiring National Park visitor centre is located on the corner of Ardmore St and Ballentyne Rd. It provides advice about walking and hiking in the national park and information about the huts, campsites, weather and heritage sites. There is also a small museum display of the history, fauna and flora of the national park within the visitor centre.

=== Pembroke Park ===
Pembroke Park covers on the foreshore of Lake Wānaka. The majority of the park is grass fields, with a skate park and 136 carparks close to the town centre.

Originally known as &quot;The Commonage&quot;, the park was surveyed in 1875 and 1880. A nine-hole golf course was established on the park by 1920, with barbed wire to keep the cows out. From 1940, the New Zealand Electricity Department held the park with the thought that Lake Wānaka might be used for hydro-electricity production. It was designated as a recreational reserve in 1971, managed by Lake County Council, (which later became the Queenstown-Lakes District Council).

The establishment of the parking lot in Pembroke Park in 2000 was controversial, as one of its management objectives is &quot;to preserve in perpetuity Pembroke Park as a recreational area for the enjoyment of the people of Wanaka and visitors&quot;.

== Notable buildings ==
=== Saint Columba&#x27;s Anglican Church ===
Saint Columba&#x27;s was built in 1902 and completed in 1911. It is a category 2 historic place.

=== Chalmers&#x27; cottage ===
Chalmers&#x27; cottage is a grade 2 listed building. It was built in the 1870s for Archibald Chalmers, who was a butcher based in Wānaka.

=== Wānaka War Memorial ===
The Wānaka War Memorial commemorates the twenty seven soldiers from the area that died in World War I and the nine that died in World War II. It is located on Chalmers Street.

=== Dinosaur slide ===
The dinosaur slide built by the Wānaka Jaycees in 1976 is a well known fixture at the lakefront playground in Wānaka.

=== Wānaka watersports facility ===
Described as having a &quot;richly textured and contoured façade [which] belies the tough functional requirements demanded by a project realised in a sensitive environmental zone&quot;, the Wānaka watersports facility was the winner of the 2020 Southern Architecture Awards. It is used by the Wānaka Rowing Club Rowing Club, Wanaka Lake Swimmers and TriWanaka. The facility gained resource consent in 2016 despite 744 submitters opposing the build.

=== Holy Family Catholic Church ===
Holy Family Catholic Church was built in 2011 and its organic form was designed to allude to the mountains that surround it. The church replaced the previous church in Brownston Street. It is located next to the Holy Family School.

==Education==
Wānaka has four schools.

*Holy Family School is a state-integrated Catholic full primary (Year 1–8) school, and has students. The school was established in 2006.
*Mount Aspiring College is a state Year 7–13 secondary school, and has students. The school was established in 1986 following the split of Wanaka Area School.
*Wānaka Primary School is a state contributing primary (Year 1–6) school and has students. The school was established in 1986 following the split of Wanaka Area School and relocated to its current site in October 2010.
*Te Kura O Take Kārara is a state contributing primary school, and has students. The schools was established in 2020, providing capacity for more primary school aged children as Wānaka&#x27;s population grows.

All these schools are coeducational. Rolls are as of 

== Infrastructure and services ==

=== Transport ===
Wānaka is served by the Wānaka Airport as well as by roads over the Crown Range, through the Haast Pass/Tioripatea to the West Coast, to Mount Cook Village via the Lindis Pass to the north, and south through Cromwell by .

There are daily bus services to Christchurch, Dunedin, Queenstown and Greymouth.

During the late 19th century, unsuccessful Bills were introduced to Parliament to enable the extension of the Otago Central Railway from its terminus at Taieri Lake to Wānaka and Lake Hāwea. The proposal to extend the railway, which had since already been extended to Cromwell, was again unsuccessfully revived in the early 20th century. The main reason for NZR&#x27;s reluctance was having to cross the Clutha River twice. A more direct route to Hāwea was planned but dropped due to cost.

=== Utilities ===
Aurora Energy operates the electricity distribution network in and around Wānaka. Electricity is fed from Transpower&#x27;s national grid at Cromwell to Wānaka via twin 66,000-volt lines.

Fresh water for the town is drawn from Lake Wānaka via two inlets and treated by chlorination prior to distribution. Since 2008, the water supply has had issues with Didymo &quot;rock snot&quot; algae entering the system and building up, clogging filters and household plumbing. The Queenstown-Lakes District Council planned to add protozoal treatment to the water supply in 2024.

===Commerce===
In late 2021, Wānaka became home to the smallest Countdown supermarket in New Zealand. It will provide increased competition in the supermarket trade for Wānaka.

Resource consent was approved for a film studio development in 2021. The film studio is expected to cost $280 million and will include up to 10 sound stages, an 11 hectare lake, an Italian village and replicas of parts of Venice, Paris and New York City.

==Notable people==
*Tim Wallis – A pilot and businessman, started Warbirds over Wanaka, and has a street named after him in the town: Sir Tim Wallis Drive.
*Nico Porteous – New Zealand&#x27;s youngest Olympic medallist
*Zoi Sadowski-Synnott – New Zealand&#x27;s first winter Olympic gold medallist

==References==
==External links==

*Wānaka promotions site
*Warbirds over Wanaka website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q930344" start="0" end="6" title="Wānaka" label="Wānaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="57" end="62" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="77" end="89" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="93" end="104" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192728" start="129" end="140" title="Lake Wānaka" label="Lake Wānaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q613522" start="168" end="180" title="Clutha River" label="Clutha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070905" start="203" end="231" title="Mount Aspiring National Park" label="Mount Aspiring National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q317548" start="256" end="267" title="resort town" label="resort town"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="502" end="511" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="561" end="573" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q930344" start="626" end="634" title="Wānaka" label="Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="646" end="655" title="gold rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q930344" start="692" end="698" title="Wānaka" label="Wanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q613684" start="735" end="760" title="Queenstown-Lakes District" label="Queenstown-Lakes District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163411" start="1245" end="1255" title="Kāti Māmoe" label="Kāti Māmoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q337595" start="1575" end="1593" title="Sidney Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Lea" label="Hon Sydney Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="1597" end="1616" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="UK Cabinet Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q386520" start="1635" end="1657" title="Canterbury Association" label="Canterbury Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163411" start="1914" end="1924" title="Kāti Māmoe" label="Kāti Māmoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="2007" end="2016" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q917275" start="2118" end="2129" title="Haast River" label="Haast River"/>
<link wikidata="Q613522" start="2221" end="2233" title="Clutha River" label="Clutha River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2255" end="2261" title="mōkihi" label="mōkihi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234236" start="2291" end="2293" title="pā" label="pā"/>
<link wikidata="Q756714" start="2380" end="2384" title="weka" label="weka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2565" end="2595" title="History of the Otago Region#Ngāti Toa invasions" label="attacks by North Island tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023276" start="2610" end="2620" title="Ngāti Tama" label="Ngāti Tama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690924" start="2627" end="2635" title="Te Pūoho" label="Te Pūoho"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="2675" end="2681" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="2693" end="2703" title="West Coast, New Zealand" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q498788" start="2717" end="2727" title="Haast Pass" label="Haast Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440634" start="2791" end="2801" title="Lake Hāwea" label="Lake Hāwea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760804" start="2897" end="2904" title="Waitaki" label="Waitaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189455" start="2961" end="2972" title="Crown Range" label="Crown Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q127469" start="2976" end="2989" title="Lake Wakatipu" label="Lake Wakatipu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851693" start="3095" end="3104" title="Tūhawaiki" label="Tūhawaiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969452" start="3148" end="3166" title="Nathanael Chalmers" label="Nathanael Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3200" end="3204" title="Reko (chief)" label="Reko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339873" start="3292" end="3303" title="Roaring Meg hydro scheme" label="Roaring Meg"/>
<link wikidata="Q863681" start="3339" end="3352" title="Kawarau River" label="Kawarau River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546132" start="3413" end="3417" title="Typha orientalis" label="reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q782762" start="3465" end="3482" title="adventure tourism" label="adventure tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q955400" start="3643" end="3654" title="Albert Town, New Zealand" label="Albert Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q613522" start="3701" end="3713" title="Clutha River" label="Clutha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035787" start="3804" end="3819" title="Cardrona River" label="Cardrona valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791965" start="3944" end="3954" title="Matukituki River" label="Matukituki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374629" start="4105" end="4120" title="sheepdog trials" label="sheepdog trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189455" start="4981" end="4986" title="Crown Range" label="Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q31702495" start="4991" end="5004" title="Criffel Range" label="Criffel Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="5018" end="5028" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q498788" start="5053" end="5063" title="Haast Pass" label="Haast Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="5081" end="5094" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366447" start="5100" end="5108" title="Makarora" label="Makarora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726946" start="5144" end="5151" title="Omarama" label="Omarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q837901" start="5156" end="5162" title="Twizel" label="Twizel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440634" start="5218" end="5228" title="Lake Hāwea" label="Lake Hāwea"/>
<link wikidata="Q973355" start="5353" end="5361" title="Cromwell, New Zealand" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q863681" start="5385" end="5392" title="Kawarau River" label="Kawarau"/>
<link wikidata="Q613522" start="5397" end="5403" title="Clutha River" label="Clutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568414" start="5413" end="5424" title="Glendhu Bay" label="Glendhu Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791965" start="5475" end="5491" title="Matukituki River" label="Matukituki River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070905" start="5525" end="5553" title="Mount Aspiring National Park" label="Mount Aspiring National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="5933" end="5948" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="6012" end="6031" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293231" start="6701" end="6724" title="Ranked list of New Zealand urban areas" label="43rd-largest urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="6774" end="6781" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="6783" end="6793" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949244" start="6795" end="6802" title="Mosgiel" label="Mosgiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782" start="6807" end="6813" title="Oamaru" label="Oamaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="6856" end="6879" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189861" start="6927" end="6938" title="2013 New Zealand census" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="6990" end="7001" title="2006 New Zealand census" label="2006 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="7293" end="7299" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="7306" end="7311" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="7318" end="7326" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pasifika"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="7333" end="7338" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="7632" end="7641" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821145" start="7653" end="7658" title="Hinduism in New Zealand" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q152997" start="7670" end="7676" title="Islam in New Zealand" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174275" start="7688" end="7696" title="Buddhism in New Zealand" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960460" start="8136" end="8143" title="Waitaki (New Zealand electorate)" label="Waitaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="8175" end="8201" title="New Zealand National Party" label="New Zealand National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q122178388" start="8209" end="8223" title="Miles Anderson (politician)" label="Miles Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q613684" start="8277" end="8310" title="Queenstown-Lakes District" label="Queenstown-Lakes District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108351" start="8319" end="8341" title="Otago Regional Council" label="Otago Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8406" end="8416" title="Central Otago wine region#Sub Regions" label="sub-region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061573" start="8424" end="8449" title="Central Otago wine region" label="Central Otago wine region"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="8569" end="8579" title="pinot noir" label="pinot noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="8713" end="8723" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047677" start="8842" end="8856" title="Puzzling World, New Zealand" label="Puzzling World"/>
<link wikidata="Q174923" start="8914" end="8930" title="optical illusion" label="optical illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548674" start="9053" end="9065" title="Morris Minor" label="Morris Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967043" start="9136" end="9150" title="Wānaka Airport" label="Wānaka Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895737" start="9158" end="9191" title="National Transport and Toy Museum, Wanaka" label="National Transport and Toy Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="9245" end="9260" title="Aurora Australis" label="Southern Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171214" start="9330" end="9339" title="Roys Peak" label="Roys Peak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9341" end="9351" title="Mount Iron" label="Mount Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q31676043" start="9373" end="9383" title="Pisa Range" label="Pisa Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q87853284" start="9444" end="9460" title="That Wānaka Tree" label="That Wānaka Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="9471" end="9477" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="9584" end="9593" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968838" start="9689" end="9709" title="Warbirds over Wanaka" label="Warbirds over Wanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070669" start="9710" end="9717" title="airshow" label="airshow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9904" end="9922" title="Festival of Colour" label="Festival of Colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q28182530" start="10189" end="10206" title="Rhythm &amp;amp; Alps" label="Rhythm &amp;amp; Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="10612" end="10633" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q74331" start="10647" end="10657" title="The Hobbit (film series)" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19854184" start="10669" end="10692" title="Legend of Zu Mountain" label="&amp;quot;Legend of S&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q24301388" start="10704" end="10721" title="A Wrinkle in Time (2018 film)" label="A Wrinkle in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="10809" end="10815" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="10817" end="10832" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="10834" end="10848" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="10850" end="10863" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="10865" end="10872" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="10874" end="10885" title="paragliding" label="paragliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094083" start="10887" end="10895" title="kayaking" label="kayaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q207238" start="10897" end="10904" title="rafting" label="rafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355094" start="10906" end="10913" title="jetboat" label="jetboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059" start="11056" end="11075" title="Aoraki / Mount Cook" label="Aoraki / Mount Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210275" start="11084" end="11108" title="Mount Aspiring / Tititea" label="Mount Aspiring / Tititea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070905" start="11111" end="11139" title="Mount Aspiring National Park" label="Mount Aspiring National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q472827" start="11429" end="11440" title="waterskiing" label="waterskiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q376040" start="11442" end="11454" title="wakeboarding" label="wakeboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q192520" start="11459" end="11466" title="sailing" label="sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837389" start="11876" end="11887" title="Treble Cone" label="Treble Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038784" start="11889" end="11911" title="Cardrona Alpine Resort" label="Cardrona Alpine Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278304" start="11916" end="11925" title="Snow Farm" label="Snow Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="11973" end="11983" title="Ski resort" label="ski fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413737" start="12234" end="12247" title="Merino Muster" label="Merino Muster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141488" start="12589" end="12593" title="terrain park" label="park"/>
<link wikidata="Q847120" start="12839" end="12848" title="half-pipe" label="half-pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070905" start="14013" end="14041" title="Mount Aspiring National Park" label="Mount Aspiring National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357799" start="14751" end="14785" title="New Zealand Electricity Department" label="New Zealand Electricity Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15735" end="15746" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15773" end="15785" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134891" start="16784" end="16800" title="state-integrated school" label="state-integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919500" start="16897" end="16919" title="Mount Aspiring College" label="Mount Aspiring College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967043" start="17617" end="17631" title="Wānaka Airport" label="Wānaka Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q498788" start="17686" end="17707" title="Haast Pass / Tioripatea" label="Haast Pass/Tioripatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="17715" end="17725" title="West Coast, New Zealand" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950416" start="17730" end="17748" title="Mount Cook Village" label="Mount Cook Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826225" start="17757" end="17768" title="Lindis Pass" label="Lindis Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q973355" start="17801" end="17809" title="Cromwell, New Zealand" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="17848" end="17860" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="17862" end="17869" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="17871" end="17881" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q934790" start="17886" end="17895" title="Greymouth" label="Greymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242949" start="18008" end="18029" title="Otago Central Railway" label="Otago Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18051" end="18062" title="Taieri Lake" label="Taieri Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591627" start="18077" end="18087" title="Lake Hāwea (town)" label="Lake Hāwea"/>
<link wikidata="Q538101" start="18256" end="18259" title="New Zealand Railways Department" label="NZR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822522" start="18407" end="18420" title="Aurora Energy (New Zealand)" label="Aurora Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835339" start="18513" end="18523" title="Transpower New Zealand" label="Transpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q150385" start="18762" end="18768" title="Didymo" label="Didymo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804436" start="19432" end="19442" title="Tim Wallis" label="Tim Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968838" start="19478" end="19498" title="Warbirds over Wanaka" label="Warbirds over Wanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q47132886" start="19569" end="19582" title="Nico Porteous" label="Nico Porteous"/>
<link wikidata="Q28753684" start="19632" end="19652" title="Zoi Sadowski-Synnott" label="Zoi Sadowski-Synnott"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646673" wikidata="Q3254810" url="?curid=646673" title="List of medical symptoms">
<text>Medical symptoms refer to the manifestations or indications of a disease or condition, perceived and complained about by the patient. Patients observe these symptoms and seek medical advice from healthcare professionals. 

Because most people are not diagnostically trained or knowledgeable, they typically describe their symptoms in layman&#x27;s terms, rather than using specific medical terminology. This list is not exhaustive.

==Symptoms by presentation==

My ... hurts
* abdomen
* back
* chest
* ear
* head
* pelvis
* tooth
* rectum
* skin
* Extremities
** leg
* Chronic pain
I feel:
* Chills
* Fever
* Paresthesia (numbness, tingling, electric tweaks)
* Light-headed
* Dizzy
** Dizzy – about to black out
** Dizzy – with the room spinning around me
* My mouth is dry
* Nauseated
* Sick
** like I have the flu
** like I have to vomit
* Short of breath
* Sleepy
* Sweaty
* Thirsty
* Tired
* Weak

I can&#x27;t:
* Breathe normally
* Hear normally:
** losing hearing
** sounds are too loud
** ringing or hissing in my ears
* Move one side – arm and/or leg
* Defecate normally
* Urinate normally
* Remember normally
* See properly:
** Blindness
** blurred vision
** double vision
* Sleep normally
* Smell things normally
* Speak normally
* Excrete solid feces
* Stop scratching
* Stop sweating
* Swallow normally
* Taste properly
* Walk normally
* Write normally
==Medical signs and symptoms==
Where available, ICD-10 codes are listed. When codes are available both as a sign/symptom (R code) and as an underlying condition, the code for the sign is used.

When there is no symptoms for a disease that a patient has, the patient is said to be asymptomatic.
* General
** anorexia (R63.0)
*** weight loss (R63.4)
** cachexia (R64)
** chills and shivering
** convulsions (R56)
** deformity
** discharge
** dizziness / Vertigo (R42)
** fatigue (R53)
*** malaise
*** asthenia
** hypothermia (T68)
** jaundice (P58, P59, R17)
** muscle weakness (M62.8)
** pyrexia (R50)
** sweats
** swelling
** swollen or painful lymph node(s) (I88, L04, R59.1)
** weight gain (R63.5)
* Cardiovascular
** arrhythmia
** bradycardia (R00.1)
** chest pain (R07)
** claudication
** palpitations (R00.2)
** tachycardia (R00.0)
* Ear, Nose and Throat
** dry mouth (R68.2)
** epistaxis (R04.0)
** halitosis
** hearing loss
** nasal discharge
** otalgia (H92.0)
** otorrhea (H92.1)
** sore throat
** toothache
** tinnitus (H93.1)
** trismus
* Gastrointestinal
** abdominal pain (R10)
** bloating (R14)
** belching (R14)
** bleeding:
*** Hematemesis
*** blood in stool: melena (K92.1), hematochezia
** constipation (K59.0)
** diarrhea (A09, K58, K59.1)
** dysphagia (R13)
** dyspepsia (K30)
** fecal incontinence
** flatulence (R14)
** heartburn
** nausea (R11)
** odynophagia
** proctalgia fugax
** pyrosis (R12)
** Rectal tenesmus
** steatorrhea
** vomiting (R11)
* Integumentary
** Hair:
*** alopecia
*** hirsutism
*** hypertrichosis
** nail: 
** Skin:
*** abrasion
*** anasarca (R60.1)
*** bleeding into the skin
**** petechia
**** purpura
**** ecchymosis and bruising (Sx0 (x=0 through 9))
*** blister (T14.0)
*** edema (R60)
*** itching (L29)
*** Janeway lesions and Osler&#x27;s node
*** laceration
*** rash (R21)
*** urticaria (L50)
* Neurological
** abnormal posturing
** acalculia
** agnosia
** alexia
** amnesia
** anomia
** anosognosia
** aphasia and apraxia
** apraxia
** ataxia
** cataplexy (G47.4)
** confusion
** dysarthria
** dysdiadochokinesia
** dysgraphia
** hallucination
** headache (R51)
** hypokinetic movement disorder:
*** akinesia
*** bradykinesia
** hyperkinetic movement disorder:
*** akathisia
*** athetosis
*** ballismus
*** blepharospasm
*** chorea
*** dystonia
*** fasciculation
*** muscle cramps (R25.2)
*** myoclonus
*** opsoclonus
*** tic
*** tremor
**** flapping tremor
** insomnia (F51.0, G47.0)
** Lhermitte&#x27;s sign (as if an electrical sensation shoots down back &amp; into arms)
** loss of consciousness
*** Syncope (medicine) (R55)
** neck stiffness
** opisthotonus
** paralysis and paresis
** paresthesia (R20.2)
** prosopagnosia
** somnolence (R40.0)
* Obstetric / Gynaecological
** abnormal vaginal bleeding
*** vaginal bleeding in early pregnancy / miscarriage
*** vaginal bleeding in late pregnancy
** amenorrhea
** infertility
** painful intercourse (N94.1)
** pelvic pain
** vaginal discharge
* Ocular
** amaurosis fugax (G45.3) and amaurosis
** blurred vision
** Dalrymple&#x27;s sign
** double vision (H53.2)
** exophthalmos (H05.2)
** mydriasis/miosis (H570)
** nystagmus
* Psychiatric
** amusia
** anhedonia
** anxiety
** apathy
** confabulation
** depression
** delusion
** euphoria
** homicidal ideation
** irritability
** mania (F30)
** paranoid ideation
** phobia: 
** suicidal ideation
* Pulmonary
** apnea and hypopnea
** cough (R05)
** dyspnea (R06.0)
*** bradypnea (R06.0) and tachypnea (R06.0)
*** orthopnea and platypnea
*** trepopnea
** hemoptysis (R04.2)
** pleuritic chest pain
** sputum production (R09.3)
* Rheumatologic
** arthralgia
** back pain
** sciatica
* Urologic
** dysuria (R30.0)
** hematospermia
** hematuria (R31)
** impotence (N48.4)
** polyuria (R35)
** retrograde ejaculation
** strangury
** urethral discharge
** urinary frequency (R35)
** urinary incontinence (R32)
** urinary retention
==See also==

* List of ICD-9 codes 780-799: Symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="478" end="485" title="Abdominal pain" label="abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5781808" start="488" end="492" title="Back pain" label="back"/>
<link wikidata="Q693058" start="495" end="500" title="Chest pain" label="chest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596398" start="503" end="506" title="Otalgia" label="ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="509" end="513" title="Headache" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161805" start="516" end="522" title="Pelvic pain" label="pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q143925" start="525" end="530" title="Toothache" label="tooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303135" start="533" end="539" title="Rectal pain" label="rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334793" start="542" end="546" title="Dermatome (anatomy)" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144437" start="564" end="567" title="Patellofemoral pain syndrome" label="leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088113" start="570" end="582" title="Chronic pain" label="Chronic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260058" start="593" end="599" title="Chills" label="Chills"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="602" end="607" title="Fever" label="Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q769220" start="610" end="621" title="Paresthesia" label="Paresthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57823162" start="662" end="674" title="Light-headed" label="Light-headed"/>
<link wikidata="Q180007" start="686" end="712" title="Fainting" label="Dizzy – about to black out"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="716" end="756" title="Vertigo (medical)" label="Dizzy – with the room spinning around me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162276" start="759" end="774" title="Xerostomia" label="My mouth is dry"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="777" end="783" title="Nausea" label="Nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673323" start="797" end="816" title="Malaise" label="like I have the flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="820" end="840" title="Nausea" label="like I have to vomit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="843" end="858" title="Dyspnea" label="Short of breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077823" start="861" end="867" title="Somnolence" label="Sleepy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="870" end="876" title="Diaphoresis" label="Sweaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q474187" start="879" end="885" title="Thirst" label="Thirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="889" end="894" title="Fatigue (medical)" label="Tired"/>
<link wikidata="Q270421" start="897" end="901" title="Muscle weakness" label="Weak"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="919" end="935" title="Dyspnea" label="Breathe normally"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="956" end="970" title="Hearing impairment" label="losing hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421356" start="974" end="993" title="Hyperacusis" label="sounds are too loud"/>
<link wikidata="Q192309" start="997" end="1026" title="Tinnitus" label="ringing or hissing in my ears"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291130" start="1029" end="1042" title="Hemiplegia" label="Move one side"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="1062" end="1079" title="Constipation" label="Defecate normally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="1082" end="1098" title="Urinary retention" label="Urinate normally"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="1101" end="1118" title="Amnesia" label="Remember normally"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="1138" end="1147" title="Blindness" label="Blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930803" start="1151" end="1165" title="blurred vision" label="blurred vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q775940" start="1169" end="1182" title="Diplopia" label="double vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="1185" end="1199" title="Insomnia" label="Sleep normally"/>
<link wikidata="Q468433" start="1202" end="1207" title="Anosmia" label="Smell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="1226" end="1240" title="Aphasia" label="Speak normally"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="1243" end="1262" title="Diarrhea" label="Excrete solid feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q199602" start="1265" end="1280" title="Itch" label="Stop scratching"/>
<link wikidata="Q935781" start="1283" end="1296" title="Hyperhidrosis" label="Stop sweating"/>
<link wikidata="Q623289" start="1299" end="1315" title="Dysphagia" label="Swallow normally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402731" start="1318" end="1323" title="Dysgeusia" label="Taste"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="1335" end="1348" title="Ataxia" label="Walk normally"/>
<link wikidata="Q584560" start="1351" end="1365" title="Dysgraphia" label="Write normally"/>
<link wikidata="Q45127" start="1414" end="1420" title="ICD-10" label="ICD-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="1646" end="1658" title="asymptomatic" label="asymptomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="1673" end="1681" title="anorexia (symptom)" label="anorexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q718113" start="1694" end="1705" title="weight loss" label="weight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003455" start="1717" end="1725" title="cachexia" label="cachexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260058" start="1735" end="1741" title="chills" label="chills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060890" start="1746" end="1755" title="shivering" label="shivering"/>
<link wikidata="Q852376" start="1759" end="1769" title="convulsion" label="convulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182746" start="1780" end="1789" title="deformity" label="deformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931241" start="1793" end="1802" title="mucopurulent discharge" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916362" start="1806" end="1815" title="dizziness" label="dizziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="1818" end="1825" title="Vertigo" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="1835" end="1842" title="fatigue" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673323" start="1853" end="1860" title="malaise" label="malaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q102186689" start="1865" end="1873" title="weakness" label="asthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="1877" end="1888" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="1898" end="1906" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q270421" start="1926" end="1941" title="muscle weakness" label="muscle weakness"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="1953" end="1960" title="Fever" label="pyrexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="1970" end="1976" title="perspiration" label="sweats"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="1980" end="1988" title="swelling (medical)" label="swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q847726" start="1992" end="2024" title="lymphadenopathy" label="swollen or painful lymph node(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403879" start="2046" end="2057" title="weight gain" label="weight gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="2086" end="2096" title="Heart arrhythmia" label="arrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217111" start="2100" end="2111" title="bradycardia" label="bradycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693058" start="2123" end="2133" title="chest pain" label="chest pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888709" start="2143" end="2155" title="claudication" label="claudication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123260" start="2159" end="2171" title="palpitations" label="palpitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="2183" end="2194" title="tachycardia" label="tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162276" start="2229" end="2238" title="xerostomia" label="dry mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q202013" start="2250" end="2259" title="nosebleed" label="epistaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16408" start="2271" end="2280" title="bad breath" label="halitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="2284" end="2296" title="hearing loss" label="hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115038" start="2300" end="2315" title="rhinorrhea" label="nasal discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596398" start="2319" end="2326" title="ear pain" label="otalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223254" start="2338" end="2346" title="otitis media" label="otorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292082" start="2358" end="2369" title="sore throat" label="sore throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q143925" start="2373" end="2382" title="toothache" label="toothache"/>
<link wikidata="Q192309" start="2386" end="2394" title="tinnitus" label="tinnitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q936070" start="2406" end="2413" title="trismus" label="trismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="2436" end="2450" title="abdominal pain" label="abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927059" start="2460" end="2468" title="bloating" label="bloating"/>
<link wikidata="Q209789" start="2478" end="2486" title="burping" label="belching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495657" start="2496" end="2504" title="gastrointestinal bleeding" label="bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570161" start="2510" end="2521" title="Hematemesis" label="Hematemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214063" start="2526" end="2540" title="blood in stool" label="blood in stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163908" start="2542" end="2548" title="melena" label="melena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642049" start="2558" end="2570" title="hematochezia" label="hematochezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="2574" end="2586" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="2598" end="2606" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q623289" start="2628" end="2637" title="dysphagia" label="dysphagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q653971" start="2647" end="2656" title="indigestion" label="dyspepsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="2666" end="2684" title="fecal incontinence" label="fecal incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="2688" end="2698" title="flatulence" label="flatulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q537297" start="2708" end="2717" title="heartburn" label="heartburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="2721" end="2727" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455868" start="2737" end="2748" title="odynophagia" label="odynophagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632078" start="2752" end="2768" title="proctalgia fugax" label="proctalgia fugax"/>
<link wikidata="Q537297" start="2772" end="2779" title="Heartburn" label="pyrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q403648" start="2789" end="2804" title="Rectal tenesmus" label="Rectal tenesmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549428" start="2808" end="2819" title="steatorrhea" label="steatorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="2823" end="2831" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q181391" start="2867" end="2875" title="hair loss" label="alopecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620594" start="2880" end="2889" title="hirsutism" label="hirsutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q595010" start="2894" end="2908" title="hypertrichosis" label="hypertrichosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q939378" start="2932" end="2940" title="abrasion (medical)" label="abrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q486485" start="2945" end="2953" title="anasarca" label="anasarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412657" start="2994" end="3002" title="petechia" label="petechia"/>
<link wikidata="Q935293" start="3008" end="3015" title="purpura" label="purpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q574491" start="3021" end="3031" title="ecchymosis" label="ecchymosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q574491" start="3036" end="3044" title="bruise" label="bruising"/>
<link wikidata="Q276469" start="3071" end="3078" title="blister" label="blister"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="3091" end="3096" title="edema" label="edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q199602" start="3107" end="3111" title="itch" label="itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149382" start="3125" end="3140" title="Janeway lesions" label="Janeway lesions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516325" start="3145" end="3162" title="Osler&amp;#x27;s node" label="Osler&amp;#x27;s node"/>
<link wikidata="Q184753" start="3167" end="3177" title="Wound" label="laceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q653197" start="3182" end="3186" title="rash" label="rash"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="3197" end="3206" title="urticaria" label="urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601394" start="3231" end="3249" title="abnormal posturing" label="abnormal posturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q415556" start="3253" end="3262" title="acalculia" label="acalculia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220322" start="3266" end="3273" title="agnosia" label="agnosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="3277" end="3283" title="alexia (acquired dyslexia)" label="alexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="3287" end="3294" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q567576" start="3298" end="3304" title="anomic aphasia" label="anomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q567869" start="3308" end="3319" title="anosognosia" label="anosognosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="3323" end="3330" title="aphasia" label="aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q498916" start="3335" end="3342" title="apraxia" label="apraxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q498916" start="3346" end="3353" title="apraxia" label="apraxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="3357" end="3363" title="ataxia" label="ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q944473" start="3367" end="3376" title="cataplexy" label="cataplexy"/>
<link wikidata="Q852859" start="3388" end="3397" title="altered state of consciousness" label="confusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q225957" start="3401" end="3411" title="dysarthria" label="dysarthria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280963" start="3415" end="3433" title="dysdiadochokinesia" label="dysdiadochokinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q584560" start="3437" end="3447" title="dysgraphia" label="dysgraphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="3451" end="3464" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="3468" end="3476" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036662" start="3486" end="3515" title="hypokinesia" label="hypokinetic movement disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036662" start="3521" end="3529" title="akinesia" label="akinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036662" start="3534" end="3546" title="bradykinesia" label="bradykinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q416417" start="3586" end="3595" title="akathisia" label="akathisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q755524" start="3600" end="3609" title="athetosis" label="athetosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q946041" start="3614" end="3623" title="hemiballismus" label="ballismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q883863" start="3628" end="3641" title="blepharospasm" label="blepharospasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076421" start="3646" end="3652" title="chorea" label="chorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="3657" end="3665" title="dystonia" label="dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397878" start="3670" end="3683" title="fasciculation" label="fasciculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006818" start="3688" end="3701" title="cramp" label="muscle cramps"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275" start="3714" end="3723" title="myoclonus" label="myoclonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027232" start="3728" end="3738" title="opsoclonus" label="opsoclonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q738538" start="3743" end="3746" title="tic" label="tic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="3751" end="3757" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q748444" start="3763" end="3778" title="asterixis" label="flapping tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="3782" end="3790" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822504" start="3809" end="3830" title="Lhermitte&amp;#x27;s sign" label="Lhermitte&amp;#x27;s sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829165" start="3899" end="3920" title="unconsciousness" label="loss of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q180007" start="3925" end="3943" title="Syncope (medicine)" label="Syncope (medicine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q841878" start="3953" end="3967" title="neck stiffness" label="neck stiffness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756015" start="3971" end="3983" title="opisthotonus" label="opisthotonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="3987" end="3996" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126769" start="4001" end="4008" title="paresis" label="paresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q769220" start="4012" end="4023" title="paresthesia" label="paresthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244438" start="4035" end="4048" title="prosopagnosia" label="prosopagnosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077823" start="4052" end="4062" title="somnolence" label="somnolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q244913" start="4103" end="4128" title="vaginal bleeding" label="abnormal vaginal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="4133" end="4168" title="miscarriage" label="vaginal bleeding in early pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="4171" end="4182" title="miscarriage" label="miscarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071048" start="4187" end="4221" title="antepartum haemorrhage" label="vaginal bleeding in late pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334655" start="4225" end="4235" title="amenorrhea" label="amenorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="4239" end="4250" title="infertility" label="infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q120395" start="4254" end="4273" title="dyspareunia" label="painful intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161805" start="4285" end="4296" title="chronic pelvic pain" label="pelvic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q778502" start="4300" end="4317" title="vaginal discharge" label="vaginal discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146228" start="4330" end="4345" title="amaurosis fugax" label="amaurosis fugax"/>
<link wikidata="Q285787" start="4358" end="4367" title="amaurosis" label="amaurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930803" start="4371" end="4385" title="blurred vision" label="blurred vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q845971" start="4389" end="4410" title="Dalrymple&amp;#x27;s sign" label="Dalrymple&amp;#x27;s sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q775940" start="4414" end="4427" title="diplopia" label="double vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q684383" start="4439" end="4451" title="exophthalmos" label="exophthalmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128283" start="4463" end="4472" title="mydriasis" label="mydriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q596899" start="4473" end="4479" title="miosis" label="miosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="4490" end="4499" title="pathologic nystagmus" label="nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q481787" start="4517" end="4523" title="amusia" label="amusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545365" start="4527" end="4536" title="anhedonia" label="anhedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="4540" end="4547" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q309406" start="4551" end="4557" title="apathy" label="apathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082351" start="4561" end="4574" title="confabulation" label="confabulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="4578" end="4588" title="depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="4592" end="4600" title="delusion" label="delusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="4604" end="4612" title="euphoria (emotion)" label="euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030626" start="4616" end="4634" title="homicidal ideation" label="homicidal ideation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29299" start="4638" end="4650" title="irritability" label="irritability"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="4654" end="4659" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="4669" end="4686" title="paranoia" label="paranoid ideation"/>
<link wikidata="Q175854" start="4690" end="4696" title="phobia" label="phobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q944142" start="4702" end="4719" title="suicidal ideation" label="suicidal ideation"/>
<link wikidata="Q754424" start="4735" end="4740" title="apnea" label="apnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q957217" start="4745" end="4753" title="hypopnea" label="hypopnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35805" start="4757" end="4762" title="cough" label="cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="4772" end="4779" title="Shortness of breath" label="dyspnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q897147" start="4792" end="4801" title="bradypnea" label="bradypnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q570920" start="4814" end="4823" title="tachypnea" label="tachypnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q783955" start="4836" end="4845" title="orthopnea" label="orthopnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q780410" start="4850" end="4859" title="platypnea" label="platypnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838685" start="4864" end="4873" title="trepopnea" label="trepopnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q647099" start="4877" end="4887" title="hemoptysis" label="hemoptysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55998" start="4899" end="4919" title="pleuritic chest pain" label="pleuritic chest pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q259346" start="4923" end="4929" title="sputum" label="sputum"/>
<link wikidata="Q683498" start="4968" end="4978" title="arthralgia" label="arthralgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5781808" start="4982" end="4991" title="back pain" label="back pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q565276" start="4995" end="5003" title="sciatica" label="sciatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269399" start="5018" end="5025" title="dysuria" label="dysuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077117" start="5037" end="5050" title="hematospermia" label="hematospermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q373597" start="5054" end="5063" title="hematuria" label="hematuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="5073" end="5082" title="impotence" label="impotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124286" start="5094" end="5102" title="polyuria" label="polyuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759920" start="5112" end="5134" title="retrograde ejaculation" label="retrograde ejaculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q474914" start="5138" end="5147" title="strangury" label="strangury"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="5151" end="5169" title="urethra" label="urethral discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q352585" start="5173" end="5190" title="urinary frequency" label="urinary frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q281490" start="5200" end="5220" title="urinary incontinence" label="urinary incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="5230" end="5247" title="urinary retention" label="urinary retention"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5264" end="5336" title="List of ICD-9 codes 780-799: Symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions" label="List of ICD-9 codes 780-799: Symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646676" wikidata="Q1933266" url="?curid=646676" title="Shut 'Em Down (album)">
<text>Shut &#x27;Em Down is the third studio album by American hip hop group Onyx, released on June 2, 1998, by JMJ Records and Def Jam. The album was produced by Keith Horne and Self, with help from DJ Scratch of EPMD, Bud&#x27;da and Latief. The album features guest appearances from Onyx&#x27;s affiliate X1, DMX, a then-unknown 50 Cent, Still Livin from Gang Green, All City, Mr. Cheeks, Wu-Tang Clan, N.O.R.E., Big Pun and others.

&quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; debuted at number 10 on the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and number 3 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip Hop Albums chart and sold 90,000 copies in its first week. The album features three the Billboard singles The Worst, Shut &#x27;Em Down and React. The album sold fairly well, moving over 500,000 units.

&quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; was the last album released by Onyx on Def Jam / JMJ Records, and Onyx were also officially removed from Def Jam on &quot;Black Thursday&quot; - January 21, 1999 - because the label PolyGram, who in 1994 purchased 50% of Sony&#x27;s Def Jam, was sold to Seagram on December 10, 1998.

== Background ==
&quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; was originally supposed to be released on March 17, 1998, but was delayed until April 17, then May 19, and was finally released on June 2.
Chyskillz was originally picked as the main producer of the third album. This was written in the &quot;Billboard Magazine&quot; on July 13, 1996.

In February 1998, in an interview for MTV over the phone line, Sticky Fingaz told about the new album:&quot;...It&#x27;s like a combination of both of the (first two) albums taken to the next level. All We Got Iz Us was more narcissistic, it was a dark album. This one has elements of both, style flipping. We got appearances by Nas and Wu-Tang&quot;.

== Recording and production ==
The album was recorded in New York City and Los Angeles. The album features guest spots from Onyx&#x27;s affiliate X1, DMX, Chocolate, Clay The Raider (also known as Scarred 4 Life), 50 Cent, Bonifucco, Still Livin&#x27; from Gang Green, Sunshine, Bubba Smith, All City&#x27;s J. Mega and Greg Valentine, Mr. Cheeks, Killa Sin, Method Man, Raekwon, N.O.R.E. and Big Pun. Most of the album was produced by Self and Keith Horne, with help from DJ Scratch on the songs &quot;Street Nigguz&quot;, &quot;Conspiracy&quot; and &quot;Black Dust&quot;, Bud&#x27;da also produced the songs &quot;React&quot; and &quot;Ghetto Starz&quot;. Latief made music for collaboration with Wu-Tang Clan called &quot;The Worst&quot;.

According to Keith Horne, one of the producers of the album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot;, this album was technically the forth studio album by Onyx. It was recorded a lot of songs for two albums, but eventually only one album was released. Keith Horne made 11 songs with Onyx, but only 5 of them were included on the album. &quot;Take That&quot; was cut from the album to not make a double album. The song &quot;Broke Willies&quot; samples a portion of Rolling Stones&#x27;s song &quot;Miss You&quot;.

Self was introduced to the group by Onyx&#x27;s road manager Eat &#x27;Em Up. Self did seven tracks for their third album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot;, but only five of them were placed on the album. He produced the single &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot;, the first record with DMX. He also produced the remix for this song featuring Big Pun.

== Shut &#x27;Em Down (Exclusive Advance) ==
Def Jam released a promo release on the CD in the cardboard sleeve &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down (Exclusive Advance)&quot; in February 1998. The contents of this CD differed significantly from the final version of the album: &quot;Broke Willies&quot; was originally called &quot;Stones&quot;, &quot;Rob &amp; Vic&quot; was originally called &quot;Love Of Money&quot; (and had a completely different beat), the song &quot;I Don&#x27;t Wanna Die&quot; was later removed (since R. Kelly did not give permission for using his chorus), there was a X1 verse in the song &quot;Ghetto Starz&quot;, &quot;Overshine&quot; was not a hidden track, in the song &quot;Black Dust&quot; the line from Sonny Seeza&#x27;s verse was cut, &quot;The Worst&quot; was named &quot;Onyx vs. Wu-Tang&quot;. In addition, the original cover of the album was too similar to the cover of the album &quot;All We Got Iz Us&quot; and the members of Onyx thought that people could get confused, so they changed it

== The 1998 Grammy Awards ==
The 40th Annual Grammy Awards, were held on February 25, 1998, at Radio City Music Hall, New York City. Sticky Fingaz told Ol&#x27; Dirty Bastard of his plan to take over the stage to promote Onyx&#x27;s new album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; at that evening the Grammys were going to take place.&quot;...This time I need to promote &#x27;Shut &#x27;Em Down&#x27; album... Me and my DJ LS One, we ain&#x27;t even have tickets to the Grammys... we just walked through security, talking to each other like we supposed to be here... I went to the bathroom, I washed my hands and I&#x27;m looking at the mirror and saw a nigga ODB, I&#x27;m like &#x27;Who the fuck is this? What up my nigga! Yo, I&#x27;m about to go shut this shit down, basically go onstage and promote the motherfucking album&#x27; and I told the nigga my plan, he&#x27;s like, &#x27;Alright! Let&#x27;s go! Do it!&#x27;. Along the way, I stopped to talk to a motherfucking bitch... ODB was with U-God. I was with LS One, so I asked &#x27;Yo! LS, where&#x27;s this nigga Dirty go?&#x27;. He&#x27;s like &#x27;I don&#x27;t know&#x27;. We walk into the auditorium, open the door, and who the fuck do I see onstage? ODB. I&#x27;m like, &#x27;This motherfucker stole my shit and did it without me?&#x27;&quot;.

Ol&#x27; Dirty stole his idea and did it without him. Shawn Colvin&#x27;s trip to the podium to pick up her award for Song of the Year was interrupted by the Wu-Tang Clan&#x27;s Ol&#x27; Dirty Bastard who stole the mic to praise his group, and his new clothes, after Wu-Tang lost the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album. The album in question was Wu-Tang Forever. They lost to Puff Daddy&#x27;s &quot;No Way Out&quot;. O.D.B. urged the crowd to &quot;Please calm down,&quot; and launched into a confusing speech thusly:&quot;...I went and bought me an outfit today that cost me a lot of money, because I figured that Wu-Tang was gonna win. I don&#x27;t know how you all see it, but when it comes to the children, Wu-Tang is for the children. We teach the children. Puffy is good, but Wu-Tang is the best. I want you all to know that this is ODB, and I love you all, peace&quot;.

This incident was immortalized by Sticky Fingaz in the song &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down Remix&quot;: &quot;They scared to death mothafuckas trying to ban me / I&#x27;m the one who told Ol&#x27; Dirty to shut down the Grammys&quot;.

== Def Jam promo campaigns ==
In 1997, Def Jam released a series of 5 audio cassettes entitled &quot;The Unstoppable Def Jam Sampler&quot;: Foxy Brown, LL Cool J, Method Man, Redman, EPMD. On each cassette was pictured one artist of Def Jam in the form of a comic book character. The packaging opened like a pack of cigarettes. All the tapes had the same 11 tracks from the artists of the label Def Jam. On all cassettes there was the same Onyx&#x27;s track &quot;Face Down&quot; from the upcoming album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot;.

In May 1998, as part of its &quot;Survival Of The Illest&quot; campaign, Def Jam released a series of 3 CDs called &quot;Survival Of The Illest&quot;, vol. 1/2/3 (Limited Collector&#x27;s Edition CD). The first such promotional CD was released as a bonus CD of DMX&#x27;s album &quot;It&#x27;s Dark And Hell Is Hot&quot;, released on May 19, 1998. It included 11 tracks of Onyx, 10 of which were on the album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot;. Another track is the freestyle &quot;See You In Hell, Pt.2&quot;, recorded for DJ Clue&#x27;s mixtape &quot;The Curse Of The Clue&quot; (1997), this freestyle can also be found on the compilation &quot;Cold Case Files Vol. 1&quot; (2008). The second promo CD was released as a bonus disc of Onyx&#x27;s album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; on June 2, 1998. The third promo CD was released as a bonus disc of Def Squad&#x27;s album &quot;El Niño&quot;, released on June 30, 1998.

In May 1998, as part of its &quot;Survival Of The Illest&quot; campaign, Def Jam released a series of 2 vinyl records called &quot;Survival Of The Illest&quot;, vol. 1 and vol. 2, which included new tracks from DMX, Onyx and Def Squad. The 1st collection includes Onyx&#x27;s tracks from the album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot;: &quot;React&quot; (Radio Edit) and &quot;React&quot; (TV Track). The 2nd collection includes Onyx&#x27;s tracks from the album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot;: &quot;Broke Willies&quot; (Radio Edit) and &quot;Broke Willies&quot; (TV Track).

In 1999, Def Jam released a series of 8 CDs titled &quot;The Unstoppable Def Jam Sampler&quot;: Redman, Foxy Brown, Public Enemy, DMX, ONYX, LL Cool J, Method Man, EPMD. On each disc was one rapper of Def Jam in the form of a comic book character. On each disc there were 6 tracks from the artists of the label. On the discs &quot;Method Man&quot; and &quot;EPMD&quot; there was a freestyle called &quot;See You In Hell&quot; by Onyx, recorded for DJ Clue&#x27;s mixtape in 1997.

In 1999, Def Jam released a series of 2 CDs entitled &quot;The Unstoppable Def Jam Sampler&quot;, vol I and vol II. On each disc, 4 artists of the Def Jam label were shown in the form of comic book characters. On each disc there were 12 tracks from the artists of the label. On the first CD there was a freestyle called &quot;See You In Hell&quot; by Onyx, recorded for DJ Clue&#x27;s mixtape in 1997.

== The last album on Def Jam ==
&quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; is the last album released by Onyx on Def Jam. JMJ Records as well as Onyx were officially removed from Def Jam on &quot;Black Thursday&quot; - January 21, 1999 - because the label PolyGram, who in 1994 purchased 50% of Sony&#x27;s Def Jam, was sold to Seagram on December 10, 1998.

Only four years earlier, Onyx were &quot;saving Def Jam&quot;, as Sticky Fingaz put it, but now they were hoping the label would save them. Their third—and what would become their final—album on Def Jam, &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot;, barely went gold.&quot;...Our unity with [Jam Master] Jay was broken, our unity with the label was broken&quot;, says Sticky, who came by the office one day and threw a tantrum. &quot;I flipped out, pulling plaques off the wall, throwing shit around, mad&quot;, he remembers.

== Singles ==
Four singles were released from this album: &quot;The Worst&quot;, &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot;, &quot;React&quot;, &quot;Broke Willies&quot;.

The first single, &quot;The Worst&quot; featuring Wu-Tang Clan&#x27;s Method Man, Raekwon and their affiliate Killa Sin was released, December 23, 1997. The song appeared on the &quot;Ride&quot; soundtrack. Fredro Starr and Sticky Fingaz also starred in this movie &quot;Ride&quot;, which was originally called &quot;I-95&quot;. The song peaked at #6 on the &quot;Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales&quot; for two weeks, #22 on the &quot;Hot Rap Singles&quot; for two weeks, and #64 on the Billboard&#x27;s &quot;Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs&quot; for two weeks.
The video was directed by Diane Martel and depicts a post-apocalyptic world where rap is banned. The video was filmed in Chinatown, Manhattan, New York City (Ipoh Garden Malaysian Chinese) in December 1997 and was released on &quot;The BOX&quot; on March 14, 1998.

In February 1998, in an interview for MTV, Sticky Fingaz told about collaborating with Wu-Tang:&quot;...It was a collaboration. Working on the soundtrack was a lot like the tour we did with them, we&#x27;re on the same vibe... It&#x27;s about the worst of the worst, meaning the best. We&#x27;re the worst nightmare for everyone in hip-hop. That shit is fucking right&quot;.

The second single, &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; featuring DMX was released on February 6, 1998. Single was released with a promo sticker &quot;From the forthcoming album &#x27;Shut &#x27;Em Down&#x27; in stores March 17, 1998&quot;. The song debuted at #43 on the &quot;Hot Rap Singles&quot; on February 7, 1998, peaked at #26 on the &quot;Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales&quot; for two weeks, and #61 on the Billboard&#x27;s &quot;Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs&quot;.

In the interview on &quot;White Label Radio&quot;, Fredro Starr told a story about how Onyx recorded the title track. DMX came to the NYC&#x27;s studio, &quot;Sound On Sound Studios, to record the song &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; accompanied by his pitbulls and members of Ruff Ryders, but on the shooting of a video in Downtown Los Angeles, he arrived alone with the dogs!

The video was directed by Gregory Dark and was filmed in Downtown Los Angeles in December 1997 and was released on &quot;The BOX&quot; in February 1998.

The third single, &quot;React&quot; featuring Bonifucco, X1, 50 Cent and Still Livin was released on June 2, 1998. The song peaked at #44 on the &quot;Hot Rap Singles&quot;, and #62 on the Billboard&#x27;s &quot;Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs&quot;.

&quot;React&quot; was debut directorial video of the famous director Little X and premiered in &quot;Rap City&quot; (aired on BET)

50 Cent spoke on his appearance in the video &quot;React&quot; when asked about the last time he went ice-skating.&quot;...It&#x27;s been a long time,&quot; 50 Cent said. &quot;It actually was the Onyx video. I had to learn for the video. I didn&#x27;t know why. I was like &#x27;What the—?&#x27; I asked them to put me in the box. Like an actual [penalty box]&quot;.

The fourth single, &quot;Broke Willies / Ghetto Starz&quot; featuring X1 and Mr. Cheeks was released in September 1998 with a promo sticker &quot;The next single from the gold album Shut &#x27;Em Down &#x27;98&quot;. An alternative radio version of the song &quot;Broke Willies&quot; was released on the singles &quot;React&quot; and &quot;Broke Willies&quot;. Dirty single version is still not released.

The video was directed by Little X on August 1, and premiered in &quot;Rap City&quot; (aired on BET) in September 1998.

The Queens, N.Y., natives give R. Kelly&#x27;s &quot;I Believe I Can Fly&quot; a macabre reworking, offering a somewhat controlled version of their seemingly endless rage.

In February 1998, in an interview for MTV over the phone line, Fredro Starr told about the meaning of the song &quot;Raze It Up&quot;:&quot;...&#x27;Raise It Up&#x27; is about representing wherever you at, representing this real hip-hop shit, so wherever you are on the other end, you can hear it and know we know what&#x27;s going on&quot;.

== Original versions ==
In 2012, the original full version of the song &quot;Take That&quot; was found. The song contains verses from Fredro Starr and Sonny Seeza, which were cut down on the album. Also, original versions of the songs &quot;Raze It Up&quot; and &quot;Broke Willies&quot; were found, originally called &quot;We Comin&#x27; Thru Ya&#x27;ll&quot;. Both songs contain completely different lyrics. All these songs were included in the compilation &quot;Cold Case Files Vol. 2&quot;.

In 2016, the original version of the song &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down Remix&quot; was found. The song contains completely different lyrics from all the members of the group. There&#x27;s also a verse from X1 that did not get on the album.

== Tribute ==
In 2005, &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down (Remix)&quot; was featured in the video game &quot;Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories&quot;.

In 2012, the Mongolian hip-hop group Ice Top recorded a cover version of the song &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down Remix&quot; by Onyx called &quot;Shartai&quot; and then filmed a video for this track.

In 2014, Onyx released an album called &quot;#WakeDaFucUp&quot; that included a song called &quot;The Tunnel&quot; dedicated to the NYC&#x27;s club &quot;The Tunnel&quot; in which the group performed several times. In 1998, Onyx was at the club &quot;The Tunnel&quot; on Sunday May 31, 1998, where they come to present their new album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; which was released after 2 days on Tuesday, June 2, 1998.

In 2017, in honor of 19th anniversary of Onyx&#x27;s album &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; Atlanta&#x27;s rapper Sick Flo, who&#x27;s also a member of Onyx&#x27;s movement &quot;100 MAD&quot;, released a tribute video called &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot;.

==Critical response==
&quot;Shut Em Down&quot; was met with generally positive reviews from music critics. Judson Kilpatrick of Vibe magazine saying &quot;On their third album, Shut &#x27;Em Down. Onyx still sound loud, grimy, and angry. But their usual cutthroat lyric barrages are now balanced by a few mellow tracks, such as “Ghetto Starz” (which features the radio-friendly Lost Boyz rapping over Queen’s thumping 1980 “Another One Bites the Dust”). Onyx even transform the O&#x27;Jays’ 1973 “For the Love of Money” into a self-help message rap-albeit one filled with graphic violence. As Sticky Fingaz says on the title track, “If men are dogs / I&#x27;m the Rottweiler.” Shut ’Em Down is worthy. This time their beats are slightly more delicate, but Onyx are anything but soft.&quot;

Soren Baker of The Source gave the album three and a half stars out of five, saying &quot;Their third opus, Shut &#x27;Em Down, arrives with a sound and attitude that lies somewhere between their first two projects. The excitement of “Raze It Up” and the gut-busting title track (which features yet another blazing performance from DМХ) will appeal to those thirsting for the rougher side of things. Onyx occasionally falter with their attempts at capturing the R&amp;B/hip-hop aesthetic. Evidently, after watching most of their peers win with club songs, the bald-headed wonders decided to follow suit. “Ghetto Starz” features a guest appearance from the always lively Lost Boyz, while R. Kelly&#x27;s “I Believe I Can Fly” gets a ghetto revamping on the bizarre “I Don&#x27;t Wanna Die”. No question. the group is better suited when they stick to their guns and leave that club shit to P-Diddy and his Family. Flaunting a more expanded musical repertoire. Onyx&#x27;s &#x27;Shut &#x27;Еm Down&#x27; will probably not overtake the current commercial stance of the rap game, but, for the most part, it serves as an appealing reminder of why this Q-borough crew blew up in the first place.

&quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; is a favorite album of Onyx&#x27;s Sticky Fingaz.

==Track listing==
;Notes
* &quot;The Worst&quot; contains a hidden track - &quot;Overshine&quot; which is track 18b here.

==Personnel==
Credits for &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; adapted from AllMusic and CD booklet.
* Onyx — executive producer, primary artist, producer
* Jason Mizell — executive producer
* Randy Allen — executive producer
* Irv Gotti — A&amp;R direction
* Khary &quot;Eat &#x27;Em Up&quot; Lee — A&amp;R direction
* Aaron Seawood — management
* Tom Coyne — mastering
* Jazz Young — marketing
* The Drawing Board — art direction, design
* Clay McBride — photography
* Connie Johnson — stylist
* Lydia High — project coordinator
* DJ LS One — scratches
* DMX — guest artist, performer, primary artist
* The Lost Boyz — guest artist
* Method Man — vocals
* Raekwon — vocals
* Bubba Smith — vocals
* Bud&#x27;da — producer
* DJ Scratch — producer
* Keith Horne — producer
* Patrick Viala — remixing
* Tony Black — mixing, remixing
* Don Elliott — engineer, mixing
* Ken &quot;Duro&quot; Ifill — engineer, mixing
* Vinny Nicoletti — mixing
* John Klemmer — sample source
* J.R. Cobb — composer
* Lowell Fulson — composer
* Erin Hinson — composer
* Ernie Isley — composer
* Chris Jasper — composer
* K. Jones — composer
* Jimmy McCracklin — composer
* Mr. Cheeks — composer
* J.B. Moore — composer
* Richard Rodgers — composer
* Fred Scruggs — composer
* Clifford Smith — composer
* George Spivey — composer
* T. Taylor — composer
* K. Walker — composer
* C. Woods — composer
== Leftover tracks ==
Songs that were recorded in 1996–1997 during the &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down&quot; sessions but cut from the final album:
* &quot;Mad World&quot; (feat. Who$ane &amp; X1) (prod. by Self Service)
* &quot;My Time&quot; by X1 (prod. by Self Service)
* &quot;Hi Hoe&quot;
* &quot;Crime Stories&quot;
* &quot;Anything Goes&quot;
* &quot;See You In Hell&quot;
* &quot;See You In Hell, Pt. 2&quot; (also known as &quot;Livin&#x27; In Hell&quot;) (feat. X1)
* &quot;Shut &#x27;Em Down Remix&quot; (Original Version) (feat. Noreaga, X1 and Big Pun) (prod. by Patrick Viala)
* &quot;Wili&#x27;n Wili&#x27;n&quot; (feat. All City and Gang Green)
* &quot;Set It Str8&quot; (feat. X1 and Dez from Gang Green)
* &quot;Hydro&quot; (prod. by Keith Horne)
* &quot;Pussy On The Regular&quot; (prod. by Keith Horne)
* &quot;Take That&quot; (Full Version) (prod. by Keith Horne)
* &quot;Raze It Up&quot; (Alternate Lyrics) (prod. by Keith Horne)
* &quot;I Don&#x27;t Wanna Die&quot; (prod. by Keith Horne)
* &quot;Love Of Money&quot; (feat. X1 and Chocolate) (prod. by Keith Horne)
* &quot;We Comin&#x27; Thru Ya&#x27;ll&quot; (prod. by Keith Horne)
* &quot;Love Of Money &#x27;96&quot; (feat. X1 and Chocolate) (Unreleased rock version with different lyrics)
* &quot;Vissi D&#x27;Arte&quot; (feat. Kathy Magestro) (prod. by Voelker Brothers)
* &quot;Ghetto Starz&quot; (feat. X1 and Mr. Cheeks) (prod. by Bud&#x27;da)
* &quot;Hey!&quot; (also known as &quot;Bring It&quot;) (The Philadelphia Flyers half time anthem) (prod. by Keith Horne)

==Charts==
===Weekly charts===
===Singles chart positions===
==References==
== External links ==
*Shut &#x27;Em Down at Discogs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q936693" start="71" end="75" title="Onyx (group)" label="Onyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127073" start="106" end="117" title="JMJ Records" label="JMJ Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q654283" start="122" end="129" title="Def Jam" label="Def Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011339" start="194" end="204" title="DJ Scratch" label="DJ Scratch"/>
<link wikidata="Q291286" start="208" end="212" title="EPMD" label="EPMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983745" start="214" end="225" title="Bud&amp;#x27;da" label="Bud&amp;#x27;da"/>
<link wikidata="Q28355271" start="302" end="304" title="X1 (rapper)" label="X1"/>
<link wikidata="Q223769" start="306" end="309" title="DMX" label="DMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="326" end="333" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728661" start="364" end="372" title="All City (rap group)" label="All City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353885" start="374" end="384" title="Mr. Cheeks" label="Mr. Cheeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q52463" start="386" end="398" title="Wu-Tang Clan" label="Wu-Tang Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q53549" start="400" end="408" title="N.O.R.E." label="N.O.R.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q380656" start="410" end="417" title="Big Pun" label="Big Pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="495" end="520" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="542" end="568" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="646" end="655" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776205" start="664" end="673" title="The Worst (Wu-Tang Clan and Onyx song)" label="The Worst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505518" start="675" end="693" title="Shut &amp;#x27;Em Down (Onyx song)" label="Shut &amp;#x27;Em Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300241" start="698" end="703" title="React (Onyx song)" label="React"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="974" end="982" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969696" start="1046" end="1053" title="Seagram" label="Seagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q52158699" start="1264" end="1273" title="Chyskillz" label="Chyskillz"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1367" end="1385" title="Billboard Magazine" label="Billboard Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="1449" end="1452" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q704742" start="1474" end="1487" title="Sticky Fingaz" label="Sticky Fingaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1821" end="1834" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1839" end="1850" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q223769" start="1914" end="1917" title="DMX (rapper)" label="DMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="1978" end="1985" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728661" start="2056" end="2064" title="All City (rap group)" label="All City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353885" start="2100" end="2110" title="Mr. Cheeks" label="Mr. Cheeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741337" start="2112" end="2121" title="Killa Sin" label="Killa Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q298694" start="2123" end="2133" title="Method Man" label="Method Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q320167" start="2135" end="2142" title="Raekwon" label="Raekwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q53549" start="2144" end="2152" title="N.O.R.E." label="N.O.R.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q380656" start="2157" end="2164" title="Big Pun" label="Big Pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011339" start="2237" end="2247" title="DJ Scratch" label="DJ Scratch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983745" start="2339" end="2350" title="Bud&amp;#x27;da" label="Bud&amp;#x27;da"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300241" start="2381" end="2386" title="React (Onyx song)" label="React"/>
<link wikidata="Q52463" start="2464" end="2476" title="Wu-Tang Clan" label="Wu-Tang Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776205" start="2490" end="2499" title="The Worst (Wu-Tang Clan and Onyx song)" label="The Worst"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="2963" end="2977" title="Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312462" start="2996" end="3004" title="Miss You (The Rolling Stones song)" label="Miss You"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505518" start="3244" end="3262" title="Shut &amp;#x27;em Down (Onyx song)" label="Shut &amp;#x27;Em Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q380656" start="3348" end="3355" title="Big Pun" label="Big Pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q273055" start="3873" end="3881" title="R. Kelly" label="R. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542315" start="4412" end="4437" title="40th Annual Grammy Awards" label="40th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q753437" start="4474" end="4495" title="Radio City Music Hall" label="Radio City Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4497" end="4510" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q336924" start="4531" end="4553" title="Ol&amp;#x27; Dirty Bastard" label="Ol&amp;#x27; Dirty Bastard"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="4673" end="4680" title="Grammys" label="Grammys"/>
<link wikidata="Q267438" start="5737" end="5749" title="Shawn Colvin" label="Shawn Colvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027904" start="5801" end="5817" title="Grammy Award for Song of the Year" label="Song of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q52463" start="5841" end="5853" title="Wu-Tang Clan" label="Wu-Tang Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367988" start="5967" end="5998" title="Grammy Award for Best Rap Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Rap Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006529" start="6026" end="6041" title="Wu-Tang Forever" label="Wu-Tang Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="6056" end="6066" title="Puff Daddy" label="Puff Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282581" start="6080" end="6090" title="No Way Out (Puff Daddy album)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142209" start="7969" end="7991" title="Cold Case Files (album)" label="Cold Case Files Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="9946" end="9954" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969696" start="10018" end="10025" title="Seagram" label="Seagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q654283" start="10244" end="10251" title="Def Jam" label="Def Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776205" start="10746" end="10755" title="The Worst (Wu-Tang Clan and Onyx song)" label="The Worst"/>
<link wikidata="Q52463" start="10772" end="10784" title="Wu-Tang Clan" label="Wu-Tang Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298694" start="10792" end="10802" title="Method Man" label="Method Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q320167" start="10804" end="10811" title="Raekwon" label="Raekwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741337" start="10832" end="10841" title="Killa Sin" label="Killa Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332484" start="10906" end="10910" title="Ride (soundtrack)" label="Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q730261" start="10929" end="10941" title="Fredro Starr" label="Fredro Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q704742" start="10946" end="10959" title="Sticky Fingaz" label="Sticky Fingaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4143086" start="10993" end="10997" title="Ride (1998 film)" label="Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580002" start="11086" end="11120" title="Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales" label="Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322696" start="11159" end="11174" title="Hot Rap Singles" label="Hot Rap Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="11211" end="11220" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="11234" end="11259" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658611" start="11307" end="11319" title="Diane Martel" label="Diane Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719572" start="11513" end="11520" title="The Box (U.S. TV channel)" label="The BOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="11585" end="11588" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505518" start="11948" end="11966" title="Shut &amp;#x27;Em Down (Onyx song)" label="Shut &amp;#x27;Em Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q223769" start="11983" end="11986" title="DMX (rapper)" label="DMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322696" start="12195" end="12210" title="Hot Rap Singles" label="Hot Rap Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580002" start="12265" end="12299" title="Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales" label="Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="12336" end="12345" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="12359" end="12384" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="12527" end="12530" title="NYC" label="NYC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144318" start="12645" end="12653" title="pitbulls" label="pitbulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193843" start="12669" end="12680" title="Ruff Ryders" label="Ruff Ryders"/>
<link wikidata="Q995043" start="12716" end="12736" title="Downtown Los Angeles" label="Downtown Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q946314" start="12797" end="12809" title="Gregory Dark" label="Gregory Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q995043" start="12828" end="12848" title="Downtown Los Angeles" label="Downtown Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719572" start="12892" end="12899" title="The Box (U.S. TV channel)" label="The BOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300241" start="12949" end="12954" title="React (Onyx song)" label="React"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="12986" end="12993" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322696" start="13076" end="13091" title="Hot Rap Singles" label="Hot Rap Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="13114" end="13123" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="13137" end="13162" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256737" start="13240" end="13248" title="Little X" label="Little X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930183" start="13272" end="13280" title="Rap City" label="Rap City"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="13297" end="13300" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="13303" end="13310" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353885" start="13749" end="13759" title="Mr. Cheeks" label="Mr. Cheeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256737" start="14104" end="14112" title="Little X" label="Little X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930183" start="14149" end="14157" title="Rap City" label="Rap City"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="14174" end="14177" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="14410" end="14413" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q936693" start="15180" end="15202" title="Cold Case Files Vol. 2" label="Cold Case Files Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15547" end="15585" title="Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories" label="Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q107033631" start="15607" end="15624" title="Mongolian hip hop" label="Mongolian hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978825" start="15834" end="15846" title="Wakedafucup" label="#WakeDaFucUp"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="15921" end="15924" title="NYC" label="NYC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853273" start="15943" end="15953" title="Tunnel (New York nightclub)" label="The Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="16304" end="16311" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591288" start="16563" end="16576" title="music critics" label="music critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q266786" start="16599" end="16612" title="Vibe magazine" label="Vibe magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27680828" start="17262" end="17273" title="Soren Baker" label="Soren Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140254" start="17277" end="17287" title="The Source" label="The Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q704742" start="18518" end="18531" title="Sticky Fingaz" label="Sticky Fingaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="18727" end="18735" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="21504" end="21523" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646680" wikidata="Q610089" url="?curid=646680" title="PanAmSat">
<text>PanAmSat Corporation was a satellite service provider headquartered in Greenwich, Connecticut, United States. Founded in 1984 by Reynold &quot;Rene&quot; Anselmo, it operated a fleet of communications satellites used by the entertainment industry, news agencies, internet service providers, government agencies, and telecommunication companies. Anselmo got the idea for PanAmSat from Norm Leventhal, a communications lawyer in Washington, D.C., to whom he had turned to for advice regarding difficulties he was encountering in getting reasonably priced satellite transmission for his Spanish International Network (SIN), the current-day Univision. Anselmo financed the entire project himself and Leventhal&#x27;s law firm, hiring Martin Rothblatt for special satellite technical advice, filed for approval from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and lining up an initial satellite from RCA Astro-Electronics and a heavily discounted launch from Arianespace.

PanAmSat effectively broke the monopoly on international satellite communications which was held by Intelsat, an international treaty-based organization founded and owned by several countries including the United States. PanAmSat, led by Anselmo, successfully lobbied the United States Congress to permit it to operate globally, competing against Intelsat. Univision would also gain a nationwide cable audience through PanAmSat&#x27;s efforts, gaining a head start in Spanish-language television in the United States and remaining the #1 Spanish network to this day.

Following the death of Rene Anselmo in 1995, his widow Mary Anselmo controlled the company for a time. PanAmSat was sold to Hughes Electronics, a division of General Motors, in a US$3 billion cash and stock deal. The satellite operations continued to be under PanAmSat with Hughes being the majority shareholder. In May 1997, Hughes Communication Galaxy merged with PanAmSat, adding 9 more satellites to its fleet. In 2003, News Corporation purchased Hughes Electronic&#x27;s PanAmSat division and on 24 April 2004 sold PanAmSat to a consortium of private equity firms in a leveraged buyout including Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co. (KKR), Carlyle Group and Providence Equity Partners for US$4.3 billion.

== 2004 leveraged buyout ==
KKR led the 2004 leveraged buyout by purchasing a 44% stake in the company. Carlyle and Providence each invested 27%, with management representing the remainder of the equity. The consortium invested only US$550 million in equity, financing the remainder through bank loans and bonds. The transaction closed in August 2004. One month after the buyout, the company issued an additional US$250 million in discount notes used to pay the consortium dividends. Three months later, PanAmSat filed an initial public offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).

In an ironic twist of fate, its private equity owners sold PanAmSat to its archrival Intelsat in August 2005 for a total of US$4.3 billion in a deal finally consummated in July 2006. At the time of its sale, PanAmSat was the world&#x27;s leading carrier of TV channels. In combination with INTELSAT (which had also gone private under private equity ownership in 2001), the new company — called Intelsat — is the world&#x27;s largest commercial satellite company, with 53 spacecraft serving over 200 countries, with nearly 1400 employees.

In March 2007, &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine estimated the net worth of Rene Anselmo&#x27;s widow, Mary Anselmo at US$1 billion. Anselmo, 78, lives in Greenwich, Connecticut.

== Satellite fleet ==
== References ==

== External links ==
* Official website
* SPACE.com article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q610089" start="0" end="20" title="PanAmSat" label="PanAmSat Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="71" end="93" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="95" end="108" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312873" start="129" end="161" title="Rene Anselmo" label="Reynold &amp;quot;Rene&amp;quot; Anselmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="186" end="210" title="communications satellite" label="communications satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="224" end="246" title="Entertainment" label="entertainment industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="248" end="261" title="news agency" label="news agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="263" end="288" title="internet service provider" label="internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="316" end="333" title="Telecommunications" label="telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="427" end="443" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="584" end="613" title="Univision" label="Spanish International Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="637" end="646" title="Univision" label="Univision"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777103" start="730" end="746" title="Martine Rothblatt" label="Martin Rothblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="815" end="848" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913694" start="895" end="916" title="Lockheed Martin Space" label="RCA Astro-Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q309867" start="954" end="965" title="Arianespace" label="Arianespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="1068" end="1076" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1240" end="1262" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778965" start="1591" end="1603" title="Mary Anselmo" label="Mary Anselmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33127619" start="1660" end="1678" title="Hughes Electronics" label="Hughes Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="1694" end="1708" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q185278" start="1960" end="1976" title="News Corporation" label="News Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="2084" end="2098" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058381" start="2110" end="2126" title="leveraged buyout" label="leveraged buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="2137" end="2170" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q926806" start="2178" end="2191" title="The Carlyle Group" label="Carlyle Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113908" start="2196" end="2222" title="Providence Equity" label="Providence Equity Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="2440" end="2446" title="Equity (finance)" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="2535" end="2555" title="debt" label="bank loans and bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="2717" end="2725" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389632" start="2757" end="2762" title="SEC filing" label="filed"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="2766" end="2789" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="2799" end="2833" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="2927" end="2935" title="INTELSAT" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="3236" end="3244" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="3402" end="3408" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646682" wikidata="Q5196288" url="?curid=646682" title="Custard Factory">
<text>The Custard Factory is a creative and digital business workspace complex, including independent shops, cafes and bars, on the site of what was the Bird&#x27;s Custard factory off High Street, Deritend, in the Digbeth area of central Birmingham, England. 

==Development==
The Custard Factory complex is set in fifteen acres (60,000m2) of factory buildings, originally constructed for Sir Alfred Frederick Bird (1849–1922), the son of Alfred Bird (1811–1878), the inventor of egg-free custard. The architectural firm commissioned to design the building was Hamblins. At one time, a thousand people worked at the factory. The Bird company moved to Banbury in 1964.

The Custard Factory project was started by Bennie Gray and substantially expanded by his son Lucan Gray, who owned and ran the project until June 2017. A City Grant Award of £800,000 was used to start the redevelopment in January 1992. This public sector funding levered in £1.6 million of private sector investment for the refurbishment of of redundant buildings, providing 145 units for use by artists, designers and communicators. The architect was the Birmingham-based firm, Glenn Howells Architects. The first phase created around 300 jobs. On the completion of the Custard Factory project, an anticipated 1,000 jobs will have been created.

Phase one consisted of the refurbishment of Scott House which is now home to a community of media companies, artists and small creative enterprises. The loading bay was turned into a lake around which are set 200 studio workshops above ground floor level. On the ground floor itself are meeting rooms, dance studios, holistic therapy rooms, a café and a record and clothes shop. In the foyer are art display cases with a larger gallery space at the rear. A huge iron dragon sculpture crawls up the exterior rear elevation. There are stages for musicians, DJs and rappers and a 220-seat theatre.

Phase two - originally named &#x27;The Greenhouse&#x27;, but now &#x27;Gibb Square&#x27; after the Gibb Street location - was completed in 2002. It focuses on new media and media businesses and includes a hundred studio/offices plus galleries, restaurants and shops set around a central pool with fountains. The pool is sometimes emptied to allow for dance music events. The Green Man, a high sculpture by Tawny Gray made from vegetation and stone, overlooks Gibb Street.

===Zellig===

In March 2007, the regional development agency, Advantage West Midlands, announced new funding of £9.6m for 100 new office and workspace units. The result was Zellig (former Devonshire House), a restored grade II listed building, which opened in May 2010 and features a new sculpture, the Deluge, by Toin Adams.

==Co-located media training==
The presence of the Custard Factory has drawn two media training agencies to locate nearby. The old Trades Union Studies Centre is now a media and arts annexe of South Birmingham College and in 2005, the VIVID media centre moved from the Jewellery Quarter. Also nearby is Access Creative College in Birmingham, a specialist 16-19 education provider in creative vocational qualifications.

About away is the new &quot;Progress Works&quot; complex, opened in 2005 as part of the Custard Factory quarter, on Heath Mill Lane. &quot;The Bond&quot; complex is also a short walk away.

Three-quarters of a mile north is BIAD, the largest British university art &amp; design teaching and research centre outside London.

===Nearby entertainment and shopping locations===
Nearby are two music venues, The Institute (formerly The Sanctuary) and AIR, home to and owned by Godskitchen the trance superclub. The Custard Factory is close to the Old Crown pub, a half-timbered building dating from the 14th century, Birmingham Coach Station, and the Bull Ring which is Birmingham&#x27;s main shopping centre, with its landmark Selfridges building.

==Occupants==
Notable past and current occupants include:

*Huel
*&quot;Fused Magazine&quot;
*Cartoonist Alex Hughes
*Maverick Television
*North One Television
*Beer Digbeth (formerly Clink Beer)
*Punch Records
*Rhubarb Radio
*The Gadget Show
*Ocean Colour Scene
*ASOS.com
*Rare
*Codemasters
*Gensler
*Powershop
*Birmingham Pilates Studios
*No Basic Bombshell
*Fix My Broken Mac

==References==

*£10m expansion at Custard Factory hints at greater ambition for Digbeth 

==External links==
*Custard Factory
*1890 Ordnance Survey map of the Custard Factory site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5196288" start="4" end="19" title="Custard Factory" label="Custard Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430685" start="147" end="166" title="Bird&amp;#x27;s Custard" label="Bird&amp;#x27;s Custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262603" start="192" end="200" title="Deritend" label="Deritend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275561" start="209" end="216" title="Digbeth" label="Digbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="233" end="243" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q81292" start="318" end="322" title="acre" label="acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525969" start="384" end="409" title="Sir Alfred Bird, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Alfred Frederick Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q684195" start="434" end="445" title="Alfred Bird" label="Alfred Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q625825" start="484" end="491" title="custard" label="custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435806" start="637" end="653" title="Kraft Foods Banbury" label="moved to Banbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568878" start="1143" end="1167" title="Glenn Howells" label="Glenn Howells Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="1628" end="1636" title="holistic" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q683794" start="2066" end="2075" title="new media" label="new media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460159" start="2282" end="2291" title="Green Man" label="Green Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="2300" end="2309" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9082074" start="2313" end="2323" title="Tawny Gray" label="Tawny Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565336" start="2899" end="2923" title="South Birmingham College" label="South Birmingham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937831" start="2941" end="2946" title="Vivid (media arts)" label="VIVID"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189579" start="2975" end="2992" title="Jewellery Quarter" label="Jewellery Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547145" start="3350" end="3354" title="Birmingham Institute of Art and Design" label="BIAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3441" end="3447" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275562" start="3529" end="3542" title="Digbeth Institute" label="The Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651989" start="3572" end="3575" title="AIR (nightclub)" label="AIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576905" start="3598" end="3609" title="Godskitchen" label="Godskitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170435" start="3614" end="3620" title="trance music" label="trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504364" start="3621" end="3630" title="superclub" label="superclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754826" start="3668" end="3677" title="Old Crown, Birmingham" label="Old Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916668" start="3738" end="3762" title="Birmingham Coach Station" label="Birmingham Coach Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734894" start="3772" end="3781" title="Bull Ring, Birmingham" label="Bull Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475656" start="3849" end="3859" title="Selfridges" label="Selfridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023229" start="3931" end="3935" title="Huel" label="Huel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509997" start="3943" end="3957" title="Fused Magazine" label="Fused Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717206" start="3976" end="3987" title="Alex Hughes (cartoonist)" label="Alex Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794184" start="3989" end="4008" title="Maverick Television" label="Maverick Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056228" start="4010" end="4030" title="North One Television" label="North One Television"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4032" end="4066" title="Beer Digbeth (formerly Clink Beer)" label="Beer Digbeth (formerly Clink Beer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259944" start="4068" end="4081" title="Punch Records" label="Punch Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q42310747" start="4083" end="4096" title="Rhubarb Radio (Birmingham)" label="Rhubarb Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344874" start="4098" end="4113" title="The Gadget Show" label="The Gadget Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332158" start="4115" end="4133" title="Ocean Colour Scene" label="Ocean Colour Scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q211951" start="4135" end="4143" title="ASOS.com" label="ASOS.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q642707" start="4145" end="4149" title="Rare (company)" label="Rare"/>
<link wikidata="Q23901" start="4151" end="4162" title="Codemasters" label="Codemasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100834" start="4164" end="4171" title="Gensler" label="Gensler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236844" start="4173" end="4182" title="Powershop" label="Powershop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4232" end="4249" title="Fix My Broken Mac" label="Fix My Broken Mac"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646696" wikidata="Q748455" url="?curid=646696" title="Cajón">
<text>A cajón ( ; &quot;box, crate, drawer&quot;) is a box-shaped percussion instrument originally from Peru, played by slapping the front or rear faces (generally thin plywood) with the hands, fingers, or sometimes implements such as brushes, mallets, or sticks. 

Cajóns are primarily played in Afro-Peruvian music (specifically música criolla), but have made their way into flamenco as well. The term cajón is also applied to other box drums used in Latin American music, such as the Cuban cajón de rumba and the Mexican cajón de tapeo.

==Description==
Sheets of 13 to 19 mm ( to inch) thick wood are generally used for five sides of the box. A thinner sheet of plywood is nailed on as the sixth side, and acts as the striking surface or head. The striking surface of the cajón drum is commonly referred to as the &quot;tapa&quot;. A sound hole is cut on the back side. The modern cajón may have rubber feet, and has several screws at the top for adjusting percussive timbre.

== Origins and evolution ==

The cajón is the most widely used Afro-Peruvian musical instrument since the late 19th century. Enslaved people of west and central African origin in the Americas are considered to be the source of the cajón drum. Currently, the instrument is common in musical performance throughout some of the Americas and Spain. The cajón was developed during the periods of slavery in coastal Peru. The instrument reached a peak in popularity by 1850, and by the end of the 19th century cajón players were experimenting with the design of the instrument by bending some of the planks in the cajón&#x27;s body to alter the instrument&#x27;s patterns of sound vibration. After slavery the cajón was spread to a much larger audience including Criollos.

Given that the cajón comes from musicians who were enslaved in the Spanish colonial Americas, there are two complementary origin theories for the instrument. It is possible that the drum is a direct descendant of a number of boxlike musical instruments from west and central Africa, especially Angola, and the Antilles. These instruments were adapted by enslaved people from the Spanish shipping crates at their disposal. In port cities like Matanzas, Cuba, codfish shipping crates and small dresser drawers became similar instruments. Peruvian musician and ethnomusicologist Susana Baca recounts her mother&#x27;s story that the cajón originated as &quot;the box of the people who carried fruit and worked in the ports,&quot; putting it down to play on whenever they had a moment. Another theory is that enslaved people used boxes as musical instruments to subvert Spanish colonial bans on music in predominantly African areas, essentially disguising their instruments.

While early 20th century versions of the festejo appeared to have been performed without the cajón, especially due to the influence of Perú Negro, a musical ensemble founded in 1969, the cajón began to be more important than the guitar and, indeed, became &quot;a new symbol of Peruvian blackness&quot;.

After a short 1977 visit to a diplomat’s party and a TV presentation in Lima along with Peruvian percussionist Caitro Soto, Spanish flamenco guitar player Paco de Lucía brought a cajón to Spain to use it in his own music, after being impressed by the rhythmic possibilities of the instrument. According to percussion historians, it was Pepe Ébano who introduced the cajón into Spanish flamenco, later used with Paco de Lucía in the percussion of &quot;Entre dos aguas&quot;. In 2001, the cajón was declared National Heritage by the Peruvian National Institute of Culture. In 2014, the Organization of American States declared the cajón an &quot;Instrument of Peru for the Americas&quot;.

== Contemporary music ==

In the 2000s (decade), the cajón was heard extensively in Coastal Peruvian musical styles such as Tondero, Zamacueca and Peruvian Waltz, Spanish modern Flamenco and certain styles of modern Cuban Rumba. The modern cajón is often used to accompany a solo acoustic guitar or piano. The cajón is becoming rapidly popular in blues, pop, rock, funk, world music, jazz, etc. The cajón is often used as a bass drum by bands instead of a full drum kit when performing in minimalist settings, as the cajón can simultaneously serve as both a bass drum and a seat for the drummer. Though occasionally played by some bands in place of the &#x27;, the cajón has become a popular instrument in the folk music of Ireland, where the quieter and higher-pitched &#x27; traditional frame drum serves the same purpose, and has a unique playing style.

==Playing styles ==

The player sits astride the box, tilting it at an angle while striking the head between their knees. The percussionist can play the sides with the top of their palms and fingers for additional sounds. Some harder hitting players use protective drumming gloves to protect their hands from bruises and blisters. Some percussionists attach a bass drum pedal to the instrument, enabling them to play it with a single foot. There are also lap cajons (which are smaller and more portable) that sit on the lap of the musician. 

The instrument has been played not only with hands, but also with plastic and metal brushes, as used for drum kits, for example with the Pen Technique, developed by Patrizio Migliarini, which allows the musician to play jazz and funky rhythms with a completeness and dynamic richness close to that of a drums, through the use of metal brushes. Another way of playing the cajón is to use an ordinary bass drum pedal, thus turning the cajón into an indirect percussion instrument which can be played with the feet. This enables the player to beat it just like a pedal-bass drum, thus leaving the hands (and one other foot) free to play other instruments. On the other hand, it also restricts the player&#x27;s standard cajón-playing position, as when the cajón is placed on the ground, in the bass drum location, it is hard for the performer to slap it with her or his hands.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==

* Afro-Peruvian music
* Jawbone (instrument)
* Festejo

==References==
==External links==
*How to Build a Cajón</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q748455" start="2" end="7" title="Cajón" label="cajón"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="60" end="81" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="98" end="102" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="163" end="170" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993565" start="291" end="310" title="Afro-Peruvian music" label="Afro-Peruvian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950428" start="325" end="339" title="música criolla" label="música criolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="371" end="379" title="flamenco" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q727781" start="447" end="467" title="Latin American music" label="Latin American music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018028" start="487" end="501" title="cajón de rumba" label="cajón de rumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018032" start="518" end="532" title="cajón de tapeo" label="cajón de tapeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221712" start="832" end="842" title="sound hole" label="sound hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="955" end="965" title="percussive" label="percussive"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="966" end="972" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="1366" end="1373" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="1732" end="1740" title="Criollo people" label="Criollos"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="2037" end="2043" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q166131" start="2053" end="2061" title="Antilles" label="Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q272471" start="2185" end="2199" title="Matanzas, Cuba" label="Matanzas, Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="2201" end="2208" title="codfish" label="codfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q152266" start="2319" end="2330" title="Susana Baca" label="Susana Baca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445668" start="2756" end="2763" title="festejo" label="festejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171305" start="2850" end="2860" title="Perú Negro" label="Perú Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392765" start="3131" end="3142" title="Caitro Soto" label="Caitro Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="3152" end="3160" title="flamenco" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q153300" start="3175" end="3188" title="Paco de Lucía" label="Paco de Lucía"/>
<link wikidata="Q70876000" start="3356" end="3366" title="Pepe Ébano" label="Pepe Ébano"/>
<link wikidata="Q55776593" start="3472" end="3487" title="Entre dos aguas (song)" label="Entre dos aguas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973631" start="3561" end="3590" title="National Institute of Culture" label="National Institute of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="3605" end="3636" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531526" start="3833" end="3840" title="Tondero" label="Tondero"/>
<link wikidata="Q222445" start="3842" end="3851" title="marinera" label="Zamacueca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509521" start="3856" end="3870" title="Vals (Peruvian)" label="Peruvian Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="3887" end="3895" title="Flamenco" label="Flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q388475" start="3925" end="3936" title="Cuban Rumba" label="Cuban Rumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="3989" end="4004" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="4008" end="4013" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="4056" end="4061" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="4063" end="4066" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="4068" end="4072" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="4074" end="4078" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="4080" end="4091" title="world music" label="world music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="4093" end="4097" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482056" start="4419" end="4440" title="folk music of Ireland" label="folk music of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="4927" end="4936" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="5215" end="5223" title="drum kit" label="drum kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="5676" end="5685" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993565" start="6017" end="6036" title="Afro-Peruvian music" label="Afro-Peruvian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394579" start="6039" end="6059" title="Jawbone (instrument)" label="Jawbone (instrument)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445668" start="6062" end="6069" title="Festejo" label="Festejo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646709" wikidata="Q4805012" url="?curid=646709" title="Ashford United F.C.">
<text>Ashford United F.C. are an English football club based in Ashford, Kent. The &#x27;new&#x27; United was formed in 2011, resurrecting the name used by the town&#x27;s football club between 1891 and 1907. Following the demise of the original Ashford United club in 1907 and through to 1928 Ashford was represented by Ashford Railway Works FC and after that between 1930 and 2010 by Ashford Town F.C. The current club is effectively a &#x27;phoenix club&#x27; having risen from the ashes of the financial ruin of its predecessor. Although not a supporter owned club, like most non-league clubs, it relies on contributions of volunteers and supporters.

Ashford United are currently members of the following their record-breaking promotion from the Southern Counties East Football League in the 2016–17 season. They are one of very few semi-professional teams in England to have a synthetic 3G pitch, which is located at their home stadium &#x27;The Green Box Stadium&#x27; formerly known as Homelands.

==History==

&quot;For each season&#x27;s League and Cup records of the Ashford clubs see: List of Ashford United F.C. seasons.&quot;

===South Eastern Rangers (1881–1891)===

The roots of senior football in Ashford originate in 1881 with the South Eastern Rangers who played at Newtown Green (with dressing rooms in the adjacent Alfred Arms). Over a six-year period between 1886 and 1891 the club on four occasions reached the final of the Kent county knock-out competition (the fore-runner of the Kent Senior Cup): in 1886 and 1888 playing for the Kent Badge they lost on both occasions to Chatham, (the second loss being a 6–1 defeat in a replay at the Victoria Ground in Ashford following a goalless first match); and in 1889 and 1891 lost in the final of the Kent Cup to Chatham and the Lincoln Regiment respectively (in the intervening season of 1890 the Rangers were Kent Cup semi-finalists).

In May 1889 to commemorate the club being runners-up in three Kent Badge/Cup finals in four seasons the Kent FA presented the club with a small shield. However the loss in the 1891 Kent Cup final sparked bad feeling between the club and the Kent FA – the club felt insulted by the ‘quality and character’ of the losers medals and returned them and subsequently resigned from the Kent FA. Against this backdrop was news of formation of a new club.

===Ashford United (1891–1907)===

In July 1891 the first Ashford United F.C. was formed by the amalgamation of the South Eastern Rangers and Kentish Express FC – albeit a hold-out faction of the former club continued to exist. The new club&#x27;s home ground was behind the Victoria Hotel and the team played in a white shirt (with blue Maltese Cross) and blue shorts. About 700 people yielding gate receipts of £5 were present for &#x27;United&#x27;s&#x27; first match at the Victoria Ground on 19 September 1891, a defeat by the Highland Light Infantry 1–5. Two weeks later the club played their first FA Cup match, an away first round qualifying tie in which they were defeated 6–2 at Crouch End. Later, on 24 October 1891 Ashford played host to a touring Canadian team; the result was a 1–3 loss (Ashford&#x27;s scorer J Hamblin) in a match notable for the sending-off (for verbally abusing the referee) of one of the Dominion&#x27;s players. In their first tilt at the Kent Cup ‘United’ reached the semi-final in February 1892 before losing out to Gravesend.

In April 1893 the team exceeded the exploits of their forerunners and defeated Chatham 2–0 to win the Kent Cup (United scorers: Archie Munro and Frank Young). Despite Ashford&#x27;s protestations that the match should have been played at a neutral venue, it was played at Chatham. Ashford had been the beneficiaries of a bye prior to the final – in the semi-final they were due to meet the West Kent Regiment but they were posted to Ireland before the match took place.

The following season, in October 1893, in an 1893–94 FA Cup first round qualifying match Ashford United suffered their – and for every Ashford club thereafter – worst defeat: a 12–0 loss to Woolwich Arsenal (for whom it was an all-time biggest goal difference equalling win). The tie was not without controversy as before the match it was reported in the Kentish Independent Newspaper that Arsenal, a team playing at a higher level (they had that season joined the Football League Second Division), expected a one-sided victory and had openly offered Ashford £20 and the promise of a friendly match against their second team in Ashford if they would scratch from the tie: the offer was not accepted.

The club were founder members of the Kent League in 1894–95 finishing seventh of nine teams. For the following season an externally financed 200 seat stand was constructed at the Victoria Ground. With many competing teams now turning to professionalism the amateur &#x27;United&#x27; team finished in twelfth and bottom place in the 1895–96 Kent League. Consequently, to preserve its division one status, the team faced a &#x27;test&#x27; match against second division Faversham: the result was a 5–0 victory for &#x27;United&#x27;. As it transpired it was irrelevant as the larger North Kent clubs departed the Kent League to join the higher ranked Southern League and Ashford and Faversham were both included in the revised 1896–97 Kent League Division 1. Additionally Ashford joined the top division of the newly instituted East Kent League with a reserve team in the second division for one season. &#x27;United&#x27; joined the ranks of professional clubs in the 1897–98 season and began engaging paid players.

In 1898 the club moved to a new home stadium at Godinton Road and the stand from the Victoria ground was relocated. The new ground was beyond the Godinton Road railway bridge and thus a fair distance from the clubs core area of support. The 1899 Kent Senior Cup Final (in which Maidstone beat Folkestone) was staged at the new stadium. &#x27;United&#x27; were essentially a mid-table team during their seasons in the Kent League. A notable result was a 0–10 defeat at Sittingbourne in a Kent League match in January 1899.

In early 1900 two Ashford players, Gilbert Godsmark and George Foley were transferred to Second Division club Newton Heath. The former of these players is notable as the first signed for a transfer fee by the club that was shortly to become Manchester United. The fee of £40 was payable in two instalments with half paid immediately and the remainder after satisfactory completion of a trial period. After scoring four goals in nine matches, early the following year, Godsmark died of disease on army service at the Second Boer War – with Ashford reportedly serving a writ for the remaining £20.

The team, now in a blue and white striped kit, played in two successive Kent Senior Cup Finals, but were unsuccessful on both occasions. Season 1901–02 saw them lose a replay 1–4 to Sittingbourne (played at Ramsgate), following a 2–2 draw (played at Faversham) in which Sittingbourne had scored a penalty two minutes from time to force the replay. Then during the following 1902–03 season they lost 1–2 to Maidstone with the tie played again at Faversham. During the early 1900s in addition to playing in The Kent League the club competed in the Thames &amp; Medway Combination – they finished each season at near or at the bottom of this league.

In the summer of 1903 the club left the Godinton Road ground and returned to their spiritual home of Newtown to a railway owned site off Newtown Road (under the railway arches on the Willesborough side of the river). During the 1903–04 season the team achieved a then club best in reaching the FA Cup 4th qualifying round, where they were defeated at home 0–2 by old rivals Chatham. For the 1905–06 season, whilst continuing to play in the Kent League, the club decided to join the newly formed Division 2 of the South Eastern League in preference to the Thames &amp; Medway Combination – this increased the number of matches and travelling costs but the committee were hopeful that as it would bring fresh teams to the town it would prove financially beneficial. The team finished eleventh of the twelve teams in the new league with home and away fixtures with West Hampstead unplayed: the decision was reversed for the following season.

The club began the 1907–08 campaign with financial matters precipitating a cut in expenditure, however the money problems could not be overcome. In November 1906 the team was struggling on the pitch: fielding weakened teams led to several heavy defeats (two Thames and Medway defeats 1–11 and (a record equalling worst) 0–12 both to Sittingbourne and 0–8 in the Kent League to Dover). Into January 1907 the club were failing to fulfil some fixtures: their final match on 26 January 1907 was a 3–0 Kent League home defeat by Cray Wanderers. Early the next month the club collapsed with debts of £80. At the time of their demise Ashford United were bottom of both the Kent League (having won two of ten matches in which they had conceded 35 goals) and the Thames &amp; Medway Combination (28 goals conceded from five matches with a single win): their records were expunged from the league tables.

===Ashford Railway Works: (1907–1928)===

Shortly after the demise of Ashford United &quot;through the instrumentality of Mr Walter Hole and others&quot; at a meeting at the Victoria Hotel it was decided to form a new club connected with the South Eastern and Chatham Railway (who had a large works in Ashford). Initially the club took the name of its forerunner but promptly changed this to S.E and C.R. Ashford Works F.C. – becoming more commonly known as Ashford Railway Works. The club&#x27;s home ground was the same as its predecessor, off Newtown Road, and is believed to have been provided rent-free by the South Eastern &amp; Chatham Railway.

Playing in red and green quartered colours the Ashford Railway Works club joined the East Kent League and the Folkestone and District Senior League. In 1908–09 they were East Kent League champions; the following season, 1909–10, they won the Folkestone and District Senior League and were also runners-up in Kent League Division 2 Eastern section (formerly known as the East Kent League). The railwaymen went on to win the latter league in four successive seasons: 1911–12, 1912–13, 1913–14 and 1919–20 (the latter after the break caused by the Great War). The Railway Works team had finished tied on points in both the 1912–13 and 1913–14 seasons with Folkestone Gas and Folkestone respectively but took the Championship by winning a deciding play-off match on each occasion.

The club became known simply as &#x27;Ashford&#x27; upon the post-war resumption of the Kent League competition. Around this time the club acquired its nickname of the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; as many of the members were drawn from the ranks of skilled engineers from the railway. Having won Division 2 Eastern the previous season the club were promoted to Division One of the Kent League for the 1920–21 season where they finished tenth from seventeen teams: the team maintained mid table finishes in this league until their final Division One season of 1926–1927. The team reached the semi-finals of the Kent Senior Cup in 1922–1923 but were beaten in a replay to the eventual trophy winners Maidstone (the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; equalised through a penalty in the last minute of the original tie). The following season the team reached the final of the inaugural Kent League Cup in May 1924, losing out 2–0 to Northfleet United.

As a consequence of the 1923 merger of railway companies which formed the Southern Railway by 1927 the club no longer came under the wing of the South Eastern and Chatham Railway but came under the auspices of the Southern Railway Mechanics Institute. They were opposed to any section running into debt and expected them to be self-supporting. The team had unacceptably lost several hundred pounds in finishing twelfth of fourteen teams in their 1926–1927 Kent League Division 1 campaign so it was decided to return the club to amateur status and to playing in the Kent League Division 2 East and the Folkestone and District Senior League. This situation lasted only one season after which the club quit the leagues leaving Ashford with no senior club. The Ashford Railway Works club did though go out on a high as champions of the three team 1927–1928 Kent League Division 2 East.

===Ashford / Ashford Town (1930–2010)===

==== Kent League: Pre-War (1930–1940)====
The decision to found Ashford Football Club was taken at a meeting held at the County Theatre on 28 April 1930 chaired by the editor of the Kentish Express Sir Charles Igglesden. The new club was elected to the Kent League and won their first match on 30 August of the same year at the Railway Works ground with visitors Canterbury Waverley beaten 4–2. In this first season the new club finished sixth in the 19 team league and were losing semi-finalists in the Kent Senior Cup to eventual winners Dartford who were themselves Southern League Championship winners that season.

In October 1931 the club moved to a new ground at Essella Road in Ashford. A company was formed to purchase the land for £550 and with improvements to the pitch and facilities for a ground with a 4,000 spectator capacity the total cost was £1,500 – with annual rental to the football club to be £60. The new Essella Park pitch featured a notable slope with the Willesborough end higher than the Ashford end. The first match at the ground on 31 October 1931, with Ashford playing in claret and blue, was a 4–1 win over Sittingbourne in front of over 2,000 spectators.

Ashford were mostly a mid-table ranked team in the seasons to 1939, however in their first campaign of 1931–32 they were distant runners-up in the Kent League to Northfleet United (who at the time were a nursery team for Football League Division 2 team Tottenham Hotspur). The team scored an all-time club record 115 goals over the 36 match season and concluded the season with a sequence of only one loss (to champions Northfleet United) in their last 14 league matches (W12; D1; L1). This included consecutive league wins in the final six matches of the season which together with three straight league wins at the start of the next season created an Ashford FC club record of nine consecutive league wins. The &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; Reserve side tasted success in the 1931–32 season by winning the Kent Amateur League Eastern section with an equally impressive goalscoring record of 84 goals over 21 matches played. The former Crystal Palace and Sheffield United forward Bert Menlove joined the club as a player in 1931 (scoring 25 goals in the 1931–32 season) and became player-manager between 1932 and 1934.

The next season, 1932–33, was literally a season of two halves: for the first 17 league games the team won 12 matches with 1 drawn and 4 lost; the second 17 matches was a complete reversal with only 4 won and 13 lost which included a club record 7 successive league defeats (part of an 8-game run of losses). There was little significant improvement in the subsequent 1933–34 campaign: at mid-season the continued existence of the club was under threat owing to lack of support and associated financial difficulties. In March 1934 then record Tottenham Hotspur goal-scorer, and scorer of the only goal in the 1921 FA Cup Final, Jimmy Dimmock made his debut for the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27;, he scored twice and provided an assist in a 3–1 Kent League victory over Aylesford Paper Mills. Two weeks later he played in the Kent League match in which Ashford suffered their record largest league defeat (and all-match goals conceded record) with a 3–14 drubbing at Folkestone Reserves. The financial crisis was averted by a nursery club tie-up with Football League Third Division South Clapton (now Leyton) Orient who then proposed (unsuccessfully) that Ashford would enter the Eastern Section of the 1934–35 Southern League in place of their reserve side.

This association with &#x27;Orient&#x27; created the most high-profile game played in the early years at Essella Park: in the 1934–35 FA Cup First Round Proper Ashford, who had won away at Kent League powerhouse team Northfleet United in the final qualifying round, were drawn against Clapton Orient. The tie had extra spice: Ashford were &#x27;Orient&#x27;s&#x27; nursery team and they had loaned a couple of young players and transferred several players to the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27;. The most notable was former Liverpool and England full back Tommy Lucas whom Orient had appointed as Ashford&#x27;s manager. In a match that &quot;lacked nothing in vigour and spirit&quot; in front of nearly 4,000 spectators Ashford scored first through Jim French but fell 4–1 to their visitors. In the spring of 1935 Ashford were reporting that &#x27;Orient&#x27; were failing to fulfil the agreed terms of the nursery arrangement and were therefore experiencing a financial shortfall and having to cut expenses. Ashford had started their 1934–35 Kent League campaign with seven wins from eight matches (W7; L1) but during April 1935 they recorded a nine match win-less run (D4; L5).

The arrangement with Orient was downgraded to a &#x27;working arrangement&#x27; for the 1935–1936 season. In The spring of 1936 the club once more encountered financial problems and was the subject of a Commission set-up by the Kent County FA to reach agreement between a newly set-up Emergency Club Committee and players over unpaid wages. The club weathered the storm and by the end of the 1939 season the Annual Meeting reported that the club was in a financially sound position with a credit balance at the bank and all debts paid save for an old bank debt which was being paid-down by the Supporters Association (whose contributions to the club were covering of the order of 25% of the annual costs).

In a midweek home game in April 1937, towards the end of their 1936–1937 Kent League fixtures, the team recorded their largest (and for any Ashford team) victory with a 15–0 rout of Erith &amp; Belvedere with Joe West scoring seven of the goals. For the 1937–1938 season the club entered into a single season working (but not nursery) arrangement with Football League Division 2 club West Ham who provided access to their amateur and fringe players. The season ended with a new record of ten straight Kent League matches without a win (D3; L7) culminating in a 1–8 defeat at Aylesford Paper Mills.

The final home game played by the club before the wartime suspension of Kent League matches was the 1938–39 Kent League Cup final replay victory for the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27;, beating Bexleyheath and Welling 1–0 (scorer: Tricker) after a 1–1 draw in the original tie. In the final league match four days prior to the final there was a heavy 1–11 league match defeat at Erith &amp; Belvedere, the club Ashford had routed 2 years previously. During the campaign the team had created an Ashford FC club record of 8 consecutive league wins within a single season, scoring 36 goals whilst conceding 6. Tricker was club top-scorer over all matches with 42 out of the 105 goals scored. Harry Todd formerly of Margate (via their nursery deal with Arsenal) and former Tunbridge Wells Rangers captain joined the club for the 1938–1939 season as player-coach of the team and continued post-war.

For the 1939–40 season before the full wartime suspension of league football for the club, they played in the Eastern Group of the Kent Regional League finishing tenth of eleven teams.

====Kent League: Post-War (1946–1959)====
After the war, at a meeting in February 1946 it was decided to revive the club. The company which in 1931 had been set-up to own the ground had been struck-off in 1940 and the club were fearful the then owners would use the land for development – the scenario was averted when club president and co-founder/owner of Norman Cycles Fred Norman purchased the ground for a reported £1,900 and agreed to waive the first years rent.

The team rejoined the Kent League competition. In their first season back, 1946–47, the club scored a post-war record single match goal tally (and post-war then record nine goal winning margin) in a Christmas Day 11–2 demolition of Folkestone at Essella Park. The next day saw a 5–5 draw in the return match at Folkestone.

For the 1948–49 campaign Joe Fagg was appointed club manager: he had been associated with the club for many years including as an effective treasurer during the financially difficult pre-war period. Former West Ham United defender Charlie Walker joined as player-coach from Margate (where he had been the Kent League league winning coach for the previous two seasons – with a League, League Cup and Senior Cup treble in the latter). Under their leadership Ashford won the 1948–49 Kent League Championship; this top spot was decided by &#x27;goal average&#x27; as there was a three-way tie at the top of the table with two other clubs (Dover and Ramsgate) finishing on an identical 52 points. In recognition of the achievement the club presented an engraved fountain pen to each player. The team scored 109 goals in their league campaign (second highest ever to the 115 scored in the 1931–32 season): Ted Wells was top-scorer with 27 goals from 25 league games (he repeated the feat of a 20-goal haul for the following season too) and Fred James next best with 23 from 31. Wells created a record of scoring in nine consecutive games – eight of which were league games. In their run to the championship the team established a record of 20 consecutive unbeaten league matches (W16; D4). It was almost a double celebration: the Ashford Reserves team were pipped to top spot in Kent League Division 2 by Folkestone.

The &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; second string were eventually successful and took the Kent League Division 2 title in both the 1952–53 and 1955–56 campaigns. During the latter campaign they achieved a 21 league game unbeaten run (W16; D5). It was a particularly successful period for the reserve side who won the Kent League 2 Cup in both 1949–50 by defeating Ramsgate Reserves 4–1 and in 1952–53 (for the League and Cup double) beating Sittingbourne Reserves 2–1. The Reserves also appeared in four Kent Intermediate Cup finals: 1952–53 losing 3–1 to Dover Reserves; and facing Folkestone Reserves three times 1953–54 (won 2–0), 1955–56 (lost 2–1) and 1958–56 (lost 2–0). The Reserves rounded off the decade in the 1958–59 campaign with a 15 league game unbeaten run (W14; D1) – the 14 wins being consecutive.

From the 1950–1951 season the club began to style itself as Ashford Town Football Club rather than Ashford Football Club. The &#x27;Town&#x27; started the season in style with a 9–3 home victory over Aylesford Paper Mills, a game in which Charlie Barnard scored 5 goals – a then post-war club single match record.

Charlie Walker was succeeded in the summer of 1951 as player-coach by another ex-Margate man, Ken Horrigan. He took the team to the 1951–52 Kent League Cup final where they lost 3–0 to home-team Folkestone.

In January 1953 club manager Joe Fagg announced his intention to resign and two months later David Nelson was brought in from Crystal Palace as player-manager Former player-coach Horrigan continued playing in the first team that season and remained with the club, latterly mainly playing in the reserves, until 1954. In June 1953, having enjoyed an extended seven year rent free period, the club became the owners of Essella Park when they purchased the freehold from Fred Norman for the same amount he had paid for it in 1946.

Until Nelson became manager the team had recorded upper mid-table positions in the Kent League but in the first of his two full seasons at the helm (1953–54) Nelson&#x27;s team finished 14th of 16 teams and recorded only 5 wins from 30 games – the lowest win percentage in the club&#x27;s Kent League campaigns. This included a run from November 1953 of only one win in the last 21 league matches of the season (W1; D7; L13). Only 34 goals were scored over the 30 game league campaign with Alan Smith top-scorer with 6. There was little improvement the following season and despite Nelson being offered a contract for the next 1955–56 season he resigned in May 1955 having accepted a coaching position abroad.

He was replaced for the player-manager role from within the club on a part-time basis by Harry Freeman who re-jigged the playing staff – bringing in younger players after the club had cut wages towards the end of the previous season. His single season tenure of 1955–56 continued the run of lower/mid table finishes and first team gates slumped almost 40% to below 1,300 (whilst the Division 2 winning reserves had gates of 1,000) which created a financial loss and put the club in debt. The following season team matters were presided over by a Management Committee with a mid-league table outcome. Towards the end of that 1956–57 season there was a win-less run of eight successive Kent League matches (D1; L7) (expanded to nine including a Kent Senior Cup match loss) which included a then post-war record of six successive league losses. A bright spot was top-scorer Ron Vigar who recorded 21 goals from 27 league outings.

The 1957–58 season saw the appointment of ex-Leyton Orient and Southampton full-back Ted Ballard as player manager. A poor first season which included a run of 16 league matches with only two (back to back) wins (W2; D2; L12), incorporating a run of six straight league losses, resulted in a 16th of 18 teams final league position. Ron Vigar was responsible for 21 of the 53 league goals scored. Despite lack of league success in his five years at the club Ballard guided the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; to notable cup achievements.

In the 1958–59 season the team (and an Ashford club for a first time since 1893) won the Kent Senior Cup. Kent League Ashford beat Southern League Tonbridge in the final at Gillingham watched by 5,061 spectators. Ron Vigar scored both goals in a 2–1 victory, the marker from Tonbridge being the only goal conceded by Ashford in their five matches in the competition; Tonbridge had hit both the crossbar and the post (from a penalty shot) during the game. Although over the league campaign Vigar notched 20 goals (his third successive with at least 20) he was outranked as top scorer by Jimmy Jenkins on 22.

Earlier that 1958–59 season the team reached the FA Cup First Round proper for first time since 1934. At the start of the cup run in the preliminary round the club produced their all-time record FA cup win with a 10–1 home victory over Betteshanger CW – with both Jimmy Jenkins and Gordon Burden recording hat-tricks. The &#x27;Town&#x27; then battled through four qualifying rounds culminating in a 4th qualifying round home replay victory over Southern League club Hastings United to reach the First Round proper. For this tie they hosted Football League Division 4 club Crystal Palace in front of an Essella Park record of 6,525 spectators, losing narrowly 1–0. The match was refereed by a youthful Jack Taylor who climaxed his career as referee at the 1974 World Cup Final. This season was the first of four consecutive appearances by Ashford (who remained managed by Ted Ballard throughout this time) in the &#x27;proper&#x27; rounds of the FA Cup. For each of these years they would ultimately fall to teams from the Football League.

====Southern League Division 1 (1959–1971)====
The Kent League which had been in existence since 1894 with Ashford United as founder members, was disbanded in 1959. Consequently, Ashford Town joined-up to the Southern League for the 1959–60 season, the first of a 44-year membership. The &#x27;Town&#x27; were incorporated into the newly formed Division One (the second level of the Southern League) together with seven clubs from the Kent League, (Folkestone, Ramsgate, Margate, Dover, Bexleyleath and Welling, Tunbridge Wells and Sittingbourne). Additionally the league comprised the rumps of the former Southern League South East and North West Divisions together with two additional new recruits, Hinckley Athletic and Romford. Away matches for the team involved more extensive travelling with trips to amongst others Exeter City Reserves, Merthyr Tydfil, Kidderminster, Burton Albion and Cambridge City. The &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; first match in the new league on 22 August 1959 and was a then post-war Ashford record reverse 1–8 at fellow newcomers Hinckley Athletic. Four days later playing the other newly recruited club Romford at Essella Park Ashford notched their first points courtesy of a 1–0 victory (scorer: Don Murfet). The team finished 14th of 22 clubs in the league in a campaign during which they suffered, for the third season in the last four, a six consecutive league match losing streak during an eight match league win-less sequence (D1; L7).

The 1959–60 season witnessed the team&#x27;s second successive appearance in the First round proper of the FA Cup: after successfully negotiating four qualifying matches including, in the last of these, winning away at Southern Premier League team Gravesend and Northfleet the reward was match at Football League Third Division Brentford. The result was a 0–1 defeat in front of a crowd of 13,900 – the largest single match crowd to see the &#x27;Town&#x27; play. In making this round of the cup once again Ashford Town were awarded full membership of The Football Association.

But 1959 was not all about action on the pitch. The club became a Limited Company; but a more visible milestone was the appearance of floodlighting at the Essella Road ground. The installation of the &#x27;Do it Yourself&#x27; floodlighting was perhaps the best example of voluntary effort at the club. The self designed and installed system comprised eight 40-foot high towers each housing four 2,000 watt lamps and had required an up-rated power supply to be laid to the ground. The overall cost was £1,507.10s.5d. During their 28-year lifetime it is reported that only one match was not completed owing to non-working floodlights – caused by mains power failure. The lights were officially switched on with a Grand Opening Floodlight Game on Monday 19 October 1959 with First Division Chelsea the visitors. England forward and football legend Jimmy Greaves scored four goals in a 7–2 victory for the Londoners, with Ron Vigar and Gordon Burden netting for the home side.

The club&#x27;s exploits were curtailed once again in the First Round proper of the 1960–61 FA Cup: after a single qualifying victory (an away replay win at Margate), the journey was brought to an end by a 1–2 home loss (Town scorer: Joe White) to Division 4 League club Gillingham. On the Gills team-sheet was forward John Shepherd who played for and skippered Ashford the following season. The cup run in that 1961–62 season was the next high-point in Ashford Town&#x27;s history when the club reached, for the first time, the FA Cup Second Round Proper. Following a fourth round qualifying home win over Dover the first round match-up saw Ashford play a goal-less draw at non-league (Isthmian League) Wycombe Wanderers then winning the replay at Essella Park 3–0 (scorers Joe White, Ron Clayton &amp; John Shepherd). In the Second Round the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; lost 0–3 on home turf to Football League Division 3 Queens Park Rangers – playing for the visitors was Keith Rutter who would subsequently return to Ashford three years later to captain the team.

In mid-March 1962 it was announced that manager Ballard, who had over a year remaining on his contract, was leaving the club to move on to Hastings United. Taking over coaching responsibilities on a part-time basis for the remainder of the season was former player and current trainer Bert Sibley – with club management to be handled by the club committee. Shortly after Sibley took the reins the team created an Ashford Town record with a run of a six consecutive drawn league matches (increasing to nine by including draws in two legged Kent Floodlit final games and the first leg of the Kent Senior Cup final). The team went on to win the Kent Floodlight Cup, beating Southern League Premier Tonbridge 2–1 away in a second leg replay (having drawn 1–1 in the first leg at Essella Park and 2–2 away in the second). In the Kent Senior Cup final &#x27;the Nuts and Bolts&#x27; were eventually beaten 1–4 by Dover – after an aggregate 2–2 draw over two ties the decider for the 1961–62 competition was unusually contested at the start of the following 1962–63 season by a much changed Ashford team, watched by a little over three thousand spectators on neutral territory at Folkestone.

Under Sibley the team started the actual 1962–63 season with a run of seven consecutive win-less league matches (D3; L4) and recorded only one win over the next six games giving aggregate figures of P13; W1: D4; L8. The team finished 18th from 20 teams in the league with only nine wins all season and losing all of their last six league matches. They put the poor league form behind them in the last match of the season and lifted the Kent Senior Cup for a third time by beating Margate 1–0 in the final played at Gillingham, with former England Youth player Brian Dellar notching the decider.

The next two seasons each saw single match Southern League goals record matches for the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27;. The first was in February 1964 when the team thrashed Barry Town 10–1 (goals from with John Harris, Lawrie Thomson, Bob Walker(2), Malcolm Collins, Paul Nicholas(3), Alec Garden and John Smith). Despite team strength being hampered by financial constraints the team achieved an eleven-year best seventh-place finish in the 1963–64 league. Less palatable during the following season, in which the team slumped to 17th in the final table, playing their third game in six days in a mid-week match in November 1964 the team crumbled to a post-war record 0–8 defeat at Crawley Town.

A further upshot of the disbanding of the Kent League was that the Reserve team also had to find another League in which to compete. In 1959–60 they were founder members of the Seanglian League (in effect a reserves section of the Aetolian League which itself comprised mostly disenfranchised former Kent League clubs). The second string team were runners-up in the 1960–61 Seanglian League Cup losing the final at home 0–1 to Dover Reserves. The reserves team were champions of the 12 team Seanglian League in 1961–62 and came close to a treble but lost the Seanglian League Cup final 1–5 over two matches ( h:0–2; a:1–3) to Leyton Orient ‘A’ team and lost 2–3 at home to Slade Green in the final of the Kent Intermediate Cup. Two years later in 1963–64 the Seanglian League morphed into the Metropolitan &amp; District League Division 2 and the reserves endured a poor season with only five wins from 28 league matches – this included a run from December to the season&#x27;s end of only one win from 17 league matches (W1; D5; L11) and only 31 goals scored over the 28 match season. In 1966–67 the Reserves joined the newly formed Kent Premier League.

Although the club had for many years played in green and white, from the mid-sixties for three seasons they adopted tangerine and white for their team colours before reverting to their former colours in 1968–69.

Sibley&#x27;s tenure ended after the final match of the 1964–65 season; it had been announced (prematurely) that Allan Sanders was to take over as manager however Ashford were unwilling to pay the £3,000 fee demanded from his current club Brighton &amp; Hove Albion. Subsequently, prior to the start of the 1965–66 season the club appointed ex-England and Chelsea full back and First Division championship medal holder Peter Sillett as player-manager. The new manager&#x27;s first season was the worst to date in the Southern League with 9 wins, 10 draws and 27 losses over the 46 game league season and for the first time for Ashford Town the team scored an average of less than 1 goal per league game with 44 goals – failing to net in thirteen matches. The &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; finished 23rd from 24 clubs.

In the following 1966–67 season&#x27;s FA Cup the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; battled through four qualifying rounds (beating in the last Sillett&#x27;s previous club Southern League Premier Guildford City in a replay at Essella Park) to reach the first round proper where they defeated another Southern League Premier outfit Cambridge City 4–1 (2 goals each from Tim Soutar &amp; Jim Roberts). For the club&#x27;s second ever appearance in the Second Round they were drawn away to Football League Third Division Swindon Town. The initial tie on the Saturday was postponed owing to frozen pitch at the County Ground. The re-arranged fixture provided no respite however with Ashford falling 5–0 to Swindon. 
Two years later during the 1968–69 campaign the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; had their best run in the Southern League Cup competition and reached the semi-finals; they were eliminated 3–2 at Southern League Premier Division (and that season&#x27;s League and Cup double winners) Cambridge United.

In the early part of the 1969–70 season victories in the first three FA Cup qualifying rounds gave supporters hope of a run into the proper rounds of the FA Cup, but this was quashed by a home defeat in the 4th qualifying round to the previous season&#x27;s Athenian League Premier Division champions Walton &amp; Hersham. The main prize however crystallised at the season&#x27;s end. Throughout its Southern League tenure and during Sillett&#x27;s previous three seasons the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; had been a mid/lower table team – their previous high point was seventh in 1963–64. But in 1969–70 under the manager Sillett this was eclipsed by a fourth-placed finish – a position that was rewarded with promotion to the Southern League Premier Division. Whilst the number of League matches won that campaign was not significantly greater than the previous few seasons the team was better defensively and conceded fewer goals and lost fewer matches with a new club low of an average of one goal per game being conceded per league match by ever present goalkeeper Dave Hills. It was additionally the first season since 1958–59 that a &#x27;Town&#x27; player, Bobby Laverick (who quit the club at the seasons end), scored in excess of 20 goals (with 21 from his 36 matches). With sixteen draws from forty-two matches played (W19; D16; L7) the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; were the league leaders for drawn games – the season had started with an unbeaten nine match run of which six were drawn and three won. This promotion was a big step up for the club and represents their highest placing in the football pyramid; they were only one division below the Football League – indeed the 1969–70 Southern Premier champions, Cambridge United, had been elected to the Football League Fourth Division (there being no automatic promotion at this time).

Ashford&#x27;s first match in the 1970–71 Southern League Premier Division was a 1–1 draw at home to Weymouth with Ashford equalising through Terry Street with the last kick of the match. Two days later Ashford (extremely) briefly topped the table courtesy of a 1–3 win at Margate. Notable during the campaign were the players who appeared between the posts: the previous season&#x27;s ‘keeper David Hills ceased playing early in the season; for one match former 1950s Chelsea goalie, Bill Robertson appeared; new custodian Brian Gambrill signed-on for £300 from Canterbury City and conceded seven goals on his home debut in a 7–1 loss to Worcester City – Ashford&#x27;s lone marker was scored by David Gillingwater, a former Chelsea FA Youth Cup winner and England Youth international; mid-season Gambrill was injured and for three matches local amateur &#x27;keeper Reg Gorham stepped in (echoing the make-up of the original Ashford United club he worked for a local newspaper). The latter back-stopped the team to a 4–2 home win against Hillingdon Borough to snap a 13 league game win-less run (D4; L9). Later in the campaign the team endured a sequence of one win in fourteen league matches (W1; D5; L8). With only eight wins all season and the highest goals conceded in the league (86) the &#x27;Town&#x27; finished 20th (from 22 teams) and were thus relegated. Despite the lacklustre league campaign the team had progressed to the Kent Senior Cup semi-final, but lost the tie 4–3 away to Dover.

====Southern League Division 1 South (1971–1979)====
The demotion from the Southern Premier put Ashford in the now regionalised Southern League Division One South for 1971–72. After a slow start and a twelve league match mid-season slump (W1; D2; L9) the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; recorded a 10th-placed finish. The same season the Reserves reached the final of the Kent League Division One Cup but where defeated by Chatham in the final.

The following season in the 1972–73 FA Trophy the club had their best ever non-league knock-out cup run. After battling through seven ties (including three qualifying rounds), the last of which was a 3–2 away win at Bangor City of the Northern Premier League, the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; reached the semi-finals – just one match from a Wembley final. Alas the dream was not to be: in a match played on neutral turf at Peterborough they lost 1–0 to a disputed second half penalty to Northern Premier League club Scarborough (who would themselves go on to win the trophy). Ironically for a club so linked to the railways, supporters travelling on a special train arrived 15 minutes after the kick-off following a delay en route.

In the league, the Southern League Division One South, after a good run in their final 13 league matches (W9, D2; L2) Ashford finished third, one place below the promotion places. In all competitions Alan Morton set a club record scoring 46 goals in 59 games (31 from 36 league matches), which stood for 42 years until broken in the 2014–15 season – his haul included a sequence of scoring in eight (all league games) consecutive matches, and excluding the intervening FA trophy semi-final game this run expands to scoring sixteen goals in nine consecutive league matches. At the other end of the pitch it was the first ever season that &#x27;Town&#x27; conceded fewer that an average of one goal per league match with ever-present &#x27;keeper Gambrill being beaten only 40 times over the 42 league games which included seventeen clean sheets.

There were two other notable events from the 1972–73 the season. Firstly Roy Hodgson, who has since had a distinguished club and country managerial career, including the England team manager for four years, played for the &#x27;Town&#x27;. Secondly the club took part in European football in the appropriately named Cross Channel Competition. Teams from French towns near the coast (Boulogne, Saint-Omer and Hazebrouck) played similarly positioned English clubs (Ashford, Folkestone and Dover). Ashford fulfilled all their continental away and one home fixture but the competition fizzled out owing to fixture congestion resulting from the long cup runs which was exacerbated by bad weather and power blackouts (from industrial disputes in the UK).

Around the early seventies the club began looking for a new home stadium and favoured relocation to a site adjacent to the local authority&#x27;s leisure complex close to Ashford town centre. However nothing was agreed and the search for new premises wasn&#x27;t resolved until towards the end of the next decade.

During the 1973–74 season long-time manager Peter Sillett resigned in December 1973 and moved to Folkestone and was replaced by Dennis Hunt who moved in the opposite direction having earlier been sacked by Folkestone. Dennis had been a member of the Gillingham team that defeated Ashford in the FA cup in 1960–61.

A modicum of cup success was achieved in the 1974–75 campaign. Ashford won through five rounds (winning the last of these at soon to be promoted Southern League South Division club Hillingdon Borough) to reach the FA Cup First round proper, with a home tie against Division 3 outfit Walsall. Owing to a waterlogged pitch the scheduled Saturday fixture was postponed and moved to mid-week. The match was played on the following Wednesday afternoon as Ashford&#x27;s floodlights were deemed not of the required standard for an evening game. In front of a modest but enthusiastic crowd of 2,623 (that included many schoolboys allowed the afternoon off from their schools) Ashford lost to Walsall 1–3 (&#x27;Town&#x27; scorer: John Hold). There was a ripple of performance too in the Kent Senior Cup where the team reached the 1974–75 semi-finals losing 3–1 to Southern League Premier Division Maidstone United. Dennis Hunt left in January 1975 after just one year in charge as manager and was replaced by former Ashford Reserves and Herne Bay Manager Reg Elliott. He spent only eleven months at the helm: during his tenure first-choice goalkeeper Tony Godden was transferred for a very modest £1,500 fee to West Bromwich Albion who, with him playing his part, would come close to lifting the Football League League Winners Trophy in 1979. Across two half-seasons for the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; Godden had kept 14 clean sheets in 40 league matches played including five successively early in the 1974–75 season.

In February 1976 after a couple of months with former manager Peter Sillett in charge as caretaker Bobby Nash took up the player/manager reins. The club had recorded mid-table finishes in the previous three campaigns but things worsened in Nash&#x27;s first full season in charge of 1976–77. The club hit the local press for all the wrong reasons early in 1977 with a story that the club was £23,000 in debt and two weeks from bankruptcy. There followed a drastic reorganisation and effort both on and off the field which over several years restored financial equilibrium. League performance in 1976–77 was the worst recorded as a Southern League team with 5 wins, 8 draws and 21 losses over the 34 league games. This included both a failure to win any of their first 11 matches (D3; L8) which included two League Cup matches and, later in the campaign, a 13 league game win-less sequence (D3; L10) which included a club record seven consecutive match losing streak. The team finished 17th from 18 clubs in the division. There was though a Kent Senior Cup semi-final contested by the team, this ended in a 3–2 home defeat by Bromley who were the eventual cup winners.

In April 1978 in the midst of a 14 league match sequence that returned only one win (W1; D5; L8) Gordon Burden replaced Bobby Nash as player-manager. Gordon had first played for the club in 1954–55 and he was in his fourth stint as a &#x27;Town&#x27; player. On-going financial constraints limited performances and lowly league finishes continued. In the 1978–79 season there was a run of six consecutive league match defeats and the team scored an all-time record low of 28 league goals from their 40 league matches (in 18 of which they failed to score). Top league scorers with 6 apiece were Tony Smith and Peter McRobert – over the next twenty years Peter made a club record 819 appearances (59 as a substitute) for the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27;. In all competitions the team scored 35 goals from their total of 46 matches. Dave Clay top-scored with 8.

====Southern League Southern Division (1979–1999)====
In 1979–80 there was a major reorganisation of non-league football with the creation in of the Alliance Premier League (the forerunner to the Football Conference and National League) which comprised the top clubs from both the Southern and Northern Premier Leagues. The Southern League itself was reorganised into a Southern and a Midland Division (with no Premier Division), with Ashford Town placed in the Southern section.

With the club maintaining its stringent financial policies and with stronger former Southern Premier teams (who hadn&#x27;t made the cut into the Alliance) making up part of the opposition lower bottom half league finishes continued for the &#x27;Town&#x27; team. There was an eleven league match win-less sequence in 1979–80 (D5; L6) and the 1980–81 campaign finished with only one win in the final 18 league matches (W1; D8; L9). There was some light however as the team reached the Kent Senior Cup final for two years in succession in 1980–81 and 1981–82. On neither occasion were the team able to bring home the silverware, losing to Alliance Premier League teams Gravesend &amp; Northfleet (2–0) and Maidstone United (3–0) respectively.

The Southern Premier Division was re-introduced for the 1982–83 season, with regional-based Southern and Midland leagues below. Ashford Town remained in the Southern Division and although ostensibly staying in the same league this was a slide down the football pyramid – now being in the third level below the Football League – the team had not played below at least the second level for 23 years. The &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; finished eight in the league table; John Young was the leading league scorer with 22 goals from 32 matches.

The club also recorded an eighth-place finish in the 1983–84 season and contested the semi-finals of the Courage Eastern Floodlit Cup, losing to Essex League club Stansted 2–3 on a penalty shoot-out after the sides had drawn a two legged semi-final 3–3 – Stansted were having a stellar season and completed a cup quadruple of the Eastern Floodlit Cup itself, the Essex Senior League Cup, the East Anglian Cup and most prestigiously the FA Vase. Earlier in the campaign Ashford had won through four FA Cup ties to reach the fourth qualifying round where they were defeated 0–3 at Isthmian Premier League Barking. During the season John Young was once again the leading league scorer with 24 goals from 38 league matches and the leading scorer over all the season&#x27;s 59 matches notching 42 goals – close to matching the 46 goal record of Alan Morton set 12 years previously.
For 1984–85 Chris Weller replaced Burden as manager – a slump to 17th position with half of the league matches lost brought an end to Wellers&#x27; managerial reign just prior to the end of his one season in charge; previous manager Peter Sillett was reappointed in his place.

The turnaround from 18th position in the first full season of Sillett&#x27;s second managerial spell in 1985–86 to League runners-up and promotion a year later in 1986–87 was striking. The promotion was founded on a tight defensive unit who conceded only 32 goals – the fewest in any season by Ashford Town and the all-time lowest goals conceded to games ratio (the previous two lowest were both by Sillet managed &#x27;Town&#x27; teams). The team kept 19 clean sheets in the league: Keith Hepple kept 15 from the 33 league games in which he played (including five consecutive in February 1987) and Warren Scott four from his five matches; there was too a run of seven league matches without a loss (W6; D1). Sillett was the first manager to pilot the club to promotion since he initially achieved the feat back in 1969–70 campaign. The season also saw the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; contest a Kent Senior Cup semi-final, a 1–0 home defeat to eventual cup winners Dartford. Working with Sillet in the role of club trainer in both promotion seasons and in the intervening seasons too was George Sergeant. The former Irish Cup winner had previously played for the &#x27;Town&#x27;, joining from Hastings in 1952 and would fill the &#x27;man with the magic wet sponge&#x27; role for many more years yet! completing a total of 52 years service to the club.

But the 1986–87 season wasn&#x27;t all about promotion: it marked the season the club bid farewell to Essella Park as their home after 56 years. The final game on 2 May 1987 was a title decider against Dorchester Town, the 0–0 result meant the Dorset club pipped Ashford to the league title by one point. The current ground was in a residential district and hemmed in by houses and the club had been looking to relocate for over 15 years and had looked at 17 sites. The directors purchased a plot of land for £80,000 a few miles beyond the immediate boundaries of the town in Kingsnorth and although they felt this was &quot;not the ideal site&quot; they could find nothing within the Town boundary. The seventy acre plot was undeveloped at the time of the final fixture at Essella Park; planning permission for the new &#x27;Homelands&#x27; stadium was yet to be granted – the chairman of the directors was critical of &quot;constant delays&quot; by an &quot;unhelpful&quot; Ashford Council. The club were therefore without a home stadium: they agreed a ground-share at long time rivals Folkestone for the next two years.

With the 1986–87 promotion the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; moved-up to the Southern Premier League – now sponsored by Beazer Homes. Manager Peter Sillett left for Poole Town immediately following the promotion. His assistant Nicky Sparks took the helm for a season and despite a mid-season run of one win and eleven draws in eighteen matches (W1; D11; L6) achieved a creditable mid-table finish. Chris Weller was reappointed for the following 1988–89 season: the club finished 18th, one place above the four Southern Premier League relegation places with the personal milestone of 20 league goals in a season being achieved by Dave Arter from his 41 matches.

The team returned to Ashford for 1989–90 season with the opening of the Homelands stadium – this boasted a capacity of 3,300 spectators with 500 seated. But it wasn&#x27;t an auspicious inaugural season: Ashford, still managed by Weller, finished 19th of 22 teams and were consequently relegated back to the Southern Division. In the final 19 league matches there were 17 defeats (W1; D1; L17): these included a run of five consecutive league matches in which the team failed to score – this was part of a run of seven scoreless matches which included two Cup matches, one of which was a 560-mile round trip Premier Inter League Cup match at that seasons Northern Premier League runaway Champions Colne Dynamoes.

The mid to late 1980s saw a run of near misses for the Reserves squad. In the Kent League Division 2 they were runners-up for four seasons: in 1984–85 to Sheppey United; in 1987–88 to Fisher Athletic; in 1988–89 to Hythe Town; and in 1990–91 to Canterbury City (courtesy of third ranked Dover having three points deducted). They had also been losing finalists in the 1986–87 Division 2 League Cup 0–1 at home to Sittingbourne.

In the early 1990s there were several big-money and record transfers: in late 1990 forward partnership Jeff Ross and Dave Arter were sold to Hythe Town for a combined fee of £25,000 – a club record single receipt; three years later in 1993 a single player record of £20,000 was received from Sittingbourne for Lee McRobert; and the following year a record of £7,000 was paid by Ashford to Sittingbourne to bring Dave Arter and Jeff Ross back to Ashford. Arter holds the club record for scoring with 196 goals from 381 plus 14 substitute appearances: he commenced playing as an 18 year old in August 1983 and took 46 matches until December 1985 to score his first goal for the club.

For the 1990–91 season in the Southern Division the &#x27;Town&#x27; came under player-manager Neil Cugley who came in from Folkestone. He had previously been player-manager at Hythe Town, winning the 1988–89 Kent League championship. For the first five seasons of Cugley&#x27;s tenure the fans saw a series of comfortable top ten league finishes. During this period the old cup spirit of the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; stirred: in 1991–92 they lost out in a Kent Senior Cup semi final 1–0 at Hythe; the following 1992–93 season they fought through four FA Cup ties to reach the fourth qualifying round where they were defeated 2–1 at home by Conference League outfit Slough Town; later that season the team collected some silverware being victorious in the Kent Senior Cup final beating Isthmian League Premier Bromley 3–2 with Andy Pearson and Lee McRobert (2) netting – the latter was the clubs league top-scorer that season with 27 goals from playing all 42 matches; in 1993–94 the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; reached the semi-finals of the Eastern Floodlit Cup, but were soundly beaten 2–6 at Braintree Town – paying the price for the heavy toll of fixtures at the climax of the season, this match being their fifth game in ten days. That 1993–94 league campaign saw the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; finish in sixth place in the Southern Division, their results included a run between the 8th February and the season&#x27;s end during which they lost only once in 22 league matches (W13; D8; L1). Nicky Dent was the club&#x27;s highest league goal-scorer with 21 from 32 matches, closely followed by Mark Stanton who notched 20 from 39.

There followed for the first time in 20 years three seasons with the appearance of Ashford Town in the ‘proper’ rounds of the FA Cup – manager Neil Cugley had been a non-playing member of Ashford&#x27;s squad in their last appearance in the First Round in 1974–75.

In the first of these in 1994–95 the team won through 5 preliminary/qualifying rounds, culminating with a triumph at Salisbury City, to reach the First Round proper. The resultant home tie against Fulham was watched by a Homelands record crowd of 3,363. On a heavy waterlogged pitch, in a match televised by Sky TV, Neil Cugley&#x27;s side achieved a more than creditable 2–2 draw against their Third Division opponents. Ashford took a two-goal lead (through Jeff Ross and Dave Arter) before two late controversial penalties both converted by Micky Adams rescued the league team. In the replay at Craven Cottage the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; took the match to extra time but ultimately succumbed 5–3 (with goals from Mark Stanton(2) and Nicky Dent).

That 1994–95 season marked only the second time in post-war football that Ashford scored in excess of 100 league goals – their 106 was second only to the 109 scored by the 1948–49 Kent League winning team. The team scored a total of 151 goals in all 59 competitive matches, with Dave Arter banging in 45 in his 55 appearances (one shy of Alan Morton&#x27;s 1972–73 club record); 35 of Arter&#x27;s goals were from his 42 league appearances including four league hat-tricks. Arter scored eleven of his league goals in three of the final four matches of the season, notching two quadruples and a triple; these matches formed part of a run of seven consecutive league matches won by the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; (with an aggregate score of 26–7), this being a post-war league win record equalling sequence (with the 1948–49 season). Mark Stanton, who missed the season end through injury, tallied 35 goals from 46 appearances including an Ashford Town post-war record-equalling (with Charlie Barnard from 1950) single game haul of five, in a 6–1 Southern League Cup victory at Erith &amp; Belvedere, and a total of nine in the seven match FA Cup run. A mid season run of eight draws in an eleven-game sequence (W2; D8; L1) – which included 5–5 scoreline at Newport on the Isle of Wight – contributed to the 5th placed league finish.

In the 1995–96 FA Cup, after disposing of Isthmian League Division 1 Aldershot Town at home in the final of four qualifying rounds, the First Round draw saw Ashford away at their fellow Isthmian League club Bognor Regis Town. Ashford achieved a 1–1 draw on the south coast but then lost 0–1 at home in the replay. The match was a complete anti-climax; after being delayed by a power cut, Carlton Wynter then hit the post in the opening minute – the hosts just knew it just wasn&#x27;t going to be their night. This was the first time the club had been knocked out in the &#x27;proper&#x27; rounds of the FA Cup by a fellow non-league team. Perhaps fate was trying to save the supporters the trauma of a trip to Peterborough (the scene of the 1972–73 FA Trophy semi-final defeat) who awaited the winner in the next round.

The 1995–96 season was though a particularly successful campaign for the &#x27;Town&#x27; in other competitions. On the county cup front they won the Kent Senior Cup beating Charlton 3–0 in the final with goals from Dave Arter, Andy Allon and Matt Carruthers. And most importantly in the league they won promotion to the Southern League Premier Division as a result of the team&#x27;s second-placed finish to Sittingbourne in the Southern Division with a record of W25; D9; L8 over the 42-game season: Arter scored 25 of the 75 league goals scored; 44 league goals were conceded, there were 18 clean sheets courtesy of goalie Maurice Munden from his 41 matches.

For the third FA Cup run, in the 1996–97 season, after a single qualifying round home win over Isthmian League Premier club Kingstonian, the First Round tie saw Ashford again encounter Isthmian Premier opposition in the form of Dagenham And Redbridge. Following a 2–2 draw on home turf Ashford visited the &#x27;Daggers&#x27; for the replay: the match ended 1–1 with Ashford progressing to the second round with a 4–3 penalty shoot-out win with the vital penalty scored by Paul Chambers (who would later become Ashford United manager). In the Second Round Ashford were drawn away at Watford. The &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; matched their higher ranked opponents in a goalless first-half, but the Vicarage Road side eventually ran out 5–0 winners.

The club&#x27;s return season to the Southern League Premier Division (now with the sponsor Dr Martens) in 1996–97 was a struggle, the league results included a 15 match sequence without a win (D7; L8). With a finishing position of 19th (ensured only by winning their last two league matches) the club was only saved from relegation by the resignation of Sudbury Town. This precipitated the end of Neil Cugley&#x27;s seven year managerial reign (he moved on to Folkestone Invicta) and he was replaced by Nigel Donn who had joined the playing staff the previous season from Dover Athletic. The results for the following 1997–98 campaign were worse, 29 losses from 42 matches was the highest loss ratio experienced by the Ashford Town club. This included a mid-season run of 10 league matches without a win (D2; L8) followed shortly afterwards by a club record equalling sequence of 7 consecutive league game losses which included 5 consecutive in which the &#x27;Town&#x27; failed to score. The team scored only 34 league goals and failed to score in 19 matches: two players, Paul Chambers and Lee Lough top-scoring with 4 goals each. Unsurprisingly relegation couldn&#x27;t be evaded and 21st place (from 22 teams) saw the Town return to the Southern Division for the following 1998–99 season where they finished 7th in the 22 team league.

But the big news for 1998 was not the relegation but rather the news of a take-over of the indebted club by a consortium headed by former England forward Rodney Marsh. In addition to clearing the club debts they planned a development of the Homelands site. The deal ultimately collapsed but the ownership of the freehold of Homelands became separated from the football operation. As a safeguard a trust of former club directors placed a covenant on the Homelands site which stipulated if it was sold for development that a new stadium had to be built. Another ownership consortium, fronted by John Gurney, surfaced but they became unable to continue financing the club. The Ashford Town club survived when Tim Thorogood acquired it in 2001 with a lease arrangement being struck with the owners of the Homelands freehold.

====Southern League Eastern Division (1999–2004)====
The league had undertaken another reorganisation and renaming exercise for 1999–2000 and Ashford now competed as a Southern League, Division One Eastern team. During all the ownership upheaval there was a merry-go-round of managers. During the 1998–99 campaign in January 1999 Nigel Donn was succeeded by George Wakeling from Bromley. The club engaged former England international Paul Parker as director of football. In the 1999–2000 season he and Wakeling had the team topping the league table in late autumn of 1999 – after losing two of their first four league matches the team embarked on an unbeaten 14 league match sequence (W11; D3); this run included an all-time Ashford FC record equalling (from 1938 to 1939) eight consecutive single season league wins, in which 21 goals were scored whilst only 4 conceded. During this part of the campaign Lee McRobert emulated Ted Wells (from 1948 to 1949) by scoring in nine consecutive matches (eight of which were league games). Amidst the turmoil of the takeover things took a nosedive for Messrs Wakeling &amp; Parker and after a run of just one win in seven league games the pair were sacked on 10 January 2000. They were replaced for the remainder of the season by Tony Reynolds and despite a late season seven league match undefeated run (W5; D2) the earlier slump meant the team finished in sixth place in the 22 team league table.

From the 2000–01 season, in order to differentiate it from the similarly named club from Ashford, Middlesex, the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; official club name was extended to Ashford Town (Kent). In the campaign the new manager was Tommy Sampson (who had taken Deal Town to victory in the FA vase final the previous season) and the team advanced to the 4th round (the last 32) of the FA trophy. They were defeated in Weymouth 1–3 to end &#x27;Town&#x27;s&#x27; best run in the competition since 1972–73. Under Sampson league form was mediocre (W14; D1; L13) (this included an unbeaten run (W5; D1) in his final six final league matches in charge) and Tim Thorogood, who now owned the club, assumed team management for the final third of the season. During his tenure there was only one win from their last 14 league matches (W1; D3; L10). The team recorded a mid-table final league position: as a measure of the disruption encountered during the campaign there were 51 players who appeared in the &#x27;Town&#x27; shirt over the 42 league matches.

The 2001–02 campaign started in the same vein as the previous one ended with only one win in the first ten games (W1; D1; L8) and the team finished 14th from 22 teams but only seven points above the bottom spot. The team reached the semi-finals of the Kent Senior Cup where they were on the wrong end of a heavy 5–0 defeat at Football Conference club Margate.

For 2002–03 the team moved away from their green and white strip and played in lime green shirts and blue shorts. The team finished 11th from 22 teams and it was the last season in which an Ashford Town player notched 20 league goals with Adrian Stone reaching that number from his 36 matches played. The 2003–04 league season started with a nine match unbeaten run (W5; D4): the last of these games was the first of five consecutive without scoring. Subsequent inconsistent results led to a 12th placed league ranking. This season marked Ashford&#x27;s final one as a member of the Southern League after 44 years under their umbrella – there was more reorganisation afoot of the non-league scene.

====Isthmian League Division One / Southern Division (2004–2010)====
The 2004–05 season reorganisation was brought about by the introduction of a North and South regional Conference leagues below the Premier. There was also the establishment of boundaries between the Southern and Isthmian leagues (which hitherto had overlapped). As a result, Ashford Town were allocated to the Ryman sponsored Isthmian League Division One. This was a further demotion down the non-league structure, with the club&#x27;s new league referred to as &#x27;step 4&#x27; of non-league football (i.e. four levels below the Football League).

In September 2004 owner/manager Tim Thorogood appointed former England player Terry Fenwick as manager. He quit four months later claiming a vast turnover of players had not allowed a settled squad: thirty-five players had been used during a run of poor results of just two wins in 16 league matches (W2; D6: L8). Thorogood resumed as manager and the team, who failed to score in 15 of 42 league matches, finished the season 20th of 22 teams.

Supporters concerns for the existence of the club were raised in the summer of 2005 by a carry-over from the takeover/ground ownership saga of a few years previously; it was claimed the club had not paid rent (of £2,500pa) for three years and additionally had £12,000 unpaid arrears with the Inland Revenue. The issues were subsequently all resolved and Thorogood remained in control of the club. Under the joint managership of himself and John Cumberbatch team performances in the league in 2005–06 continued in a poor vein with only 2 wins in the team&#x27;s first 23 league games (W2; D7; L14). Over the 44 league match campaign just 41 goals were scored: there were 17 games in which the team failed to score and a near record 7–0 thrashing at Horsham. The &#x27;Town&#x27; ended the league campaign as 21st from 23 teams.

For the following season the there was further league reorganisation and the Isthmian replaced its single Division One with two regional divisions with &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; in the Southern division for 2006–07. There was a managerial change in October when John Cumberbatch was appointed sole manager from the role of joint-manager he had held the previous season. The league finish, incorporating a mid-season run of one win in 15 league matches (W1; D4; L10), was poor (18th from 22 teams) but there was a Kent Senior Cup semi-final contested (a 5–0 heavy home defeat by Isthmian Premier Bromley). Success was achieved though by the back-room staff led by Elaine Osbourne who won an award for the division&#x27;s best club match day programme.

March 2007 saw further changes in ownership of the club. Tim Thorogood sold to a new joint-ownership team of Tony Betteridge and Don Crosbie. They had acquired the freehold interest in the Homelands site in 2006 and crucially this transaction reunited ownership of the club and stadium. They also announced that Arsenal and England striker Ian Wright was to become director of football strategy at the club.

The start of the 2007–08 season saw former Northampton Town and Dover manager Clive Walker appointed as manager and the team returned to a green and white strip. The directors reported they had spent half a million pounds in refurbishing the Homelands facilities. Despite a respectable record over his 12 league game matches in charge (W5; D4; L3) Walker didn&#x27;t last long and he was replaced as manager at the end of October by former Wales International Steve Lovell. He oversaw a sequence of only one loss in the final eleven league matches (W8; D1; L1) and eighth position in the final table.

There was minor triumph for the club in 2007–08 with the Reserve team winning the Kent League 2 Cup (defeating Dartford) and finishing as Kent League Division 2 runners-up (to Dover).

Lovell&#x27;s first full season in charge of 2008–09, when the team again finished eighth in the league, featured a team best since the league winners of 1948–49: an unbeaten league match run of fifteen matches (W:9; D:6) which included a seven match winning streak. But most of the action over the next couple of years seasons took place off the field. In the summer of 2008 Director Crosbie announced plans for a Sports Village at Homelands. But within a year the relationship between the joint-owners Betteridge and Crosbie turned sour and a year later the boardroom dispute escalated. The split in the boardroom affected the on-field performances in the 2009–10 campaign – under the continued managership of Steve Lovell the club barely clung to their Division One status finishing 20th of 22 teams. There were league game sequences of both a 14 match win-less run (D6; L8) and a run of one win in 11 (W1; D3; L7). The first league match of the season was a near record 7–0 loss at Croydon Athletic and they nearly doubled the dose by winning 6–0 at the Homelands later in the season. The Ashford Town club did though win their final game on 4 April 2010, a 2–1 victory over Chatham.

At the end of the season there was an impasse at boardroom level and the club were in debt to Ebbsfleet United Under Football Association rules whilst this remained unpaid they were suspended from competition. In the courts the row between Betteridge and Crosbie was finally resolved with financial administration for the club and Betteridge then buying the assets of the club from the administrator. However the settlement came too late for the club to compete in the 2010–11 season.

The summer of 2010 therefore marked the end of Ashford / Ashford Town FC after a history of 80 years. During this time they had won only one League championship, the Kent league in 1948–49 and had enjoyed a few promotions and cup exploits along the way. Although relegation had usually followed shortly after the promotions the club had never for any season finished bottom of their League – albeit it was close on more than one occasion!

===Ashford United (2011– )===

====Kent Invicta League (2011–2013)====
During what transpired to be a short one-season hiatus the club was reformed as Ashford United – a revival of the name used between 1891 and 1907. The club adopted the same crest as their immediate forerunners, Ashford Town, except the word &#x27;United&#x27; replaced &#x27;Town&#x27; and the simple wording &#x27;Founded 1930&#x27; was expanded to &#x27;Founded 1891, Reformed 2011&#x27;. The home stadium for the club remained at &#x27;The Homelands&#x27;.

Under FA rules the &#x27;new&#x27; Ashford United were not permitted to re-join the league where Ashford Town had left-off, so for their inaugural season of 2011–12 they were placed into &#x27;step 6&#x27; football in the newly formed Kent Invicta League. Initially in 2011 the club appointed former manager Tony Reynolds as manager but owing to personal commitments he stepped aside before competitive games commenced and former Ashford Town player Paul Chambers took up the reins. After an indifferent start to their first season over the second half there was a ten league match unbeaten run (W5; D5) and the team finished in fifth position.

The team&#x27;s finishing position improved two places in the 2012–13 season to third. &#x27;United&#x27; were unbeaten in their first twelve league games (W10; D2), a sequence that included six straight league victories in which Mo Takalo (Takalobighashi) scored in each game. Although only the two top teams in the league were eligible for automatic promotion to the Kent League, Ashford United were awarded promotion in place of the second placed Hollands &amp; Blair who didn&#x27;t have the facilities and ground grading to take the promotion.

====Kent League / Southern Counties East Football League (2013–2017)====
During the close season the Kent League renamed itself as the Southern Counties East Football League. After a positive start on the pitch to the 2013–14 season in November 2013 owner Tony Betteridge announced that he had relinquished ownership of the club and the Homelands freehold to a company of which the wife of Don Crosbie, the director he had fought for ownership of the club back in 2010, was a director. In the 2013–14 season&#x27;s cup competitions the team reached the last 32 of the FA Vase competition (losing 1–2 at home to Hanwell Town, that season&#x27;s champions of the Spartan South Midlands Football League) and reached the Final of the Kent Senior Trophy played at Tonbridge, where they lost 0–4 to Beckenham Town. Between 14 September 2013 and 18 February 2014 the team achieved a then Ashford all-time record with a 10 consecutive league match winning run. United topped their league around Christmas, however fixture congestion owing to their cup exploits – with the team playing 12 matches in one three week period – led to a slight dip in form and they finished in second position.

The following 2014–15 season was in some ways a re-run of the previous one with a last 32 appearance in the FA Vase (losing heavily 0–5 at home to Norwich United, that season&#x27;s runaway champions of the Eastern Counties Football League) and a runners-up position in the league. A mid-autumn six league match win-less run (D4; L2) derailed the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; promotion hopes and although the team put together a new Ashford all-time record of 13 consecutive league victories they couldn&#x27;t top eventual league champions Phoenix Sports. Over the season Stuart Zanone was the leading scorer with 47 goals (41 in the league) from 35 appearances and surpassed the Ashford club post-war single season goalscoring record of 46 goals in 59 appearances (established by Alan Morton playing for Ashford Town forty-two years previously). He also established an Ashford all-time record of scoring in 11 consecutive league matches (a sequence interspersed with non-scoring cup games) and equalled an Ashford all-time record of scoring seven goals in match (equalling Joe West from 1936 to 1937) with all the goals in a 7–0 victory over Lingfield. Additionally Zanone had notched 28 goals in 11 consecutive away games between 18 October 2014 and in March 2015 and at the end of the season collected the league top scorer&#x27;s Golden Boot award.

As the 2014–15 season ended the club announced that the natural grass pitch at the Homelands (which had a history of poor drainage leading to postponed fixtures) was to be replaced during the close season with a synthetic 3G playing surface – this mooted as being the first stage of a sports village redevelopment plan to ensure a steady source of income for the club owners. Delays in construction of the pitch led to early 2015–16 season match postponements; but these were only the start of events sparked by the pitch installation. A dispute with the financiers of the project led to them demanding immediate repayment of their loan and although the club repudiated their claims they couldn&#x27;t prevent court proceedings in which the ownership of the Homelands ground was transferred to the finance company; in February news broke of a disputed winding-up petition being filed against the football club company. This was promptly overturned by the court, but owing to the financial situation the league levied a ten-point deduction against the team.
The football club owners continued to dispute and legally challenge matters and this rolled on beyond the season&#x27;s end.

The disputes detracted from an otherwise more than satisfactory 2015–16 season on the pitch – albeit it was without silverware. It began inauspiciously when on 15 August 2015, after just two games of the campaign and following a heavy 1–5 loss in the FA Cup to fellow SCEFL side Cray Valley PM, the manager Paul Chambers was relieved of his duties after a stay of four years and 171 mostly won matches. Former Ashford Town defender Danny Lye – who had returned to the Homelands as a player in December 2014 – was appointed player-manager. The team started slowly over his first ten league matches (W4; D2; L4) but over the remaining 25 league matches there were 18 victories (W18; D5; L2) and a 14 match unbeaten run incorporating 12 wins. The team finished third in the table (which would have been second, nine points behind winners Greenwich Borough had it not been for the ten points deduction). The club progressed two rounds further than previously in the FA Vase: after a replay win away in the north-east at Gateshead based Northern League Dunston UTS (a club record 660 mile round trip) the ‘Nuts and Bolts’ reached the last eight before being eliminated 0–3 at one-time Southern League rival Salisbury (who were romping away with that season&#x27;s Wessex Football League title). It was disappointment once again in the Kent Senior Trophy final where, after a goalless draw, the team lost out in a penalty shoot-out 6–7 to Sheppey United.

The previous season&#x27;s top scorer Stuart Zanone left early in the 2015–16 season and was replaced by veteran forward Shaun Welford, who was brought in as player-assistant manager from Hythe Town. Welford scored in nine consecutive, all league, matches – which numerically equalled the sequences of Lee McRobert&#x27;s (1999–2000) and Ted Wells (1948–1949) (although theirs’ weren&#x27;t all league games). Welford finished the campaign as United&#x27;s top scorer, netting on 37 occasions (31 in the league); second highest scorer Adam Booth notched 20 league goals in his total of 28.

The club began the 2016–17 season with the legal dispute from the previous campaign unresolved. Against this backdrop the returning player coach Danny Lye put together a strong squad – with the club asking the supporters to contribute towards the playing budget. Off-pitch matters continued to concern the supporters: there was an administrative dispute, ultimately resolved, with the FA over registration for acceptance for promotion; then a scare over the suitability for matches of the 3G pitch at the Homelands. However mid-March brought positive news that the legal dispute between the club and financiers who owned the ground had been settled and ownership of the Homelands had been transferred back to the football club company and subsequently the pitch and facilities passed ground grading requirements. A new director, Derek Pestridge, was appointed and he made a £500,000 interest-free loan to the club company against which a legal charge over the stadium (which had been re-introduced into the company&#x27;s financial statements following settlement of legal/finance matters) was established in his favour.

On the pitch the team challenged all season at the top of the SCEFL Premier Division and ultimately prevailed over Crowborough Athletic to clinch the 2016–17 SCEFL Premier League title and promotion to the South Division of the Isthmian League. It was a season of records: most league wins (30 out of 38 games); most league points (92); highest Homelands league attendance to date for Ashford United (807); and in scoring 119 goals, the Ashford club record of 115 scored by Ashford Town in the Kent League of 1931–32 was eclipsed; Shaun Welford with a hat-trick in the season&#x27;s last match created a new all-time club record of scoring 48 goals in 42 competitive matches (with 37 and the Golden Boot in league matches) beating Start Zanone&#x27;s 47 goal record from two seasons previously; second highest scorer Rory Hill notched 20 league goals in his total of 23; goalkeeper George Kamurasi, who was the recipient of two red cards during the season, kept 14 clean sheets in the 31 league matches in which he played. There was also victory in the Kent Senior Trophy where, after being runners-up for the previous two years, United lifted the trophy as champions with a 2–1 win (both goals from Shaun Welford) over Cray Valley PM on neutral turf at Maidstone.

With the legal/stadium disputes settled and promotion achieved the close of the 2016–17 season saw Ashford United return to where their forerunners Ashford Town had been when they ceased existence seven years previously.

====Isthmian League South / South East Division (2017– )====
Ashford returned to the Isthmian League South division for the 2017–18 season. Any thoughts of a successful season were quickly extinguished with defeats in the first two games which led to the club parting company with manager Danny Lye and the subsequent departure of experienced players. Youth team coach Jason Whitmore was appointed manager but having to rebuild the squad – and in the interim fielding inexperienced youth team players – led to a continued run of poor results including an autumn run of 12 league matches without a win (D2; L10). During January the club appointed experienced former manager of Greenwich Borough Gary Alexander as Whitmore&#x27;s assistant with a plan for the former to take over as manager the following season. There was a significant turnover of players with 78 donning the club&#x27;s jersey in the 46 match league season; there were 21 goalscorers with Max Watters topping the list with 8 (from 27 appearances). The previous season had been one of positive records, this one featured negatives: 111 goals were conceded over the league campaign – the first time in excess of 100 had been conceded by either Town or United; the goal difference of negative 51 was similarly an unwanted record; the 28 league losses was the worst since the record 29 in the 1997–98 campaign; the team&#x27;s 9–1 defeat at Cray Wanderers was the worst for the new &#x27;United&#x27; and the highest scoring/winning margin across any of the league&#x27;s games that season. With ten points from their final six league matches the team scrambled to 21st-placed finish (from 24 clubs) and maintained their league status.

There was a reorganising and resizing down to 20 teams across ‘step 4’ leagues and consequently an extra division at that level was added to the Isthmian League for the 2018–19 season with United placed in the South East Division. With Gary Alexander in position as manager the season started well with three wins. This though was followed by a seven league match win-less run (D2, L5) and early exit from FA Cup and FA Trophy competitions. Three successive league wins in November looked to have got the team back on track but couldn&#x27;t save manager Alexander who was sacked (via a Saturday evening text message) at the end of November. He was immediately replaced by Tommy Warrilow, a former Ashford Town player and previously a manager at Tonbridge Angels and Cray Wanderers, who had become available following the early season demise of Thamesmead Town. Under Warrilow over the remaining 23 matches of the season the team won 15, drew 3 and lost 5 and achieved a fourth-placed finish in the league and a promotion play-off spot. Danny Parish was top scorer over the league campaign with 25 goals from 27 starts and in a defence that conceded less than a goal a game (35 in 36 matches) there were 16 (including 6 consecutive) clean sheets kept by former England C squad goalkeeper Sam Mott. In the play-off semi-final in front of 1,123 spectators on a Monday night at Hastings United the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; ran-out 3–2 victors; twice coming from a goal behind with strikes from Jay May and Sam Corne and the latter scored a penalty one minute from the end of extra time for the winning goal. In the promotion final Ashford lost 2–1 after extra-time away at Horsham although even had they won they would not have not been promoted: Ashford&#x27;s regular season points per league game was insufficient to claim one of the five &#x27;step four&#x27; promotion spots available for the seven play-off winners.

The 2019-20 and 2020–21 seasons were affected by the COVID-19 pandemic with both foreshortened and no promotion or relegation. At the suspension of the league in March 2020 with thirty of their scheduled thirty-eight fixtures completed the &#x27;United&#x27; were second in the table (albeit only fifth on a points per game basis). They were the league&#x27;s highest scoring team with 75 goals of which David Smith had notched 20. Following the suspension the season was cancelled and there followed a six-month close season. The following 2020–21 season hardly happened at all with only six league matches completed before curtailment at the end of October 2020: the team recorded a return of three defeats from their four home league matches. There was little cup success in either campaign with FA cup first qualifying round exits in both seasons and first and second qualifying exits respectively in the FA Trophy. Off the field, in September 2020 Director Derek Pestridge made his second secured (against property) loan to the football club company of £213,435.50, and in June 2021 Paul Bowden-Brown was appointed by the club as Director of Football - he had previously been associated with the club in 2011.

A full football program returned for the 2021–22 Isthmian League South East Division season which started in a familiar pattern for the club with early exits from the FA Cup at the preliminary round stage (a 6–5 penalty defeat in a replay at home to Chatham) and a second qualifying round exit from the FA Trophy. The start to the league campaign saw a run of 11 wins in the first 15 matches (W11; D2; L2) and at the end of November the team were at the head of the table; form dipped over the next ten league matches (W3; D2; L5); however results recovered and 8 wins from the next 11 matches saw the ‘Nuts and Bolts’ secure a second-placed finish in the table 13 points adrift of league champions Hastings United. The latter team had won 2–1 at Homelands in front of an Ashford United new record league attendance of 1,134 (and the highest seen at the Homelands for a league match since 2004-05 when 1,057 were present at the Ashford Town match versus upwardly mobile AFC Wimbledon). The subsequent promotion play-off semi-final was a tight 1–0 victory over Cray Valley; the final itself was an anti-climactic 0–2 loss to Herne Bay in front of a record home crowd for Ashford United of 1,865 (the 4th highest all-time competitive match Homelands attendance to date).

In April 2022 the club gained planning consent to further develop the unused 9.5 acres of the Homelands site (see the Stadium section below). Shortly afterwards it was announced that Director of Football, Paul Bowden-Brown was stepping down from his position. The company accounts showed that over the season the club had reduced its accumulated trading deficit by almost twenty-five thousand pounds, recovering the increase incurred during the previous two COVID-19 pandemic interrupted seasons.

The 2022–23 season began in a somewhat off-key manner (which pervaded the season): the three top scorers from the previous campaign departed – with two leaving during pre-season preparations; and the team&#x27;s first home league match was postponed owing to a delay in certification of the club&#x27;s pitch. After winning seven of their first ten league matches (W7; D2; L1) this was followed by a thirteen match slump (W3; D3; L7), with many of these against promotion rivals, which saw the team drop out of the play-off places. Around the turn of the year two virtually ever-present defenders and four regularly playing squad players departed the club in quick succession and although replacements, including the club leading scorer from the 2018–19 season Danny Parish, were recruited, this contributed to a significant churn in the playing staff – 37 players started league matches and a further nine made substitute appearances. The team remained on the fringes of the promotion play-offs but losses in their final four matches resulted in a ninth-placed position in the final table.

At the conclusion of the campaign manager Tommy Warrilow, who had been in charge since 2018 left the club. Two weeks later new manager Kevin Watson was appointed; he had recently left Herne Bay (whom he joined mid-season) following their relegation from the Isthmian Premier Division – previously he had enjoyed a fruitful five-year spell at Cray Valley (the 2018–19 Southern Counties East Football League champions and FA Vase finalists).

Off the pitch, in January 2023 the club announced planning approval for the previously announced development of the Homelands site had been granted and in February 2023 Holly Jean Crosbie, whose company had completed the architects work on the development, was appointed as a Director of the company running the club. The annual financial statement at May 2023 indicated that the club company&#x27;s deficit had increased over the year by slightly in excess of sixty-five thousand pounds.

Delays to relaying the synthetic pitch at the Homelands meant the club began the 2023–24 season playing their home matches at Chatham and didn&#x27;t return to play in Ashford until early November 2024. By this date the team had been ousted from the FA Cup (preliminary round), the FA Trophy (third qualiying round) and the Kent Senior Cup (first round) but, were in a play-off position in the league table. A slump in results from late November of four consecutive losses and then five consecutive losses in January saw the club descend to mid-table where they would finish the season in 11th position with forty-five points, twenty-five adrift of the final promotion play-off position and a negative goal difference of minus twenty-five, the sixth worst in the division. On a positive note the club reached the semi-finals of the Velocity Cup (Isthmian League Cup) before being beaten 4–2 by old rivals and eventual trophy winners Chatham Town. Shortly following that defeat, in mid March, manager Kevin Watson was relieved of his duties (the club&#x27;s league record with him at the helm was P29; W12; D3; L14). He was replaced on an interim basis until the end of the season by former Maidstone United F.C. manager Alan Walker who was assisted by former Ashford Town player Darren Hare. Top league scorer with ten goals (from seventeen plus five substitute appearances) was Vance Bola - who quit the club in February. The player with highest number of appearances (from the 46 players who played in matches) was Harvey Brand playing in 42 of the club&#x27;s 49 competitive matches.

More significantly for the club during the season, in November 2023, owner Don Crosbie announced that he was looking to sell the club. In March 2024 it was announced that he had accepted an offer for the club (with details to be announced later). In mid-May 2024 the cub signed recently resigned Chatham Town assistant manager and former Gillingham captain Danny Kedwell as manager. Kedwell left the club in January 2024 and was replaced by own of the new co-owners of the club, Lloyd Hume.

==Players==
==Managers==
==Rivalry and Supporters==
From the earlier Ashford United days the club&#x27;s rivals were chiefly Chatham, Maidstone United and Tunbridge Wells Rangers. As the club transformed first into Ashford Railway Works and then Ashford Town, the rivals became increasingly the neighbouring East Kent clubs: Folkestone, Dover, Margate and Hastings. Following Ashford&#x27;s move into the Isthmian League and the eroding of the relative status of the leagues in which the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27; have competed teams from North Kent/South London and East Sussex have mostly replaced former rivals as playing opponents and the focus of supporters rivalry.

Following the formation of Ashford United and their progression into step 9 of the football pyramid the likes of Sevenoaks Town, Greenwich Borough, Beckenham Town, Tunbridge Wells, Sheppey United and Fisher came to the fore as rivals with the latter three having supporters similarly vocal to those of the &#x27;Nuts and Bolts&#x27;.

Since 2011, United have boasted higher attendances than around 80% of other English teams at Step 8 &amp; 9 level. Their supporter&#x27;s independent social media network is one of the largest in non-league below the National League. The vocal section renamed itself &quot;the FAMOUS NUTS AND BOLTS&quot; in 2018 and claim to be one of the largest in Kent at this level.

United fans became famous across the Football network in early 2018 when they took around 90 fans to their away game in Guernsey, a number almost triple the previous record held by Hastings United when they took 31 a year prior.

==Stadium==

Ashford have played at the Homelands Stadium since its construction in 1989. They had returned to the town after a two-year ground share at Folkestone, following leaving their previous home ground of 56 years at Essella Park, Ashford. The record attendance at the Homelands ground of 3,363 was set at the first round 1994–95 FA Cup match against Fulham.

The originally installed natural grass pitch at the Homelands had a history of poor drainage and wear that had over the years caused match postponements. To rectify this at the conclusion of the 2014–15 season the club began installing a new synthetic 3G pitch (of a FIFA 2 rated standard) for use the following season. Its construction was delayed and it was not available until shortly after the commencement of the 2015–16 season.

Many teams have ground-shared at the Homelands: Conference South club Margate for the 2004 season during which their Hartsdown Park stadium was undergoing redevelopment; Maidstone United played at the stadium for two seasons from 2009 whilst their Gallagher Stadium ground was built; SCEFL club Canterbury City were tenants between 2014 and 2017, they were a nomad club without their own home ground and had previously played at Herne Bay and subsequently at Faversham.

From the 2018–19 season Kennington who compete in the Southern Counties East Football League began to play their home matches at the Homelands.

In April 2022, a long mooted major redevelopment plan of the Homelands site was announced. This included; the installation of an additional full size 3G football pitch with changing facilities; building ten start-up business units; the erection of a new canopy for fans at the west end of the main pitch; and improvements to car parking areas - all expected to be completed for the 2023–24 season. An indoor sports hall was proposed as a future addition.(Proposed plan).

Previous Ashford Teams’ Stadiums
*South Eastern Rangers: Newton Green, Newtown, Ashford
*Ashford United: &quot;1891–1898&quot;, Victoria Ground, behind the Victoria Hotel (now Victoria Point), Ashford &quot;1898–1903&quot;, Godinton Road (western end, beyond railway bridge) &quot;1903–1907&quot;, Railway Works ground, off Newtown Road (under railway arches, Willesbough side of river Stour), Ashford
*Ashford Railway Works: Railway Works ground, off Newtown Road (under railway arches, Willesbough side of river Stour), Ashford
*Ashford / Ashford Town: &quot;1930–1931&quot;, Railway Works ground, off Newtown Road (under railway arches, Willesbough side of river Stour), Ashford &quot;1931–1987&quot;, Essella Park, Essella Road, Willesborough, Ashford &quot;1987–1989&quot;, Cheriton Road, Folkestone &quot;1989– &quot;, The Homelands, Kingsnorth, Ashford

==Honours==

FIRST TEAM

*League
** East Kent League Division 1
***Runners-up: 1898–1899
** East Kent League
***Champions: (As Ashford Railway Works) 1908–09
** Kent League: Division 2, Eastern Section
***Champions: (As Ashford Railway Works) 1911–12, 1912–13, 1913–14, 1919–20, 1927–28
***Runners-up: (As Ashford Railway Works) 1909–10
** Folkestone and District Senior League
***Champions: (As Ashford Railway Works) 1909–10
***Runners-up: (As Ashford Railway Works) 1919–20
**Kent League
***Champions: 1948–49
***Runners-up: 1931–32
**Southern League: Southern Division
***Runners-up: 1986–87, 1995–96
** Southern Counties East Football League
***Premier Division Champions: 2016–17
***Runners-up: 2013–14, 2014–15
*Cup Competitions
** Kent County Badge
***Runners-up: (as South-Eastern Rangers) 1886, 1888
** Kent Cup / Kent Senior Cup
***Winners: 1892–93, 1958–59, 1962–63, 1992–93, 1995–96
***Runners-up: 1888–89, 1890–91 (as South-Eastern Rangers); 1901–02, 1902–03, 1961–62, 1980–81, 1981–82
**Kent League Cup
*** Winners: 1938–39
***Runners-up: 1923–24 (As Ashford Railway Works); 1950–51
** Kent Floodlight Trophy
***Winners: 1961–62
** Kent Senior Trophy
***Winners: 2016–17
***Runners-up: 2013–14, 2015–16

RESERVES

*League
**Kent League Division 2
***Champions: 1952–53, 1955–56
***Runners-up: 1948–49, 1984–85, 1987–88, 1988–89, 1990–91, 2007–08
**Seanglian League
***Champions: 1961–62
**Kent Amateur League: East
***Champions: 1931–32
*Cup Competitions
**Kent League Cup
***Runners-up: 1971–72 
**Kent League League 2 Cup
***Winners: 1949–50, 1952–53, 2007–08
***Runners-up: 1986–87
**Kent Intermediate Cup
***Winners: 1953–54
***Runners-up: 1952–53, 1955–56, 1957–58, 1961–62
** Seanglian League Cup
***Runners-up: 1960–61, 1961–62

==Club records==
*Record attendance
** At Essella Park: 6,525; v Crystal Palace, FA Cup first round 1959–60
** At The Homelands: 3,363; v Fulham, FA Cup first round, 1994–95
** At an away ground: 13,900 at Griffin Park, Brentford; v Brentford, FA Cup first round, 1959–60
*Most appearances: Peter McRobert: 819 (760 starts + 59 substitute) (1974–2002)
*Individual Goal Scoring Records
**Most in Ashford Career: Dave Arter: 196 (1983–1986,1988–1990,1994–1996)
**Most in a single season: (post-war): Shaun Welford: 48 (in 42 matches) 2016–17
**Most in a single game: 7: Joe West: v Erith &amp; Belvedere (home) Kent League 28 April 1937; Stuart Zanone: v Lingfield (away) Southern Counties East Football League 24 March 2015
**In Consecutive League Games: 11 Stuart Zanone (sequence excludes non-scoring cup matches) Southern Counties East Football League 2014–15. 9 Shaun Welford (consecutively played matches) Southern Counties East Football League 2015–16; 
*Single Game Records
**Win: 15–0 v Erith &amp; Belvedere, Kent League 28 April 1937 
**Defeats: (Original Ashford United) 0–12: @ Woolwich Arsenal, FA Cup 14 October 1893 &amp; @ Sittingbourne, Thames and Medway Combination 7 November 1906 (Ashford FC) 3–14 @ Folkestone Reserves, Kent League 1933–34
*Team Consecutive Single Season League Match Sequences
**Wins: 13, Southern Counties East Football League 2014–15
**Draws 6, Southern League 1961–62 (expands to 9 for all competitive matches)
**Defeats: 7: 1932–33 Kent League; 1976–77, 1989-90 (twice) &amp; 1997–98 Southern League
**Unbeaten: 20 (won 16, drawn 4) Kent League 1948–49
**Without a Win 15 (drawn 7, lost 8) Southern League 1996–97
*Highest transfer fee
**Paid: £7,000 to Sittingbourne for J Ross and D Arter, 1994
**Received: £20,000 from Sittingbourne for Lee McRobert, 1993
*Best Performances FA Knock-out Competitions
**FA Cup: Second Round (3): 1960–61, 1966–67 &amp; 1996–97
**FA Trophy: Semi-final, 1972–73
**FA Vase: Quarter-final 2015–16

==Ashford United Ladies==

===History===
In June 2022 it was announced that the long established Ashford Ladies club was to become affiliated with the Ashford United organisation and be renamed Ashford United Ladies. The former team had moved from their long-time home, the Arthur Baker Field at Charing in 2020 and been playing for two seasons at Ashford United&#x27;s home stadium of The Homelands.

Ladies football commenced in Ashford over fifty years earlier: in 1971–1972 Ashford Ladies joined the newly formed Division 1 West of the Kent Women&#x27;s League. In April 1972 they were defeated in the League Cup final by Barnfield (Sevenoaks) 4–3 after extra time; the following season against the same team the result was reversed with Ashford winning the cup 1–0. Also in 1973 the team played in the quarter-finals of the Mitre sponsored Women&#x27;s FA Cup. The team were League Cup runners-up on a further two occasions and were three times League runners-up before in the 1978–79 campaign they completed a feat not previously achieved by any team: they won the treble of League, League Cup and Sutcliffe Cup (retained from the previous season); top scorer Allison Wheeler scored 43 goals in the season taking her club total to 207. The same season the reserves team had a couple of near misses, finishing as runners-up in the Division 2 league and League 2 cup. As a result of their success the team were promoted to the Women&#x27;s South East Regional League Premier Division (with the reserves team in Division 1).

The Ashford Ladies club now affiliated to ‘United’ had over the previous seventeen years achieved several promotions: in 2005–06 as league winners from the Kent County Division of the South East Counties Women&#x27;s League to Division 1 East; from there as league runners-up into the Premier Division in 2009–10 (from which they were relegated the next season); and again as league winners into the Premier Division in 2014–2015. After maintaining mid-table finishes over the subsequent five seasons reorganisation within the women&#x27;s leagues in 2020 saw the team placed in the London &amp; South East Women&#x27;s Regional League Division 1 South. In the 2021–2022 season, their final campaign as Ashford Ladies, the team finished in third position in the ten team league.

In their first season (2022–23) playing as Ashford United Ladies the team were champions of Division 1 South of the London &amp; South East Women&#x27;s Regional League and achieved promotion to the Premier Division – the fifth tier in the women&#x27;s league pyramid. The team scored 113 goals over their 22 match league campaign and conceded only 23. Rebecca Wyatt with 48 goals of which 35 were in league games was the seasons top scorer (for the fifth successive season with a total of 146 goals). Additionally the team were winners over Clapton Community in a dramatic final of the L&amp;SER Trophy (the combined Division 1 South and North knockout cup): on neutral turf at Maidstone at half-time ‘United’ were 3–0 ahead; at full-time the score was level at 3–3; with two goals in extra time the ‘United’ Ladies won 5–3 and lifted the trophy.

&quot;For season&#x27;s League and Cup records of the Ashford Ladies club see List of Ashford United F.C. seasons.&quot;

===Honours===

*League
** Kent League Women&#x27;s League Division 1 West
***Champions: 1978–1979
***Runners-up: Three occasions
** South East Counties League Kent County Division
***Champions: 2005–06
** South East Counties League Division 1 East
***Champions: 2009–10 
***Runners-up: 2014–15
** London &amp; South East Women&#x27;s Regional League Division 1 South
***Champions: 2022–23
*Cup
** Kent League Women&#x27;s League Division 1 Cup
***Champions: 1972–1973, 1978–1979
***Runners-up: 1971–1972 &amp; two other occasions
** Sutcliffe Cup
***Champions: 1977–1978, 1978–1979
** London &amp; South East Women&#x27;s Regional League Trophy
***Champions: 2022–23

==References==
==External links==
*Nuts and Bolts Archive, History of Ashford Town &amp; Ashford United
*Football Club History Database
*Non-League Football matters</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4805012" start="0" end="19" title="Ashford United F.C." label="Ashford United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="35" end="43" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q725261" start="58" end="71" title="Ashford, Kent" label="Ashford, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187030" start="438" end="450" title="Phoenix club (sports)" label="phoenix club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="574" end="584" title="Non-League football" label="non-league"/>
<link wikidata="Q311935" start="877" end="886" title="Artificial turf" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849718" start="1091" end="1126" title="List of Ashford United F.C. seasons" label="List of Ashford United F.C. seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814668" start="1499" end="1514" title="Kent Senior Cup" label="Kent Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087699" start="1592" end="1599" title="Chatham Town F.C." label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391675" start="2005" end="2012" title="Kent County Football Association" label="Kent FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758886" start="2880" end="2903" title="Highland Light Infantry" label="Highland Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="2953" end="2959" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q48688475" start="3037" end="3047" title="Crouch End F.C." label="Crouch End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="3108" end="3116" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350113" start="3210" end="3221" title="Ejection (sports)" label="sending-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="3271" end="3279" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597919" start="3402" end="3411" title="Gravesend United F.C." label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087699" start="3493" end="3500" title="Chatham Town F.C." label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814668" start="3516" end="3524" title="Kent Senior Cup" label="Kent Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270049" start="3804" end="3822" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Royal West Kent Regiment" label="West Kent Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="3847" end="3854" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="4075" end="4091" title="Woolwich Arsenal F.C." label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="4350" end="4381" title="Football League Second Division" label="Football League Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822234" start="4623" end="4634" title="Kent Football League (1894–1959)" label="Kent League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438576" start="5055" end="5064" title="Faversham Town F.C." label="Faversham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213294" start="6071" end="6084" title="Sittingbourne F.C." label="Sittingbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560937" start="6161" end="6177" title="Gilbert Godsmark" label="Gilbert Godsmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="6215" end="6230" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="6236" end="6248" title="Newton Heath F.C." label="Newton Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811518" start="6315" end="6327" title="transfer fee" label="transfer fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="6367" end="6384" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="6642" end="6657" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814668" start="6795" end="6810" title="Kent Senior Cup" label="Kent Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844365" start="7129" end="7138" title="Maidstone United F.C. (1897)" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020613" start="7472" end="7479" title="Newtown, Kent" label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003679" start="7554" end="7567" title="Willesborough" label="Willesborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087699" start="7745" end="7752" title="Chatham Town F.C." label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18129217" start="8233" end="8247" title="West Hampstead F.C." label="West Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696729" start="8835" end="8849" title="Cray Wanderers F.C." label="Cray Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304446" start="9449" end="9482" title="South Eastern and Chatham Railway" label="South Eastern and Chatham Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10401" end="10414" title="World War I" label="the Great War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="10532" end="10542" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844365" start="11334" end="11343" title="Maidstone United F.C. (1897)" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059418" start="11557" end="11574" title="Northfleet United F.C." label="Northfleet United"/>
<link wikidata="Q741266" start="11651" end="11667" title="Southern Railway (UK)" label="Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392034" start="12684" end="12699" title="Kentish Express" label="Kentish Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822234" start="12755" end="12766" title="Kent Football League (1894–1959)" label="Kent League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814668" start="13006" end="13021" title="Kent Senior Cup" label="Kent Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18510" start="13042" end="13050" title="Dartford F.C." label="Dartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="13071" end="13086" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003679" start="13483" end="13496" title="Willesborough" label="Willesborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059418" start="13852" end="13869" title="Northfleet United F.C." label="Northfleet United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="13943" end="13960" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="14624" end="14638" title="crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="14643" end="14659" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q55979139" start="14668" end="14680" title="Bert Menlove" label="Bert Menlove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415502" start="15417" end="15434" title="1921 FA Cup Final" label="1921 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386957" start="15436" end="15449" title="Jimmy Dimmock" label="Jimmy Dimmock"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055444" start="15574" end="15595" title="K Sports F.C." label="Aylesford Paper Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="15771" end="15790" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595" start="15892" end="15919" title="Leyton Orient F.C." label="Clapton (now Leyton) Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="16015" end="16030" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="16198" end="16204" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059418" start="16281" end="16298" title="Northfleet United F.C." label="Northfleet United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595" start="16349" end="16363" title="Leyton Orient F.C." label="Clapton Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470737" start="16615" end="16626" title="Tommy Lucas" label="Tommy Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17917692" start="16809" end="16819" title="Jim French (footballer, born 1907)" label="Jim French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291109" start="18131" end="18152" title="Erith &amp;amp; Belvedere F.C." label="Erith &amp;amp; Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379393" start="18158" end="18166" title="Joe West (footballer)" label="Joe West"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="18333" end="18341" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899804" start="18737" end="18760" title="Bexley United F.C." label="Bexleyheath and Welling"/>
<link wikidata="Q891692" start="19255" end="19262" title="Margate F.C." label="Margate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291139" start="19312" end="19335" title="Tunbridge Wells F.C." label="Tunbridge Wells Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262471" start="19982" end="19995" title="Norman Cycles" label="Norman Cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822234" start="20116" end="20127" title="Kent Football League (1894–1959)" label="Kent League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="20326" end="20336" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085659" start="20649" end="20663" title="Charlie Walker (footballer, born 1911)" label="Charlie Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q891692" start="20692" end="20699" title="Margate FC" label="Margate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321962" start="20959" end="20971" title="goal average" label="goal average"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302484" start="21053" end="21058" title="Dover F.C." label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380586" start="21063" end="21071" title="Ramsgate FC" label="Ramsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="21817" end="21827" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380586" start="22189" end="22206" title="Ramsgate FC" label="Ramsgate Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213294" start="22266" end="22288" title="Sittingbourne F.C." label="Sittingbourne Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302484" start="22381" end="22395" title="Dover F.C." label="Dover Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="22408" end="22427" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="23151" end="23161" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237965" start="23257" end="23269" title="David Nelson (footballer)" label="David Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="23290" end="23304" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810234" start="24183" end="24193" title="Alan Smith (footballer, born 1921)" label="Alan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514105" start="24493" end="24506" title="Harry Freeman (footballer)" label="Harry Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595" start="25377" end="25390" title="Leyton Orient F.C." label="Leyton Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="25395" end="25406" title="Southampton FC" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692978" start="25417" end="25428" title="Ted Ballard" label="Ted Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564389" start="26012" end="26021" title="Tonbridge F.C." label="Tonbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="26038" end="26048" title="Gillingham F.C." label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="26522" end="26528" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680457" start="26940" end="26955" title="Hastings United F.C. (1948)" label="Hastings United"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="27014" end="27029" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="27046" end="27060" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q541351" start="27175" end="27186" title="Jack Taylor (referee)" label="Jack Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692978" start="27345" end="27356" title="Ted Ballard" label="Ted Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="27419" end="27425" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="27496" end="27511" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822234" start="27565" end="27576" title="Kent Football League (1894–1959)" label="Kent League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="27723" end="27738" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="27963" end="27973" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380586" start="27975" end="27983" title="Ramsgate FC" label="Ramsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q891692" start="27985" end="27992" title="Margate FC" label="Margate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302484" start="27994" end="27999" title="Dover F.C." label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899804" start="28001" end="28024" title="Bexley United F.C." label="Bexleyleath and Welling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291139" start="28026" end="28041" title="Tunbridge Wells FC" label="Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213294" start="28046" end="28059" title="Sittingbourne FC" label="Sittingbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711586" start="28215" end="28232" title="Hinckley Athletic F.C." label="Hinckley Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424636" start="28237" end="28244" title="Romford FC" label="Romford"/>
<link wikidata="Q48939" start="28336" end="28356" title="Exeter City F.C." label="Exeter City Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519427" start="28358" end="28372" title="Merthyr Tydfil FC" label="Merthyr Tydfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q18518" start="28374" end="28387" title="Kidderminster Harriers F.C." label="Kidderminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q48929" start="28389" end="28402" title="Burton Albion F.C." label="Burton Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526204" start="28407" end="28421" title="Cambridge City F.C." label="Cambridge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711586" start="28573" end="28590" title="Hinckley Athletic F.C." label="Hinckley Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424636" start="28647" end="28654" title="Romford FC" label="Romford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="29206" end="29229" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511" start="29235" end="29259" title="Ebbsfleet United F.C." label="Gravesend and Northfleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="29315" end="29324" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="29539" end="29563" title="The Football Association" label="The Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q381704" start="29700" end="29713" title="Floodlights (sport)" label="floodlighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="30354" end="30361" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q297271" start="30412" end="30425" title="Jimmy Greaves" label="Jimmy Greaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="30812" end="30822" title="Gillingham FC" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485404" start="30860" end="30873" title="John Shepherd (footballer, born 1932)" label="John Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302484" start="31148" end="31153" title="Dover F.C." label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q18571" start="31228" end="31243" title="Isthmian League" label="Isthmian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q48953" start="31245" end="31262" title="Wycombe Wanderers F.C." label="Wycombe Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="31464" end="31483" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384979" start="31515" end="31527" title="Keith Rutter" label="Keith Rutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680457" start="31748" end="31763" title="Hastings United F.C. (1948)" label="Hastings United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564389" start="32304" end="32313" title="Tonbridge F.C." label="Tonbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302484" start="32516" end="32521" title="Dover F.C." label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q891692" start="33275" end="33282" title="Margate F.C." label="Margate"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="33310" end="33320" title="Gillingham F.C." label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q809114" start="33561" end="33571" title="Barry Town" label="Barry Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504864" start="33607" end="33621" title="Lawrie Thomson" label="Lawrie Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934292" start="33623" end="33633" title="Bob Walker (footballer, born 1942)" label="Bob Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q19584" start="34071" end="34083" title="Crawley Town F.C." label="Crawley Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688766" start="34317" end="34332" title="Aetolian League (football)" label="Aetolian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538449" start="34759" end="34770" title="Slade Green F.C." label="Slade Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411299" start="35220" end="35239" title="Kent Football League" label="Kent Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q56224329" start="35568" end="35581" title="Allan Sanders" label="Allan Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q19453" start="35694" end="35720" title="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion F.C." label="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="35811" end="35818" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635180" start="35874" end="35887" title="Peter Sillett" label="Peter Sillett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="36437" end="36460" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615797" start="36461" end="36475" title="Guildford City F.C." label="Guildford City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526204" start="36596" end="36610" title="Cambridge City F.C." label="Cambridge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19634" start="36783" end="36795" title="Swindon Town F.C." label="Swindon Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18509" start="37255" end="37271" title="Cambridge United F.C." label="Cambridge United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034742" start="37532" end="37547" title="Athenian League" label="Athenian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213670" start="37575" end="37595" title="Walton &amp;amp; Hersham F.C." label="Walton &amp;amp; Hersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="38928" end="38943" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436315" start="39035" end="39066" title="Football League Fourth Division" label="Football League Fourth Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q599356" start="39220" end="39228" title="Weymouth FC" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910669" start="39604" end="39618" title="Bill Robertson (Scottish footballer)" label="Bill Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882874" start="39758" end="39772" title="Worcester City FC" label="Worcester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424540" start="39853" end="39865" title="FA Youth Cup Finals of the 1960s" label="FA Youth Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212669" start="40159" end="40177" title="Hillingdon Borough FC" label="Hillingdon Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302484" start="40613" end="40618" title="Dover F.C." label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087699" start="41039" end="41046" title="Chatham Town F.C." label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046509" start="41098" end="41107" title="FA Trophy" label="FA Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="41278" end="41289" title="Bangor City F.C." label="Bangor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18502" start="41297" end="41320" title="Northern Premier League" label="Northern Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="41401" end="41408" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19495" start="41483" end="41495" title="Peterborough United F.C." label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237961" start="41576" end="41587" title="Scarborough FC" label="Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707381" start="41993" end="42004" title="Alan Morton (footballer born 1950)" label="Alan Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q203781" start="42712" end="42723" title="Roy Hodgson" label="Roy Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="43022" end="43030" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q208793" start="43032" end="43042" title="Saint-Omer" label="Saint-Omer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11131" start="43047" end="43057" title="Hazebrouck" label="Hazebrouck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="43111" end="43121" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302484" start="43126" end="43131" title="Dover F.C." label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="43801" end="43811" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189205" start="43832" end="43843" title="Dennis Hunt" label="Dennis Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="43954" end="43964" title="Gillingham FC" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212669" start="44200" end="44218" title="Hillingdon Borough F.C." label="Hillingdon Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19644" start="44302" end="44309" title="Walsall F.C." label="Walsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239544" start="44742" end="44751" title="John Hold" label="John Hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844365" start="44909" end="44925" title="Maidstone United F.C. (1897)" label="Maidstone United"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822447" start="45163" end="45174" title="Tony Godden" label="Tony Godden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="45223" end="45243" title="West Bromwich Albion" label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="45308" end="45323" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584552" start="46657" end="46664" title="Bromley F.C." label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18504" start="47708" end="47731" title="Football Conference" label="Alliance Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511" start="48708" end="48734" title="Ebbsfleet United F.C." label="Gravesend &amp;amp; Northfleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844365" start="48745" end="48761" title="Maidstone United F.C. (1897)" label="Maidstone United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529928" start="49466" end="49478" title="Essex Senior Football League" label="Essex League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424214" start="49484" end="49492" title="Stansted F.C." label="Stansted"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844324" start="49713" end="49729" title="East Anglian Cup" label="East Anglian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q185580" start="49757" end="49764" title="FA Vase" label="FA Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q18571" start="49900" end="49923" title="Isthmian League" label="Isthmian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861033" start="49924" end="49931" title="Barking F.C." label="Barking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707381" start="50161" end="50172" title="Alan Morton (footballer born 1950)" label="Alan Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635180" start="50431" end="50444" title="Peter Sillett" label="Peter Sillett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18510" start="51440" end="51448" title="Dartford F.C." label="Dartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975925" start="52032" end="52047" title="Dorchester Town F.C." label="Dorchester Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138067" start="52406" end="52416" title="Kingsnorth" label="Kingsnorth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="52918" end="52928" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418070" start="53116" end="53126" title="Poole Town F.C." label="Poole Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="53485" end="53495" title="Promotion and relegation" label="relegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18502" start="54268" end="54291" title="Northern Premier League" label="Northern Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9195223" start="54310" end="54324" title="Colne Dynamoes F.C." label="Colne Dynamoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494568" start="54481" end="54495" title="Sheppey United F.C." label="Sheppey United"/>
<link wikidata="Q376118" start="54511" end="54526" title="Fisher Athletic F.C." label="Fisher Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290967" start="54542" end="54552" title="Hythe Town F.C." label="Hythe Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033634" start="54572" end="54587" title="Canterbury City F.C." label="Canterbury City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213294" start="54739" end="54752" title="Sittingbourne F.C." label="Sittingbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290967" start="54896" end="54906" title="Hythe Town F.C." label="Hythe Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213294" start="55047" end="55060" title="Sittingbourne F.C." label="Sittingbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213294" start="55144" end="55157" title="Sittingbourne F.C." label="Sittingbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q118121709" start="55533" end="55544" title="Neil Cugley" label="Neil Cugley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464521" start="55562" end="55572" title="Folkestone F.C." label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290967" start="55615" end="55625" title="Hythe Town F.C." label="Hythe Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q104862835" start="55647" end="55658" title="1988–89 Kent Football League" label="Kent League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290967" start="55931" end="55936" title="Hythe Town F.C." label="Hythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18504" start="56081" end="56098" title="National League (English football)" label="Conference League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306118" start="56106" end="56117" title="Slough Town F.C." label="Slough Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584552" start="56250" end="56257" title="Bromley F.C." label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18508" start="56535" end="56549" title="Braintree Town F.C." label="Braintree Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118564" start="57461" end="57475" title="Salisbury City F.C." label="Salisbury City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="57541" end="57547" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q604475" start="57887" end="57898" title="Micky Adams" label="Micky Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707381" start="58434" end="58445" title="Alan Morton (footballer born 1950)" label="Alan Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291109" start="59172" end="59193" title="Erith &amp;amp; Belvedere F.C." label="Erith &amp;amp; Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417384" start="59352" end="59359" title="Newport (IOW) F.C." label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="59367" end="59380" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q48862" start="59498" end="59512" title="Aldershot Town F.C." label="Aldershot Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450822" start="59636" end="59653" title="Bognor Regis Town F.C." label="Bognor Regis Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19495" start="60140" end="60152" title="Peterborough United F.C." label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="60425" end="60433" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q81749638" start="60494" end="60509" title="Matt Carruthers" label="Matt Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213294" start="60660" end="60673" title="Sittingbourne FC" label="Sittingbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988619" start="61038" end="61049" title="Kingstonian F.C." label="Kingstonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938" start="61142" end="61164" title="Dagenham &amp;amp; Redbridge F.C." label="Dagenham And Redbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="61332" end="61349" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalty shoot-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714" start="61497" end="61504" title="Watford F.C." label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633536" start="62016" end="62028" title="Sudbury Town F.C." label="Sudbury Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212680" start="62122" end="62140" title="Folkestone Invicta F.C." label="Folkestone Invicta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032347" start="62165" end="62175" title="Nigel Donn" label="Nigel Donn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658370" start="62234" end="62248" title="Dover Athletic F.C." label="Dover Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179220" start="63156" end="63168" title="Rodney Marsh (footballer)" label="Rodney Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q97164153" start="63595" end="63606" title="John Gurney (football chairman)" label="John Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584552" start="64203" end="64210" title="Bromley F.C." label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q769780" start="64258" end="64269" title="Paul Parker (footballer)" label="Paul Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q725270" start="65355" end="65373" title="Ashford, Surrey" label="Ashford, Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819829" start="65498" end="65511" title="Tommy Sampson" label="Tommy Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245850" start="65527" end="65536" title="Deal Town F.C." label="Deal Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q599356" start="65683" end="65691" title="Weymouth FC" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18504" start="66641" end="66660" title="National League (English football)" label="Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="67259" end="67274" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="67643" end="67651" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q18571" start="67656" end="67664" title="Isthmian League" label="Isthmian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970405" start="68073" end="68086" title="Terry Fenwick" label="Terry Fenwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118937" start="69187" end="69194" title="Horsham F.C." label="Horsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584552" start="69863" end="69870" title="Bromley F.C." label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="70332" end="70339" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q312595" start="70360" end="70370" title="Ian Wright" label="Ian Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q48945" start="70472" end="70488" title="Northampton Town F.C." label="Northampton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302484" start="70493" end="70498" title="Dover F.C." label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134693" start="70507" end="70519" title="Clive Walker (footballer born 1945)" label="Clive Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613188" start="70889" end="70901" title="Steve Lovell (Welsh footballer)" label="Steve Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18510" start="71142" end="71150" title="Dartford F.C." label="Dartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658370" start="71207" end="71212" title="Dover Athletic F.C." label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993260" start="72202" end="72218" title="Croydon Athletic F.C." label="Croydon Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087699" start="72395" end="72402" title="Chatham Town F.C." label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511" start="72499" end="72515" title="Ebbsfleet United F.C." label="Ebbsfleet United"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242562" start="72694" end="72718" title="Administration in United Kingdom law" label="financial administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367435" start="74098" end="74117" title="Kent Invicta Football League" label="Kent Invicta League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411299" start="74878" end="74889" title="Kent Football League" label="Kent League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855653" start="74959" end="74979" title="Hollands &amp;amp; Blair F.C." label="Hollands &amp;amp; Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411299" start="75194" end="75232" title="Southern Counties East Football League" label="Southern Counties East Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q185580" start="75627" end="75634" title="FA Vase" label="FA Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651418" start="75670" end="75682" title="Hanwell Town F.C." label="Hanwell Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634353" start="75720" end="75758" title="Spartan South Midlands Football League" label="Spartan South Midlands Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878651" start="75852" end="75866" title="Beckenham Town F.C." label="Beckenham Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q185580" start="76349" end="76356" title="FA Vase" label="FA Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593190" start="76388" end="76402" title="Norwich United F.C." label="Norwich United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278145" start="76448" end="76480" title="Eastern Counties Football League" label="Eastern Counties Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18688" start="76780" end="76794" title="Phoenix Sports F.C." label="Phoenix Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707381" start="77021" end="77032" title="Alan Morton (footballer born 1950)" label="Alan Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416953" start="77383" end="77392" title="Lingfield F.C." label="Lingfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77786" end="77798" title="Season (sports)#Off-season" label="close season"/>
<link wikidata="Q311935" start="77806" end="77815" title="Artificial turf" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="79028" end="79034" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183026" start="79056" end="79070" title="Cray Valley Paper Mills F.C." label="Cray Valley PM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291161" start="79612" end="79629" title="Greenwich Borough F.C." label="Greenwich Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q185580" start="79739" end="79746" title="FA Vase" label="FA Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="79793" end="79802" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750075" start="79809" end="79824" title="Northern Football League" label="Northern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315746" start="79825" end="79836" title="Dunston UTS F.C." label="Dunston UTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="79957" end="79972" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712693" start="79979" end="79988" title="Salisbury F.C." label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3168890" start="80036" end="80058" title="Wessex Football League" label="Wessex Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="80185" end="80202" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalty shoot-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494568" start="80210" end="80224" title="Sheppey United F.C." label="Sheppey United"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290967" start="80415" end="80425" title="Hythe Town F.C." label="Hythe Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="81199" end="81205" title="The Football Association" label="the FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="81243" end="81252" title="Promotion and relegation" label="promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189148" start="82055" end="82075" title="Crowborough Athletic F.C." label="Crowborough Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="82129" end="82138" title="Promotion and relegation" label="promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18571" start="82168" end="82183" title="Isthmian League" label="Isthmian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822234" start="82434" end="82445" title="Kent Football League (1894–1959)" label="Kent League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183026" start="83160" end="83174" title="Cray Valley Paper Mills F.C." label="Cray Valley PM"/>
<link wikidata="Q18571" start="83513" end="83528" title="Isthmian League" label="Isthmian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291161" start="84104" end="84121" title="Greenwich Borough F.C." label="Greenwich Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191458" start="84122" end="84136" title="Gary Alexander (footballer)" label="Gary Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q78018030" start="84384" end="84395" title="Max Watters" label="Max Watters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696729" start="84832" end="84846" title="Cray Wanderers F.C." label="Cray Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046509" start="85545" end="85554" title="FA Trophy" label="FA Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564389" start="85874" end="85890" title="Tonbridge Angels F.C." label="Tonbridge Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696729" start="85895" end="85909" title="Cray Wanderers F.C." label="Cray Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213515" start="85973" end="85988" title="Thamesmead Town F.C." label="Thamesmead Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202306" start="86389" end="86398" title="England national football C team" label="England C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212948" start="86503" end="86518" title="Hastings United F.C." label="Hastings United"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="86702" end="86712" title="Overtime (sports)" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118937" start="86800" end="86807" title="Horsham F.C." label="Horsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="87103" end="87120" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88307" end="88357" title="2021–22 Isthmian League#South East Division" label="2021–22 Isthmian League South East Division season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087699" start="88516" end="88523" title="Chatham Town F.C." label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212948" start="88965" end="88980" title="Hastings United F.C." label="Hastings United"/>
<link wikidata="Q48851" start="89236" end="89249" title="AFC Wimbledon" label="AFC Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183026" start="89326" end="89337" title="Cray Valley Paper Mills F.C." label="Cray Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742321" start="89390" end="89399" title="Herne Bay F.C." label="Herne Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89654" end="89661" title="#Stadium" label="Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="89994" end="90011" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742321" start="91310" end="91319" title="Herne Bay F.C." label="Herne Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183026" start="91468" end="91479" title="Cray Valley Paper Mills F.C." label="Cray Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388646" start="91485" end="91531" title="2018–19 Southern Counties East Football League" label="2018–19 Southern Counties East Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q65062660" start="91546" end="91563" title="2019 FA Vase final" label="FA Vase finalists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92183" end="92190" title="Chatham Town F.C.#Ground" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q120798979" start="92307" end="92313" title="2023–24 FA Cup qualifying rounds" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q123990446" start="92339" end="92348" title="2023–24 FA Trophy" label="FA Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814668" start="92381" end="92396" title="Kent Senior Cup" label="Kent Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874581" start="92903" end="92922" title="Isthmian League Cup" label="Isthmian League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087699" start="92990" end="93002" title="Chatham Town F.C." label="Chatham Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764590" start="93247" end="93268" title="Maidstone United" label="Maidstone United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4707978" start="93277" end="93288" title="Alan Walker (footballer)" label="Alan Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224946" start="93336" end="93347" title="Darren Hare" label="Darren Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087699" start="93941" end="93953" title="Chatham Town F.C." label="Chatham Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="93983" end="93993" title="Gillingham F.C." label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q10518911" start="94002" end="94015" title="Danny Kedwell" label="Danny Kedwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087699" start="94262" end="94269" title="Chatham Town F.C." label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764590" start="94271" end="94287" title="Maidstone United F.C." label="Maidstone United"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291139" start="94292" end="94315" title="Tunbridge Wells Rangers" label="Tunbridge Wells Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212680" start="94462" end="94472" title="Folkestone Invicta" label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302484" start="94474" end="94479" title="Dover F.C." label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q891692" start="94481" end="94488" title="Margate F.C." label="Margate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212948" start="94493" end="94501" title="Hastings United F.C." label="Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18571" start="94542" end="94557" title="Isthmian League" label="Isthmian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="94894" end="94910" title="English football league system" label="football pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290893" start="94924" end="94938" title="Sevenoaks Town F.C." label="Sevenoaks Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291161" start="94940" end="94957" title="Greenwich Borough F.C." label="Greenwich Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878651" start="94959" end="94973" title="Beckenham Town F.C." label="Beckenham Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291139" start="94975" end="94990" title="Tunbridge Wells F.C." label="Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494568" start="94992" end="95006" title="Sheppey United F.C." label="Sheppey United"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291176" start="95011" end="95017" title="Fisher F.C." label="Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q18504" start="95363" end="95378" title="National League (English football)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="95638" end="95646" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212948" start="95699" end="95714" title="Hastings United F.C." label="Hastings United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386625" start="96078" end="96092" title="1994–95 FA Cup" label="1994–95 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="96107" end="96113" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q311935" start="96358" end="96367" title="Artificial turf" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58915" start="96599" end="96615" title="Conference South" label="Conference South"/>
<link wikidata="Q891692" start="96621" end="96628" title="Margate F.C." label="Margate"/>
<link wikidata="Q619141" start="96668" end="96682" title="Hartsdown Park" label="Hartsdown Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764590" start="96721" end="96737" title="Maidstone United F.C." label="Maidstone United"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518835" start="96799" end="96816" title="Gallagher Stadium" label="Gallagher Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411299" start="96835" end="96840" title="Southern Counties East Football League" label="SCEFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033634" start="96846" end="96861" title="Canterbury City F.C." label="Canterbury City"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276968" start="97046" end="97056" title="Kennington F.C." label="Kennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411299" start="97076" end="97114" title="Southern Counties East Football League" label="Southern Counties East Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q311935" start="97317" end="97319" title="Artificial turf" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822234" start="98979" end="98990" title="Kent Football League (1894–1959)" label="Kent League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411299" start="99108" end="99146" title="Southern Counties East Football League" label="Southern Counties East Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814668" start="99313" end="99339" title="Kent Senior Cup" label="Kent Cup / Kent Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822234" start="99502" end="99517" title="Kent Football League (1894–1959)" label="Kent League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="100316" end="100330" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056287" start="100351" end="100358" title="1959–60 FA Cup" label="1959–60"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="100389" end="100395" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386625" start="100417" end="100424" title="1994–95 FA Cup" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546623" start="100457" end="100469" title="Griffin Park" label="Griffin Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="100484" end="100493" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056287" start="100515" end="100522" title="1959–60 FA Cup" label="1959–60"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639104" start="102125" end="102132" title="1960–61 FA Cup" label="1960–61"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610939" start="102134" end="102141" title="1966–67 FA Cup" label="1966–67"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386626" start="102148" end="102155" title="1996–97 FA Cup" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575327" start="102181" end="102188" title="1972–73 FA Trophy" label="1972–73"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870336" start="102214" end="102221" title="2015–16 FA Vase" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005288" start="102519" end="102526" title="Charing" label="Charing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="102609" end="102622" title="#Stadium" label="The Homelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062050" start="103936" end="103975" title="South East Counties Women&amp;#x27;s League" label="South East Counties Women&amp;#x27;s League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671074" start="104335" end="104387" title="London and South East Women&amp;#x27;s Regional Football League" label="London &amp;amp; South East Women&amp;#x27;s Regional League"/>
<link wikidata="Q74109795" start="105074" end="105091" title="Clapton Community F.C." label="Clapton Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518835" start="105211" end="105220" title="Gallagher Stadium" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849718" start="105459" end="105494" title="List of Ashford United F.C. seasons" label="List of Ashford United F.C. seasons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646717" wikidata="Q797243" url="?curid=646717" title="BZFlag">
<text>BZFlag (an abbreviation for Battle Zone capture the Flag) is an online multiplayer free and open-source tank game. In the game of &quot;BZFlag&quot;, players drive around tanks, viewed from a first-person view, in a server-defined world (also known as a &quot;map&quot;), which can be modified.

==Development==
Inspired by Battlezone, &quot;BZFlag&quot; was first written in C by Chris Schoeneman in 1992 as a part of his studies at Cornell University. BZFlag was initially called &quot;BZ&quot; and despite its similarity to the SGI game of the same title by Chris Fouts, the games are completely independent of each other. 

In 1993, BZFlag was released to the public for the first time. This release took a new turn compared to older versions after a cheater, who edited the source code of his client to give himself powers that do not come from official releases, inspired Schoeneman and Pasetto to add &quot;super-flags.&quot; Super flags affect a tank&#x27;s performance by adding abilities or weapons to its arsenal. The first four flags were High Speed (boosted tank speed), Quick Turn (tank turned faster), Rapid Fire (shots moved faster), and Oscillation Overthruster (tank could go through objects). There was only one of each flag, and each flag was marked with its type. Soon after, bad and good flags were added and remain part of gameplay today, only without markers, so that the flag type is unknown to the player until it is picked up (unless the player is carrying an Identify flag).

In 1997, the release of version 1.7d came with a groundbreaking new feature: an in-game public server list. Previously, players had to either set up their own servers, know of servers, or read a list published and maintained by a third-party. Now the server list is hosted on the official BZFlag website and allows anybody to play games on servers that choose to be public.

Schoeneman eventually re-wrote BZFlag in C++ for SGI&#x27;s third IndiZone competition, which won in the &quot;Reality Engine&quot; category. Tim Riker was later given the project prior to version 1.7e to maintain and evolve. BZFlag is written in C++ and uses OpenGL for rendering. Its audio and several other sub-systems have been written using OS specific methods, although newer releases use SDL to perform low-level operations on all platforms. Textures for in-game objects are loaded from PNG files; audio, from WAVs. Zlib, which is written in C, is used to decompress data files.

=== Developers ===
The number of contributors to the project has steadily increased over time. The project invites all sufficiently experienced developers to contribute. Though there are 64 listed developers, a much smaller number of those are active contributors. 

Developers are able to edit any of the project&#x27;s files to make changes at any time. When a developer makes an edit of which other developers do not approve, or is inappropriate for the game, they are requested to &quot;revert&quot; to the previous version of the file; most developers monitor source edits on IRC or GitHub.

The copyright holder for the game is Tim Riker, but maintenance is guided by Scott Wichser and Jeff Makey as project managers. The game&#x27;s original author, Chris Schoeneman, is no longer involved in development.

== Gameplay ==
Tanks have the ability to drive through other tanks, but cannot travel through buildings or other world objects. The basic objective is to destroy opponents&#x27; tanks, which are tanks of another team&#x27;s color. Since all players can see the position of all the tanks on their radar, it is a game of outmaneuvering rather than sneaking.

There are styles of game play that modify the objective. Styles are server-based, as the server operator chooses what style to host. If there is no special style indicated by the server owner, the only objective is the above (to simply kill opponent tanks); it is called a &quot;free for all&quot;, or &quot;FFA&quot; for short.

There are three other objectives and corresponding styles (four in total): a style called &quot;capture-the-flag&quot; (or &quot;CTF&quot; for short) in which tanks try to pick up an opponent&#x27;s flag and bring to their own &quot;home base&quot;; a style called &quot;rabbit chase&quot; in which the objective is to have every hunter (orange) tank try to destroy a particular white tank, called the &quot;rabbit,&quot; and a different way of playing free-for-all called open free-for-all (OFFA), in which tanks shoot any other tanks regardless of the color. 

Servers can change the game mode and have custom maps made to fit the properties of the game. Certain thresholds are used to catch malicious players and kick them off the server, as well as message filters and an entire collection of other anti-cheating features. There are around 250 servers active at any given time (although only about 1-3% have active players).

=== Teams ===
Tanks can join as one of the four team colors, as a rogue, or as an observer. Observers cannot play, but can move anywhere in the world or watch what the tank they are linked to is doing. Observers do not have a tank and are therefore not visible to players, but are shown in the scoreboard. The colored teams are Red, Green, Blue and Purple. Rogue players are teamless players: they are allowed to kill colored team players and other rogues. Rogue tanks are colored dark grey out the window, and yellow on the radar.

In rabbit-hunt games there is a white tank, known as the &quot;rabbit&quot;, against the orange-brown &quot;hunters&quot;, or every other player. The hunters are considered a team, so rabbits with genocide, shockwave, Guided Missile, or Laser flags are dangerous, and often teamkills occur due to a group assault on the &quot;rabbit.&quot;

Teams are necessary in capture-the-flag games, in which they have to protect their team flag from capture. Rogues are occasionally allowed on servers; a rogue tank does not have any flag to defend, nor can it capture flags. Rogues tend to aid other teams of choice, or add a distraction to all teams. There is a plugin to prevent this which is used on servers with two large teams and one or two rogue players.

=== Maps ===
A BZFlag server can be configured to create a basic, random map for play, or users can load their own map files. BZFlag uses a customized text based map format to define the placement of objects. While writing a map is fairly simple in this format, most map-makers use a 3D modeling program such as Wings 3D or Blender. Graphical map editors, BZEdit or iBZEdit have also been used. Note that BZEdit is not distributed with the game, and is no longer under active development (versions of it are available at the BZFlag SourceForge.net site). Using Blender in combination with a BZFlag map plug-in is currently the most popular mapping method, though it is getting some competition from WebBZEdit.

As to the simplicity of maps, there are a number of basic objects in a map: boxes, pyramids, teleporters, cones, arcs, cylinders, spheres, team bases and meshes. Teleporters are rectangular, yellow-bordered objects that teleport a tank to another teleporter. A mapmaker may choose to not have a teleporter teleport tanks by leaving out links, or simple definitions of two points for teleporters to link between. Teleporters are also capable of teleporting to themselves, reflecting bullets and tanks that enter. Team Bases are used for CTF style games. Full three dimensional meshes have been available in maps since the 2.0 release.

=== Flags ===
BZFlag has three types of flags: team flags, bad flags and super flags. Team flags are only placed in a world during a capture-the-flag game, and represent the team it is colored to. Super flags are flags that can be in both free-for-all games and capture-the-flag games, but are strongly controlled by a server operator. The number, types of super flags, as well as where they are placed can all be controlled by the operator when starting the server. The number cannot be modified while the server is running. Super flags come in both bad and good form, and affect a tank accordingly. A bad flag may take away a certain sense of the tank: its sight, speed, or related things, while a good flag does the opposite and actually helps a tank. Good super flags are usually held until the tank is killed and explodes, or until the player driving the tank chooses to drop the flag. Bad flags are dropped after a short amount of time, after a certain number of &quot;wins&quot; (kills), or until the tank dies. The rules for dropping bad flags are set by the operator at the start of the server. All super flags have a one or two letter code that is displayed next to a player&#x27;s name on the scoreboard when that player has that flag. Once in a while, a new flag is suggested, though not always added.

=== Server environment ===
Servers can have environments that simulate the real world. A server&#x27;s environment consists of three things: The map in play, the time of day that is being simulated, and weather conditions, introducing elements of which players have no control, like rain, snow, icy and/or slippery ground, modified friction and gravity, and fog. BZFlag takes the local time from the geographical location of the server and creates a night or day-time atmosphere in the background. Servers may synchronize the local server time or allow players to change the time to any time they may desire.

== Critical reception ==

&quot;BZFlag&quot; was selected in Summer 2015 as &quot;HotPick&quot; by Linux Format. BZFlag was selected as the SourceForge.net Project of the Month for April 2004. Both Free Software Magazine and Linux Magazine noted that &quot;BZFlag&quot; was fun to play and suitable for younger gamers.

==References==
==External links==

*Official website
*BZFlag on GitHub</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="64" end="82" title="multiplayer online game" label="online multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="83" end="103" title="free and open-source" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616" start="324" end="334" title="Battlezone (1980 video game)" label="Battlezone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="376" end="377" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="434" end="452" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q963081" start="1154" end="1178" title="Buckaroo Banzai" label="Oscillation Overthruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="2126" end="2129" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q178570" start="2139" end="2145" title="OpenGL" label="OpenGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q727439" start="2274" end="2277" title="Simple DirectMedia Layer" label="SDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q752176" start="2328" end="2336" title="Texture mapping" label="Textures"/>
<link wikidata="Q178051" start="2373" end="2376" title="Portable Network Graphics" label="PNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q217570" start="2396" end="2399" title="WAV" label="WAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q207240" start="2402" end="2406" title="Zlib" label="Zlib"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006" start="6256" end="6259" title="map" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q568742" start="6467" end="6478" title="3D modeling" label="3D modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q617006" start="6495" end="6503" title="Wings 3D" label="Wings 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q173136" start="6507" end="6514" title="Blender (software)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154597" start="7048" end="7054" title="Polygon mesh" label="meshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="7155" end="7163" title="level designer" label="mapmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035213" start="7662" end="7678" title="capture the flag" label="capture-the-flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q614379" start="8733" end="8743" title="scoreboard" label="scoreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="8888" end="8900" title="natural environment" label="environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="9312" end="9322" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993361" start="9553" end="9565" title="Linux Format" label="Linux Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q165400" start="9594" end="9609" title="SourceForge.net" label="SourceForge.net"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500077" start="9652" end="9674" title="Free Software Magazine" label="Free Software Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q564658" start="9679" end="9693" title="Linux Magazine" label="Linux Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q364" start="9838" end="9844" title="GitHub" label="GitHub"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646719" wikidata="Q974365" url="?curid=646719" title="Mantak Chia">
<text>Mantak Chia (Chinese: 謝明德, Pinyin: Xiè Míngdé, born April 24, 1944, in Bangkok, Thailand) is a Taoist Master. Mantak Chia is the creator of the Healing Tao, Tao Yoga, Universal Healing Tao System, and Tao Garden Health Spa &amp; Resort, located in the northern countryside of Chiang Mai, Thailand. He wrote more than 60 books on Taoist practices and taught the principles of Taoist internal arts. His books have been translated into more than 40 languages. He views himself primarily as a teacher.

Mantak Chia has been named twice as &quot;Qigong Master of the Year&quot; by the International Congress of Chinese Medicine and Qigong in 1990 and 2012 and is also listed as number 18 of the &quot;100 most Spiritually Influential people&quot; in The Watkins Review 2012.

== Biography ==

Mantak Chia was born to a Chinese family in Thailand in 1944. He was raised in a Christian household, with his grandfather a Baptist minister and his mother a missionary. He began studying the Buddhist method of &quot;stilling the mind&quot; at the age of six, and later studied Muay Thai, tai chi, kung fu and Taoist and Buddhist meditation practices from several masters. Of all his masters, the most influential one was Yi Eng (White Cloud), an eremitic member of the Dragon&#x27;s Gate sect of the Quanzhen (Complete Perfection) school of Taoism, who taught Chia a complete Taoist training system and authorized him to teach and heal.

Later, he studied Western anatomy and medical science for two years to better understand the physiological mechanisms behind healing energy.

He established his first Universal Healing Tao school in Thailand in 1974 after systematizing his knowledge of Taoism. He founded the Universal Healing Tao Center (originally named the Taoist Esoteric Yoga Center) in New York in 1979. The center attracted a broad variety of European and American students, and some of them helped him teach Taoist practices to western students. He returned to Thailand in 1994 and created the Universal Tao Training Center (Tao Garden) in Chiang Mai. He not only teaches at Tao Garden but also tours other countries to teach and promote the Healing Tao practices every year.

== Spiritual Core ==
Rooted in traditional Taoist practices, Chia&#x27;s teaching system develops integrated physical, mental and spiritual (energy) bodies internal to human beings. The focus is on developing human life energy — &quot;qi&quot; — for self-healing and life transformation.

== Lineage ==

Chia&#x27;s lineage is that of the Dragon&#x27;s Gate sect of the Quanzhen (Complete Perfection) school of Taoism. This sect takes the practical approach in studying Taoist Inner Alchemy (Chinese: 內丹實修派). It emphasizes knowledge and method that are effective to develop the states of inner experience and consciousness that are the birthright of all humans and accessible by all, without unnecessary rituals. After having inherited the complete Taoist internal spiritual cultivation system from his master, Yi Eng, Chia followed the master&#x27;s instruction to teach it to others.

== Nine Formulas ==

The first two formulas are probably the most famous parts of Mantak Chia&#x27;s teaching. However, they are not the core of the system. The purpose of the two formulas is to invoke one&#x27;s awareness of &quot;qi&quot;, to strengthen it, and to open important &quot;qi&quot; channels in one&#x27;s body, such as the governor and functional channels. These practices build a solid foundation for later formulas.

Sexual energy plays very important roles in &quot;qi&quot; cultivation. Taoist practitioners believe that the sexual energy accounts for a large part of the energy that a human body generates, and a person cannot achieve spiritual fulfillment without conserving and leveraging the power of the sexual energy. The first step of traditional inner alchemy (Chinese: 內丹) is transforming the material carrier of sexual energy (&quot;jing&quot;) into &quot;qi&quot;. The second formula lays a solid foundation for this purpose. However, because sex is a &quot;hot&quot; topic in a society, teaching sexual practices might be controversial.

The third formula, Fusion, really starts inner alchemy practices. Inner alchemy traditionally has three stages: transforming &quot;jing&quot; to &quot;qi&quot;, transforming &quot;qi&quot; to &quot;shen&quot;, returning &quot;shen&quot; to void. &quot;Qi&quot; and &quot;shen&quot; are inner life energies with &quot;shen&quot; being a more refined level, and both originate from the same original universe force. In &quot;Kan Li&quot; practices, one should have developed strong &quot;qi&quot; of all kinds so that intercourses of different &quot;qi&quot; take place resulting in a &quot;qi&quot; entity, call &quot;qi&quot; pearl (Chinese: 內丹), inside one&#x27;s own body. This process is often described by the analogy of intercourses of a female and a male which leads to a fertilized egg. The intensive &quot;qi&quot; activities create an internal energy body which becomes the center of further practices, and eventually, the internal body leads to Tao, reaching immortality. Cultivating the internal body and merging into Tao are the central practices of Taoist inner alchemy, which require great dedication and determination.

== Reception ==
James Miller thinks that Chia&#x27;s teachings of &quot;qi&quot; and cosmology is similar to the Taoist instructor Hua-ching Ni, but Chia&#x27;s books lack discussion of philosophy, ethics or everyday practical advice. The system Chia presents is a narrowly focused system of qigong rooted firmly in &quot;neidan&quot;.

Machacek and Wilcox think that Chia&#x27;s study of Taoist sexuality has the trend in Taoist writings intended for a Western audience, a combination of theoretical knowledge and personal experience, which leads to a proliferation of subjective and modern &quot;love manuals&quot; and expositions on the Taoist way of love.

Peter B. Clarke thinks that Chia&#x27;s Healing Tao is one of the few Thai new religious movements to have achieved an international following.

== See also ==
* Taoist sexual practices

== References ==

=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
* Chia, Mantak and Maneewan. &quot;Chi Nei Tsang: Internal Organ Chi Massage, 1990 .
* Chia, Mantak and Winn, Michael. &quot;Taoist Secrets of Love – Cultivating Male Sexual Energy&quot;. Aurora Press, 1984. .
* Chia, Mantak and Stone, Sarina. &quot;Smiling Anatomy for Children, Level 1&quot;. Empowerment Through Knowledge, 2010. .
* Chia, Mantak and Stone, Sarina. &quot;Smiling Anatomy for Children, Level 2&quot;. Empowerment Through Knowledge, 2010. .
* Chia, Mantak and Stone, Sarina. &quot;Smiling Anatomy for Children, Level 3&quot;. Empowerment Through Knowledge, 2010. .
* Clarke, John James. &quot;The Tao of the West: Western Transformations of Taoist Thought&quot;. Routledge, 2000. .
* Clarke, Peter Bernard. &quot;New religions in global perspective: a study of religious change in the modern world&quot;. Routledge, 2006. .
* Kohn, Livia. &quot;Chinese Healing Exercises: The Tradition of Daoyin&quot;. University of Hawaii Press, 2008. .
* Larthe, Christopher. &quot;Mantak Chia – A Modern Taoist Master&quot;. Positive Health, July 1999 (Issue 42).
* Machacek, David W. &amp; Wilcox, Melissa M. &quot;Sexuality and the world&#x27;s religions&quot;. ABC-CLIO, 2003. .
* Miller, James. &quot;Chinese religions in contemporary society&quot;. ABC-CLIO, 2006. .

== Further reading ==
* Chia, Mantak &amp; Maneewan. &quot;Fusion of the Five Elements I: Basic and Advanced Meditations for Transforming Negative Emotions (Taoist Inner Alchemy Series)&quot;. Healing Tao Books, 1991 (Reissue edition). 
* Chia, Mantak. &quot;Cosmic Healing I: Cosmic Chi Kung&quot;. Universal Tao Publications, 2001. .

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974365" start="0" end="11" title="Mantak Chia" label="Mantak Chia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="27" end="33" title="Pinyin" label="Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="71" end="78" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="80" end="88" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="95" end="101" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408653" start="814" end="821" title="Thai Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="869" end="878" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="913" end="929" title="Baptist minister" label="Baptist minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="981" end="989" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q120931" start="1067" end="1076" title="Muay Thai" label="Muay Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q167987" start="1078" end="1085" title="tai chi" label="tai chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="1087" end="1094" title="kung fu" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="1099" end="1105" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="1236" end="1244" title="eremitic" label="eremitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q836728" start="1259" end="1277" title="Dragon Gate Taoism" label="Dragon&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q979578" start="1290" end="1298" title="Quanzhen School" label="Quanzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="1454" end="1461" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="2415" end="2417" title="qi" label="qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q836728" start="2519" end="2537" title="Dragon Gate Taoism" label="Dragon&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q979578" start="2550" end="2558" title="Quanzhen School" label="Quanzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382581" start="3864" end="3866" title="Neidan" label="內丹"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139769" start="5287" end="5299" title="James Miller (academic)" label="James Miller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5402" end="5414" title="Hua-ching Ni" label="Hua-ching Ni"/>
<link wikidata="Q204368" start="5563" end="5569" title="qigong" label="qigong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382581" start="5593" end="5599" title="neidan" label="neidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172601" start="5932" end="5947" title="Peter B. Clarke" label="Peter B. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="6007" end="6030" title="new religious movements" label="new religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q8986877" start="6094" end="6117" title="Taoist sexual practices" label="Taoist sexual practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="6998" end="7007" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q667886" start="7344" end="7352" title="ABC-CLIO" label="ABC-CLIO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646720" wikidata="Q5687008" url="?curid=646720" title="Haymarket Square">
<text>Haymarket Square may refer to:

* Haymarket Square (Boston), in Boston

* Haymarket Square (Chicago), in Chicago
* Haymarket affair, a labor demonstration in Chicago at Haymarket Square in 1886

* Haymarket Square (band), a Chicago-based psychedelic rock band </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5687011" start="34" end="59" title="Haymarket Square (Boston)" label="Haymarket Square (Boston)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107463123" start="74" end="100" title="Haymarket Square (Chicago)" label="Haymarket Square (Chicago)"/>
<link wikidata="Q214148" start="115" end="131" title="Haymarket affair" label="Haymarket affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687013" start="197" end="220" title="Haymarket Square (band)" label="Haymarket Square (band)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646722" wikidata="Q6967013" url="?curid=646722" title="Nashville State Community College">
<text>Nashville State Community College is a public community college in Nashville, Tennessee. It is operated by the Tennessee Board of Regents and shares a campus with the Tennessee College of Applied Technology at Nashville. The Nashville State facilities include of space for classrooms, labs, offices, student services, and a library. Nashville State offers a wide array of programs and degrees including associate degree and technical certificate studies, university parallel transfer programs to four-year institutions, continuing education, adult education, four Early College programs (fully immersive college experience at the Early College High School on the White Bridge campus and an embedded Early College program at Whites Creek, Glencliff, and Cane Ridge high schools), Dual Enrollment courses, and community service programs. 

Nashville State serves a seven county service area of Middle Tennessee, which includes Cheatham, Davidson, Dickson, Houston, Humphreys, Montgomery, and Stewart counties. It is an open-entry institution with on-campus, online, virtual and hybrid options.

== History ==
It has its origins in a planned redevelopment of a campus on White Bridge Road which was formerly the site of Thayer Hospital, a hospital operated by what is now the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. When the hospital was relocated adjacent to Vanderbilt University and its Medical Center in the 1960s, part of its former campus became the home of Nashville State Technical Institute.

NSTI or Nashville Tech, as it was generally known, was formed to supply the training needed for positions requiring only the Associate&#x27;s degree or professional certificates, but also to provide the beginning years of a more advanced technical education. At first, liberal arts offerings were essentially the minimum required for the institution to meet these goals, but the plan was always for NSTI to become a full community college. Nashville State opened in 1970 with an enrollment of 398 students.

As time went by, and liberal arts offerings increased somewhat, the school was used more and more by students who were looking to complete the first two years of a four-year degree at a more affordable cost. Some of these students found that credits earned at NSTI were hard to transfer to other accredited schools outside of the Tennessee Board of Regents system. A revamping of the curriculum was put in place to address this concern, and concurrently the institution was renamed Nashville State Community College, a pattern which had already been established at the other, similar urban technical institutes in the state.

Unlike other community colleges operated by the Tennessee Board of Regents, Nashville State does not conduct any intercollegiate athletics programs. Under the terms of a judicial consent decree, Nashville State must carefully tailor its offerings so as not to be in direct competition for students with Tennessee State University, a historically black university also located in Nashville, which has been ordered by federal court to achieve a higher degree of racial integration.

==Campuses==
Nashville State offers classes and programs throughout its seven county service area. There are seven campuses offering classes: White Bridge campus (in west Nashville), Clarksville campus (in Montgomery County), East Davidson campus (in Donelson), North Davidson campus (in Madison), Humphreys County campus (in Waverly), Southeast campus (in Antioch), and the Dickson campus (in Dickson County).

===White Bridge campus===
The White Bridge campus (Davidson County), sometimes referred to as the main campus, is located at 120 White Bridge Rd, Nashville. The White Bridge campus is home to the college&#x27;s Heatlhcare professions division, which features: Central Sterile Processing Technology, Nursing, Occupational Therapy, and Surgical Technology. Nashville State offers a robust Information Technology programs, ranging from Coding Bootcamps to stackable technical certificate and Associate of Science and Associate of Applied Science degrees. In addition to a litany of other program offerings, there is a state-of-the-art Music Technology studio and lab. Facilities on the White Bridge campus include classrooms, healthcare simulation rooms, offices, student services, library, two auditoriums for musical performances, events and conferences, a music recording studio, art gallery, and student gathering spots. The Mayfield Library is in the Kisber Building. In partnership with Metro Nashville Public Schools, an Early College is located on campus for high school students.
===Southeast===
The Southeast campus (Davidson County) is located at 5248 Hickory Hollow Parkway in Nashville. The Southeast campus is home to the Randy Rayburn School of Culinary Arts, with its state-of-the-art kitchen and classrooms and a Hospitality program. It is also home of Nashville State&#x27;s Law Enforcement Academy. Additionally, Students at the Southeast Campus can take courses applicable toward an Associate of Applied Science, Associate of Arts, or Associate of Science degrees. Students can also enroll ESL classes and College Prep classes.

=== North Davidson ===
To increase accessibility to higher education for Tennesseans, Nashville State has constructed a campus in the northern quadrant of Davidson County. The address is 1520 Gallatin Pike North, Madison. The college broke ground in late June 2020. The campus will be open to the community in late spring 2022, with classes starting in August 2022 for the fall term. The campus layout allows for future growth.

=== East Davidson ===
The East Davidson campus is located at 2845 Elm Hill Pike, Nashville, TN 37214. At present, classes served from this campus are online or virtual.

===Humphreys County===
The Humphreys County campus is located at 695 Holly Lane in Waverly. Students at the Humphreys County Campus can take courses applicable toward an Associate of Applied Science in Process Control Technology, General Technology—Options: Business or Technical Concentration, Business Management—Options: Business Administration, Entrepreneurship, Financial Services, and Marketing, as well as the General Education core leading to an Associate of Arts, or Associate of Science degree. The Humphreys County campus also has Industrial Process Control Technology simulation rooms.

===Dickson===
The Dickson campus is located at 206 West Walnut Street, in the heart of downtown Dickson. In late 2023, Nashville State, TCAT Dickson, and TriStar Horizon Medical Center announced the pending construction and opening of a Dickson County Center for Higher Education, which will be home to Nashville State’s Dickson campus when it opens. It will be located on Hwy 46, just south of I-40. Students at the Dickson campus can take courses applicable toward an Associate of Applied Science, Associate of Arts, or Associate of Science degrees.

=== Clarksville ===
The Clarksville campus is located at 1760 Wilma Rudolph Blvd. Clarksville, TN 37040. The campus, which will be a community-based Center for Higher Education, is currently undergoing an approximate $35 million renovation and expansion. The campus offers 15 associate degree programs and four technical certificate programs. Nashville State has partnered with Clarksville-Montgomery County School System (CMCSS) and Austin Peay State University on a Teacher Residency Program. This program is available to CMCSS classified employees and graduating seniors, and Montgomery County residents.

==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6967013" start="0" end="33" title="Nashville State Community College" label="Nashville State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="39" end="45" title="Public college" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="46" end="63" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="67" end="87" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700026" start="111" end="137" title="Tennessee Board of Regents" label="Tennessee Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059491" start="167" end="206" title="Tennessee College of Applied Technology" label="Tennessee College of Applied Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310200" start="779" end="794" title="Dual enrollment" label="Dual Enrollment"/>
<link wikidata="Q495072" start="925" end="933" title="Cheatham County, Tennessee" label="Cheatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177705" start="935" end="943" title="Davidson County, Tennessee" label="Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q494815" start="945" end="952" title="Dickson County, Tennessee" label="Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q502368" start="954" end="961" title="Houston County, Tennessee" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q502397" start="963" end="972" title="Humphreys County, Tennessee" label="Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q502345" start="974" end="984" title="Montgomery County, Tennessee" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q501954" start="990" end="997" title="Stewart County, Tennessee" label="Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q209465" start="1158" end="1164" title="campus" label="campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="1236" end="1244" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="1273" end="1317" title="United States Department of Veterans Affairs" label="United States Department of Veterans Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="1363" end="1384" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914455" start="1393" end="1407" title="Vanderbilt University Medical Center" label="Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="1630" end="1653" title="Associate&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Associate&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="1774" end="1786" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782948" start="2942" end="2968" title="Tennessee State University" label="Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="2972" end="3001" title="Historically Black colleges and universities" label="historically black university"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="3099" end="3117" title="racial integration" label="racial integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q328941" start="3303" end="3314" title="Clarksville, Tennessee" label="Clarksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q502345" start="3326" end="3343" title="Montgomery County, Tennessee" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039711" start="3418" end="3454" title="Waverly, Tennessee" label="Humphreys County campus (in Waverly)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354539" start="3495" end="3502" title="Dickson, Tennessee" label="Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q494815" start="3514" end="3528" title="Dickson County, Tennessee" label="Dickson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q130192" start="5139" end="5142" title="English as a foreign or second language" label="ESL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039711" start="5860" end="5867" title="Waverly, Tennessee" label="Waverly"/>
<link wikidata="Q781153" start="7363" end="7391" title="Austin Peay State University" label="Austin Peay State University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646725" wikidata="Q7316253" url="?curid=646725" title="Restoring the Lost Constitution">
<text>Restoring the Lost Constitution: The Presumption of Liberty is a 2003 book about the United States Constitution written by Randy Barnett, a professor of law at the Georgetown University Law Center. In the book, Barnett outlines his theory of constitutional legitimacy, interpretation, and construction. He argues that the Constitution should be interpreted by its &quot;original meaning&quot;, distinct from the Founding Fathers&#x27; original intent.

&quot;Restoring the Lost Constitution&quot; was awarded the 2005 Lysander Spooner Award for Advancing the Literature of Liberty by Laissez Faire Books.

==Summary==
&quot;Restoring the Lost Constitution&quot; is broken into four parts, each addressing an aspect of the U.S. Constitution.

# Constitutional Legitimacy describes the most common arguments for constitutional legitimacy, and argues against them in practical terms. Barnett suggests that in practice it is impossible for any constitution to derive its legitimacy from consent, but it must rather derive legitimacy through &quot;necessity&quot; and &quot;propriety&quot;.
# Constitutional Method
# Constitutional Limits
# Constitutional Powers

==Reception==
The &quot;Journal of Libertarian Studies&quot; reviewed the book, stating that &quot;though well-intentioned, the book is fatally flawed&quot;. The Future of Freedom Foundation praised &quot;Restoring the Lost Constitution&quot;, comparing it to &quot;a great symphony on which the composer labored for years, poring over passages again and again to get them just right.&quot; The Atlas Society also reviewed the book, writing &quot;Despite its occasional lack of focus, &quot;Restoring the Lost Constitution&quot; is a succinct and accurate distillation of libertarian constitutional theory—and it convincingly shows that this phrase is largely redundant.&quot; Steven G. Calabresi of the Michigan Law Review Association praised the work, citing that it &quot;replaces Richard Epstein&#x27;s &quot;Takings&quot; as the leading tome about constitutional law written from a libertarian perspective&quot;. The American Political Science Association reviewed the book, saying that it was &quot;a welcome addition to a never-ending debate&quot;.

Ronald Kahn of the Law and Politics Book Review wrote that the book was &quot;terrific in demonstrating the natural rights background to our Constitution and demonstrating that all rights cannot be listed in the Constitution&quot;, but that &quot;Barnett&#x27;s fundamental problem is that he allows for &#x27;constitutional construction&#x27; when originalism cannot tell us which meanings to adopt, but he does not seem to allow for social construction of law, or changing social meanings&quot;. In &quot;Ethics&quot; Matthew Simpson criticized &quot;Restoring the Lost Constitution&quot;, stating that while Barnett &quot;argues persuasively that an unprincipled judiciary poses a great threat to constitutionalism in America ... his own principle for reading the Constitution, the presumption of liberty, is implausible and deeply flawed&quot;.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="85" end="111" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q986354" start="123" end="136" title="Randy Barnett" label="Randy Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q846101" start="164" end="196" title="Georgetown University Law Center" label="Georgetown University Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="412" end="428" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q453503" start="435" end="450" title="originalism" label="original intent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6474162" start="584" end="603" title="Laissez Faire Books" label="Laissez Faire Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="722" end="739" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457448" start="1183" end="1213" title="Journal of Libertarian Studies" label="Journal of Libertarian Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714818" start="1550" end="1567" title="The Atlas Society" label="The Atlas Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="2081" end="2119" title="American Political Science Association" label="American Political Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="2235" end="2263" title="Law and Politics Book Review" label="Law and Politics Book Review"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646728" wikidata="Q1131382" url="?curid=646728" title="Triggernometry (album)">
<text>Triggernometry is the fifth studio album from hardcore rap group Onyx, released on July 22, 2003, by D3 Entertainment. The whole album was produced by Kronic Tones. The album features appearances by American rappers T Hussle, Genovese, Begetz, X1, Bad Luck, and Dirty Getinz. The album peaked at No. 66 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums music chart.

== Background ==
&quot;Triggernometry&quot; is an album consisting of 10 new tracks and 11 stories from the life of the group Onyx, told by the group members themselves in the gap between the songs. All the songs were produced by one producer Kronic Tones, who had already produced 7 tracks for Fredro Starr&#x27;s second solo album &quot;Don&#x27;t Get Mad Get Money&quot;. The album was criticized by the fans of the group Onyx, who believe that such production is suitable only for nightclubs, but not for the streets. Originally, the album was due out on October 31 under the title &quot;Triggernometry: The Study of Guns&quot;, but later the name was shortened to &quot;Triggernometry&quot;, and the album was released earlier.

== Singles ==
The one and only single, &quot;Mama Cryin&#x27;/Wild N Here&quot; featuring X1, Begetz, Dirty Getinz, Bad Luck was released in 2003.

==Critical response==
In 2003, the editor of the Russian online newspaper NewsLab.ru, Mitya Meshalkin, praised the album, adding that Triggernometry, despite the frightening (a mixture of the words &quot;trigger&quot; and &quot;trigonometry&quot;) name, had noticeably less street negligence and noticeably more &quot;musicality&quot;.

In 2003, RapReviews.com editor Steve &quot;Flash&quot; Juon gave the album a 4 out of 10, calling it &quot;pathetic attempt to relive past Onyx glories&quot;. The author also noted that Sticky exhibits the same problem he did on &quot;Decade,&quot; namely that he sounds tired and unenthused, like he&#x27;s going through the motions. Sticky and Fredro seem equally uninterested in resurrecting the name Onyx and shouldn&#x27;t have even tried.

==Track listing==
==Samples==
Gun Clap Music
*&quot;Calypso Rock&quot; by Original Tropicana Steel Band

O.N.Y.X. (Unreleased Original Version)
*&quot;You&#x27;re a Big Girl Now&quot; by The Stylistics (1970)

== Leftover tracks ==
Songs that were recorded in 2002–2003 during the &quot;Triggernometry&quot; sessions but cut from the final album:
* &quot;Gun Clap Music&quot; (Original)
* &quot;Wild In Here&quot; (Demo Version)
* &quot;O.N.Y.X.&quot;
* &quot;Over (feat. Begetz)&quot; (Demo Version)

==Personnel==
Credits for &quot;Triggernometry&quot; adapted from AllMusic and CD booklet.
* Onyx — performer, vocals
* Fredro Starr — performer, vocals, executive producer
* Sticky Fingaz — performer, vocals, executive producer
* Sonny Seeza — performer, vocals
* Omar &quot;Iceman&quot; Sharif — executive producer
* T Hussle — guest artist
* Genovese — guest artist
* Begetz — guest artist
* X1 — guest artist
* Bad Luck — guest artist
* Dirty Getinz — guest artist
* Kronic Tones — producer
* Dominche — co-producer
* Hector Delgado — recording, mixing, co-producer
* Brian Porizek — artwork, design
* Aldy Damian — label direction
==Charts==
==References==
== External links ==
* Triggernometry at Discogs
* Triggernometry at RapGenius
* &quot;Mama Cryin&#x27;/Wild N Here&quot; at Discogs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q936693" start="65" end="69" title="Onyx (group)" label="Onyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q28355271" start="244" end="246" title="X1 (rapper)" label="X1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="310" end="336" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q730261" start="646" end="658" title="Fredro Starr" label="Fredro Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3713434" start="690" end="718" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Get Mad Get Money" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Get Mad Get Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="2584" end="2592" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646742" wikidata="Q631884" url="?curid=646742" title="Paul Poiret">
<text>Paul Poiret (20 April 1879 – 30 April 1944) was a French fashion designer, a master couturier during the first two decades of the 20th century. He was the founder of his namesake haute couture house.

==Early life and career==
Poiret was born on 20 April 1879 to a cloth merchant in the poor neighborhood of Les Halles, Paris. His older sister, Jeanne, would later become a jewelry designer. Poiret&#x27;s parents, in an effort to rid him of his natural pride, apprenticed him to an umbrella maker. There, he collected scraps of silk left over from the cutting of umbrella patterns, and fashioned clothes for a doll that one of his sisters had given him. While a teenager, Poiret took his sketches to Louise Chéruit, a prominent dressmaker, who purchased a dozen from him. Poiret continued to sell his drawings to major Parisian couture houses, until he was hired by Jacques Doucet in 1898. His first design, a red cloth cape, sold 400 copies. He became famous after designing a black mantle of tulle over a black taffeta, painted by the famous fan painter Billotey. The actress Réjane used it in a play called &quot;Zaza&quot;, the stage then becoming a typical strategy of Poiret&#x27;s marketing practices.

In 1901, Poiret moved to the House of Worth, where he was responsible for designing simple, practical dresses, called &quot;fried potatoes&quot; by Gaston Worth because they were considered side dishes to Worth&#x27;s main course of &quot;truffles&quot;. The &quot;brazen modernity of his designs,&quot; however, proved too much for Worth&#x27;s conservative clientele. When Poiret presented the Russian Princess Bariatinsky with a Confucius coat with an innovative kimono-like cut, for instance, she exclaimed, &quot;What a horror! When there are low fellows who run after our sledges and annoy us, we have their heads cut off, and we put them in sacks just like that.&quot; This reaction prompted Poiret to fund his own &quot;maison&quot;.

==Career expansion==
Poiret established his own house in 1903. In his first years as an independent couturier, he broke with established conventions of dressmaking and subverted other ones. In 1903, he dismissed the petticoat, and later, in 1906, he did the same with the corset. Poiret made his name with his controversial kimono coat and similar, loose-fitting designs created specifically for an uncorseted, slim figure.

Poiret designed flamboyant window displays and threw sensational parties to draw attention to his work. His instinct for marketing and branding was unmatched by any other Parisian designer, although the pioneering fashion shows of the British-based Lucile (Lady Duff Gordon) had already attracted tremendous publicity. In 1909, he was so famous, Margot Asquith, wife of British prime minister H. H. Asquith, invited him to show his designs at 10 Downing Street. The cheapest garment at the exhibition was 30 guineas, double the annual salary of a scullery maid.

Jeanne Margaine-Lacroix presented wide-legged trousers for women in 1910, some months before Poiret, who took credit for being the first to introduce the style.

Poiret&#x27;s house expanded to encompass interior decoration and fragrance. In 1911, he introduced &quot;Parfums de Rosine,&quot; named after his daughter, becoming the first French couturier to launch a signature fragrance, although again the London designer Lucile had preceded him with a range of in-house perfumes as early as 1907. In 1911 Poiret unveiled &quot;Parfums de Rosine&quot; with a flamboyant soiree held at his palatial home, attended by the cream of Parisian society and the artistic world. Poiret fancifully christened the event &quot;la mille et deuxième nuit&quot; (The Thousand and Second Night), inspired by the fantasy of a sultan&#x27;s harem. His gardens were illuminated by lanterns, set with tents, and live, tropical birds. Madame Poiret herself luxuriated in a golden cage. Poiret was the reigning sultan, gifting each guest with a bottle of his new fragrance creation, appropriately named to befit the occasion, &quot;Nuit Persane.&quot; His marketing strategy, played out as entertainment, became the talk of Paris. A second scent debuted in 1912 – &quot;Le Minaret,&quot; again emphasizing the harem theme.

In 1911, publisher Lucien Vogel dared photographer Edward Steichen to promote fashion as a fine art in his work. Steichen responded by snapping photos of gowns designed by Poiret, hauntingly backlit and shot at inventive angles. These were published in the April 1911 issue of the magazine &quot;Art et Décoration&quot;. According to historian Jesse Alexander, the occasion is &quot;now considered to be the first ever modern fashion photography shoot,&quot; in which garments were imaged as much for their artistic quality as their formal appearance. A year later, Vogel began his renowned fashion journal La Gazette du Bon Ton, which showcased Poiret&#x27;s designs, drawn by top illustrators, along with six other leading Paris designers – Louise Chéruit, Georges Doeuillet, Jacques Doucet, Jeanne Paquin, Redfern, and the House of Worth. However, notable couture names were missing from this brilliant assemblage, including such major tastemakers as Lucile, Jeanne Lanvin and the Callot Soeurs.

In 1911, Poiret launched the Les Parfums de Rosine, a home perfume division, named for his first daughter. Henri Alméras was employed as a perfumer by Paul Poiret as of 1923, though certain sources suggest he had worked there since 1914.

Also in 1911, Poiret launched the Les École Martine, a home decor division of his design house, named for his second daughter. The establishment provided artistically inclined, working-class girls with trade skills and income.

In 1911 Poiret leased part of the property at 109 Rue du Faubourg Saint Honoré to his friend Henri Barbazanges, who opened the Galerie Barbazanges to exhibit contemporary art. The building was beside Poiret&#x27;s 18th century mansion at 26 Avenue d&#x27;Antin. Poiret reserved the right to hold two exhibitions each year. One of these was &quot;L&#x27;Art Moderne en France&quot; from 16 to 31 July 1916, organized by André Salmon. Salmon called the exhibition the &quot;Salon d&#x27;Antin&quot;. Artists included Pablo Picasso, who showed &quot;Les Demoiselles d&#x27;Avignon&quot; for the first time, Amedeo Modigliani, Moïse Kisling, Manuel Ortiz de Zárate and Marie Vassilieff. Poiret also arranged concerts of new music at the gallery, often in combination with exhibitions of new art. The 1916 Salon d&#x27;Antin included readings of poetry by Max Jacob and Guillaume Apollinaire, and performances of work by Erik Satie, Darius Milhaud, Igor Stravinsky and Georges Auric.

==Collapse of the Poiret fashion house==
Early in World War I, Poiret left his fashion house to serve the military. When he returned in 1919, the business was on the brink of bankruptcy. New designers like Chanel were producing simple, sleek clothes that relied on excellent workmanship. In comparison, Poiret&#x27;s elaborate designs seemed dowdy and poorly manufactured. (Though Poiret&#x27;s designs were groundbreaking, his construction was not – he aimed only for his dresses to &quot;read beautifully from afar.&quot;) In 1922, he was invited to New York to design costumes and dresses for Broadway stars. He took his top designer (France Martano) and an entourage with him, enjoying the elegant life at sea (see photos). New York City, however, was not home and he soon returned to Paris leaving his top designer there in his stead. Back in Paris, Poiret was increasingly unpopular, in debt, and lacking support from his business partners. He soon left the fashion empire he had established. In 1929, the house was closed, with its leftover stock sold by the kilogram as rags. When Poiret died in 1944, his genius had been forgotten. His road to poverty led him to odd jobs, including work as a street painter, selling drawings to customers of Paris cafes. At one time, the Chambre syndicale de la Haute Couture discussed providing a monthly allowance to aid Poiret, an idea rejected by Worth, at that time president of the group. Only his friend and one of his right-hand designers from his pre-WWI era, France Martano (married name: Benureau), helped him in his era of poverty, when most of Parisian society had forgotten him. At the end of his life, he dined regularly in her family&#x27;s Paris apartment and she ensured he was not wanting for food. (He&#x27;d previously erased her from his memoirs as, after designating her as his long-term replacement to design for Broadway in 1922, he was infuriated that she became an independent couturier upon her return to Paris.) His friend Elsa Schiaparelli prevented his name from encountering complete oblivion, and it was Schiaparelli who paid for his burial.

==Perfumery==
* &quot;Parfums de Rosine&quot; (1911)
* &quot;Nuit Persane&quot; (1911) 
* &quot;Le Minaret&quot; (1912)
* &quot;Aladin&quot;
* &quot;Arlequinade&quot;
* &quot;Borgia&quot;
* &quot;Fruit Défendu&quot; 
* &quot;Nuit de Chine&quot;

==Aesthetic and legacy==
Poiret&#x27;s major contribution to fashion was his technique of draping fabric, an alternative to the more popular tailoring and use of patterns. Poiret was influenced by both antique and regional dress, and favoured clothing cut along straight lines and decorated with rectangular motifs. The structural simplicity of his clothing represented a &quot;pivotal moment in the emergence of modernism&quot; generally, and &quot;effectively established the paradigm of modern fashion, irrevocably changing the direction of costume history.

Poiret is associated with the decline of corsetry in women&#x27;s fashion and the invention of the hobble skirt, and once boasted &quot;yes, I freed the bust, but I shackled the legs.&quot; Poiret was not the only one responsible for the change in women&#x27;s supportive garments, however, and the diminished role of corsetry was a result of various factors. Poiret is often described as an Orientalist, and his creations often drew inspiration from various Eastern styles which were at odds with other fashionable Edwardian modes. In 1911, he held an extravagant fancy-dress ball, The 1002nd Night, inspired by the tales of the &quot;One Thousand and One Nights&quot;, to which he dressed as a sultan bearing a whip and encouraged guests to dress in Orientalist styles, including harem pants and &quot;lampshade&quot; tunics similar to the one worn by his wife.

Poiret&#x27;s fashion designs feature prominently in the collections of fashion museums worldwide, and have been displayed in many exhibitions over the years. One such exhibition was &quot;Paul Poiret and Nicole Groult, The Masters of Art Deco Fashion&quot; (&quot;Paul Poiret et Nicole Groult, Maîtres de mode Art Déco&quot;) at Palais Galliera in Paris in 1986.

In May 2005, the fashion designer Azzedine Alaïa exhibited Denise Poiret&#x27;s wardrobe in a show called &quot;Free Creativity&quot; (&quot;La Création en Liberté&quot;) in his showroom before it was auctioned. Denise Poiret&#x27;s personal sartorial collection broke sales records: in particular, an auto coat that Paul Poiret had designed for her in 1914 went under the hammer for 110,000 Euros.

The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York purchased many pieces at this auction sale, which was the core of the first American retrospective on the dressmaker from May to August 2007, entitled &quot;Paul Poiret: King of Fashion&quot;.

In 2011, this show traveled to the Kremlin in Russia to celebrate the hundredth anniversary of Paul Poiret&#x27;s visit to Moscow and Saint Petersburg.

Additionally, Poiret&#x27;s perfumes, the Parfums de Rosine, are preserved in several cultural institutions, including the Osmothèque in Versailles.

In 2013, the Musée International de la Parfumerie in Grasse showcased the pioneering perfume branch of Poiret in an exhibition entitled &quot;Paul Poiret: Couturier Perfumer&quot;.

==Personal life==
In 1905, Poiret married Denise Boulet, a provincial girl; they would later have five children together. Denise, a slender and youthful woman, was Poiret&#x27;s muse and the prototype of la garçonne. In 1913, Poiret told Vogue, &quot;My wife is the inspiration for all my creations; she is the expression of all my ideals.&quot; The two later were divorced, in 1928 after twenty-three years of marriage, in a proceeding that was far from amicable due to Poiret&#x27;s many affairs.

== Brand revival ==
Commercially inactive since 1933, the Poiret global trademark rights were acquired by the Luxembourg-based company Luvanis in the early 2010s The right to use the brand name was then sold to the South-Korean fashion and luxury conglomerate Shinsegae Internationalin 2015.

In 2018 Shinsegae officially confirmed the relaunch of Poiret from Paris with Belgian businesswoman Anne Chapelle at its helm, and Paris-based Chinese couturiere Yiqing Yin as its artistic director. However after only two seasons Shinsegae announced the departure of Yiqing Yin and pivoted the brand into primarily cosmetics and skincare.

==See also==
* 1900s in fashion
* 1910s in fashion
* History of fashion design
* List of Orientalist artists
* Orientalism

==References==
==External links==

* Official website of Paul Poiret
* Paul Poiret at &quot;Vogue&quot;
* Paul Poiret, King of Fashion exhibition – The Metropolitan Museum of Art – New York City
* Poiret garment photographs, 1925–1927 from The Irene Lewisohn Costume Reference Library at the Costume Institute, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q631884" start="0" end="11" title="Paul Poiret" label="Paul Poiret"/>
<link wikidata="Q216053" start="179" end="192" title="haute couture" label="haute couture"/>
<link wikidata="Q913434" start="308" end="318" title="Les Halles" label="Les Halles"/>
<link wikidata="Q104717321" start="345" end="351" title="Jeanne Poiret Bovin" label="Jeanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726893" start="701" end="715" title="Louise Chéruit" label="Louise Chéruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259209" start="867" end="881" title="Jacques Doucet (fashion designer)" label="Jacques Doucet"/>
<link wikidata="Q646051" start="995" end="1000" title="Tulle (netting)" label="tulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q909391" start="1014" end="1021" title="taffeta" label="taffeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q596355" start="1079" end="1085" title="Gabrielle Réjane" label="Réjane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8863452" start="1117" end="1121" title="Zaza (play)" label="Zaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363963" start="1189" end="1208" title="Marketing strategy" label="marketing practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915543" start="1240" end="1254" title="House of Worth" label="House of Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244669" start="1615" end="1635" title="Leonilla Bariatinskaya" label="Princess Bariatinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q255184" start="2628" end="2634" title="Lucy, Lady Duff-Gordon" label="Lucile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396333" start="2725" end="2739" title="Margot Asquith" label="Margot Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="2772" end="2785" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="2822" end="2839" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q22452565" start="2942" end="2965" title="Jeanne Margaine-Lacroix" label="Jeanne Margaine-Lacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q313899" start="4296" end="4311" title="Edward Steichen" label="Edward Steichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146354" start="4671" end="4690" title="fashion photography" label="fashion photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444854" start="4852" end="4873" title="La Gazette du Bon Ton" label="La Gazette du Bon Ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726893" start="4988" end="5002" title="Louise Chéruit" label="Louise Chéruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546792" start="5004" end="5021" title="Georges Doeuillet" label="Georges Doeuillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259209" start="5023" end="5037" title="Jacques Doucet (fashion designer)" label="Jacques Doucet"/>
<link wikidata="Q442714" start="5039" end="5052" title="Jeanne Paquin" label="Jeanne Paquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305826" start="5054" end="5061" title="Redfern (couture)" label="Redfern"/>
<link wikidata="Q454330" start="5080" end="5085" title="Charles Worth" label="Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q272717" start="5207" end="5220" title="Jeanne Lanvin" label="Jeanne Lanvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423925" start="5229" end="5242" title="Callot Soeurs" label="Callot Soeurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q935359" start="5352" end="5365" title="Henri Alméras" label="Henri Alméras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491850" start="5839" end="5858" title="Galerie Barbazanges" label="Galerie Barbazanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q522679" start="6131" end="6143" title="André Salmon" label="André Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="6227" end="6240" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q910199" start="6259" end="6289" title="Les Demoiselles d&amp;#x27;Avignon" label="Les Demoiselles d&amp;#x27;Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q120993" start="6316" end="6333" title="Amedeo Modigliani" label="Amedeo Modigliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q281812" start="6335" end="6348" title="Moïse Kisling" label="Moïse Kisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286900" start="6350" end="6372" title="Manuel Ortiz de Zárate" label="Manuel Ortiz de Zárate"/>
<link wikidata="Q462767" start="6377" end="6393" title="Marie Vassilieff" label="Marie Vassilieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q156214" start="6563" end="6572" title="Max Jacob" label="Max Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q133855" start="6577" end="6598" title="Guillaume Apollinaire" label="Guillaume Apollinaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="6628" end="6638" title="Erik Satie" label="Erik Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="6640" end="6654" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="6656" end="6671" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q251818" start="6676" end="6689" title="Georges Auric" label="Georges Auric"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6742" end="6753" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q464023" start="8687" end="8704" title="Elsa Schiaparelli" label="Elsa Schiaparelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039121" start="9147" end="9154" title="Drapery" label="draping"/>
<link wikidata="Q242468" start="9198" end="9207" title="tailoring" label="tailoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="9319" end="9333" title="Warp and weft" label="straight lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637220" start="9718" end="9730" title="hobble skirt" label="hobble skirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42865" start="10011" end="10022" title="Orientalism" label="Orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8258" start="10255" end="10282" title="One Thousand and One Nights" label="One Thousand and One Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="10315" end="10321" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12744478" start="10401" end="10412" title="harem pants" label="harem pants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632912" start="10814" end="10829" title="Palais Galliera" label="Palais Galliera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553832" start="10883" end="10897" title="Azzedine Alaïa" label="Azzedine Alaïa"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="11253" end="11279" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="11521" end="11528" title="Moscow Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="11609" end="11615" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="11620" end="11636" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088573" start="11762" end="11772" title="Osmothèque" label="Osmothèque"/>
<link wikidata="Q621" start="11776" end="11786" title="Versailles (city)" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q173705" start="11842" end="11848" title="Grasse" label="Grasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483126" start="12175" end="12186" title="Flapper" label="la garçonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="12581" end="12597" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816747" start="12606" end="12613" title="Luvanis" label="Luvanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q490787" start="12731" end="12754" title="Shinsegae" label="Shinsegae International"/>
<link wikidata="Q216053" start="12915" end="12925" title="Haute couture" label="couturiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q16683689" start="12926" end="12936" title="Yiqing Yin" label="Yiqing Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557800" start="13119" end="13135" title="1900s in fashion" label="1900s in fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559240" start="13138" end="13154" title="1910s in fashion" label="1910s in fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q28920908" start="13157" end="13182" title="History of fashion design" label="History of fashion design"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662559" start="13185" end="13212" title="List of Orientalist artists" label="List of Orientalist artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q42865" start="13215" end="13226" title="Orientalism" label="Orientalism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646743" wikidata="Q2000129" url="?curid=646743" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa">
<text>The University of Hawaii at Mānoa is a public land-grant research university in Honolulu, Hawaii, United States. It is the flagship campus of the University of Hawaiʻi system and houses the main offices of the system. Most of the campus occupies the eastern half of the mouth of Mānoa Valley on Oahu, with the John A. Burns School of Medicine located adjacent to Kakaʻako Waterfront Park.

UH offers over 200 degree programs across 17 colleges and schools. It is accredited by the WASC Senior College and University Commission and governed by the Hawaii State Legislature and a semi-autonomous board of regents. It also a member of the Association of Pacific Rim Universities.

Mānoa is classified among &quot;R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity&quot;. It is a land-grant university that also participates in the sea-grant, space-grant, and sun-grant research consortia; it is one of only three such universities in the country to participate in all four consortia (Oregon State University and Pennsylvania State University are the others). UH and its subsidiary, the Applied Research Laboratory, is one of only fourteen University Affiliated Research Centers (UARC) of the United States Department of Defense and is one of five UARCs in the country for the United States Navy.

Notable UH alumni include Patsy Mink, Robert Ballard, Richard Parsons, and the parents of Barack Obama – Barack Obama Sr. and Stanley Ann Dunham. Forty-four percent of Hawaii&#x27;s state senators and 51 percent of its state representatives are UH graduates.

==History==

===Founding===
The University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa was founded in 1907 as a land-grant college of agriculture and mechanical arts establishing &quot;the College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts of the Territory of Hawaiʻi and to Provide for the Government and Support Thereof&quot;. The bill Maui Senator William J. Huelani Coelho through the initiatives of Native Hawaiian legislators, a newspaper editor, petition of an Asian American bank cashier, and a president of Cornell University, was introduced into the Territorial Legislature March 1, 1907 as Act 24, and signed into law March 25, 1907 by Governor George Carter, which officially established the College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts of the Territory of Hawaiʻi under a five-member Board of Regents on the corner of Beretania and Victoria streets (now the location of the Honolulu Museum of Art School). The Board of Regents first selected J.E. Roadhouse of the University of California to head the new college in October 1907 but unfortunately had died before leaving Berkely. With classes scheduled to start in February 1908, the regents persuaded Willis T. Pope, vice principal of the Territorial Normal School, to head the college for its first semester. In Spring 1908, the regents appointed John W. Gilmore, professor of agriculture at Cornell University, as the college&#x27;s first president. The Cornell connection would strongly influence the shaping of the new college, even today. It officially became an institution of higher learning on September 14, 1908, when it enrolled 5 freshmen registered for a bachelor of science degree. Willis T. Pope went on to become the Superintendent of Public Instruction in the Territory of Hawai’i from 1910 until 1913 and later a professor of botany and horticulture at the university.

In September 1912 it moved to its present location in Mānoa Valley on 90 acres of land that had been cobbled together from leased and private lands and was renamed the College of Hawaii. William Kwai Fong Yap, a cashier at Bank of Hawaii, and a group of citizens petitioned the Hawaii Territorial Legislature six years later for university status which led to another renaming finally to the University of Hawaiʻi on April 30, 1919, with the addition of the College of Arts and Sciences and College of Applied Science.

In the years following, the university expanded to include more than 300 acres. In 1931 the Territorial Normal School was absorbed into the university, becoming Teacher&#x27;s College, now the College of Education.

===20th century===
The university continued its growth throughout the 1930s and 1940s increasing from 232 to 402 acres. The number of buildings grew from 4 to 17. Following the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, classes were suspended for two months while the Corps of Engineers occupied much of the campus, including the Teacher&#x27;s College, for various purposes. The university&#x27;s ROTC program was put into active duty, which made the campus resemble a military school. When classes resumed on February 11, 1942, about half of the student and faculty body left to enter the war or military service. Students who returned to campus found classes cancelled due to lack of faculty and were required to carry gas masks to classes and bomb shelters were kept at a ready. Once the war was over, student enrollment grew faster than the university had faculty and space for.

In 1947, the university opened an extension center in Hilo on Hawaiʻi Island in the old Hilo Boarding School. In 1951, Hilo Center was designated the University of Hawaii Hilo Branch before its reorganization by an act of the Hawaiʻi State Legislature in 1970.

By the 1950s, enrollment increased to more than 5,000 students, and the university had expanded to include a Graduate Division, College of Education, College of Engineering, College of Business Administration, College of Tropical Agriculture, and College of Arts and Sciences.

When Hawaiʻi was granted statehood in 1959, the university became a constitutional agency rather than a legislative agency with the Board of Regents having oversight over the university. Enrollment continued to grow to 19,000 at the university through the 1960s and the campus became nationally recognized in research and graduate education.

In 1965, the state legislature created a system of community colleges and placed it within the university at the recommendations of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare&#x27;s report on higher education in Hawaii and UH President Thomas H. Hamilton. By the end of the 1960s, the University of Hawaiʻi was very different from what it had since its beginning. It had become larger and with the addition of the community colleges, a broad range of activities extending from vocational education to community college education, which were all advanced through research and postdoctoral training.

The university was renamed the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa to distinguish it from other campuses in the University of Hawaiʻi System in 1972.

== Campus ==

==Organization and administration==
The University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa operates within the University of Hawaiʻi System, which is governed by an 11-member board of regents who are nominated by the Regents Candidate Advisory Council, appointed by the governor, and confirmed by the State of Hawaiʻi legislature. The board also appoints the president of the University of Hawaiʻi System, who provides leadership for all 10 campuses, including as the chief executive of UH Mānoa. Day-to-day academic and operational management of UH Mānoa is the responsibility of the Provost.

=== University of Hawaiʻi president (pre-1965) ===
When UH began as the College of Hawaiʻi, Willis T. Pope served as acting dean from 1907 to 1908, despite declining the title of &quot;acting president.&quot; Since that initial period, the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa has always been led by a president, chancellor, or provost, including interim or acting roles. 

From 1908 to 1965, the president of the University of Hawaiʻi, before the creation of the University of Hawaii System (UH System), served as chief executive of the university. Technical and community colleges and Hilo College operated separately from what would later become the UH System.

=== Creation of the University of Hawaiʻi System ===
In 1965 the Hawaiʻi State Legislature created the University of Hawaiʻi System, which incorporated the technical and community colleges into the university. The President’s role was expanded to include oversight of the new university system.
=== Introduction of the chancellor role ===
In 1974, the role of chancellor was established to handle campus-specific leadership, allowing the UH President to focus on system-wide governance. 

Presidents 

Chancellors
*1974–1984: &quot;multiple chancellors&quot;

=== Return to combined leadership (1984–2001) ===
In 1984, the role of the chancellor was dissolved and the president resumed direct oversight of UH Mānoa.
=== Reintroduction of the chancellor (2001–2017) ===
In 2001, the position of chancellor was re-established by UH System president Evan Dobelle over conflict of interest concerns.

Presidents

=== President and provost (2017–present) ===
The Provost role was established to handle the academic and operational affairs of UH Mānoa, while the President served as the chief executive of the University and retained overall UH System leadership. This reorganization was made to create a governance structure similar to other major research universities, such as the University of Washington and Indiana University.

==Academics==

UH Mānoa, the flagship campus of the University of Hawaiʻi System, is a four-year research university consisting of 17 schools and colleges. In addition to undergraduate and graduate degrees in the School of Architecture, School of Earth Science and Technology, the College of Arts, Languages, and Letters, the Shidler College of Business, the College of Education, and the College of Engineering, the university also maintains professional schools in law and medicine.

Together, the colleges and schools of the university offer bachelor&#x27;s degrees in 93 fields of study, master&#x27;s degrees in 84 fields, doctoral degrees in 51 fields, first professional degrees in five fields, post-baccalaureate degrees in three fields, 28 undergraduate certification programs, and 29 graduate certification programs.

=== Schools and colleges ===

==== Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources ====
Originally called the College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts of the Territory of Hawaiʻi and formerly the College of Applied Sciences, the College of Tropical Agriculture &amp; Human Resources (CTAHR) is the founding college of the university. Programs of the college focuses on tropical agriculture, food science and human nutrition, textiles and clothing, and Human Resources.

==== Education ====
The college was established as the Honolulu Training School in 1895 to prepare and train teachers and then Territorial Normal and Training School after Hawaiʻi became a territory in 1905. As the school outgrew its location on the Punchbowl side of Honolulu, a new campus was to be constructed on the corner of University Avenue and Metcalf Street. The first two buildings constructed by the Territorial Department of Public instruction became known as Wist Hall and Wist Annex 1. The normal school was eventually merged into the University of Hawaiʻi in 1931 as the Teacher&#x27;s College. In 1959, the name was changed to the College of Education.

==== Arts, Languages, and Letters ====

The College of Arts, Languages, and Letters (CALL) is the newest and largest college at the university. It was created following the dissolution of the College of Arts and Science and the merger of the Colleges of Arts and Humanities, Languages, Linguistics, and Literature (LLL) and the School of Pacific and Asian Studies. The college&#x27;s core focus is the study of arts, humanities, and languages with a particular focus on Hawaiʻi, the Pacific, and Asia Studies.

==== Business ====

The College of Business Administration was established in 1949 with programs in accounting, finance, real estate, industrial relations, and marketing. The college was renamed the Shidler College of Business on September 6, 2006, after real-estate executive Jay Shidler, an alumnus of the college, who donated $25 million to the college.

==== Nursing ====
The School of Nursing was established in 1951, even though courses in nursing had been offered since 1932 with a partnership with Queen&#x27;s Hospital School of Nursing.

===Library===
The University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa Library, which provides access to 3.4 million volumes, 50,000 journals, and thousands of digitized documents, is one of the largest academic research libraries in the United States, ranking 86th in parent institution investment among 113 North American members of the Association of Research Libraries.

===Honors program===
The UH Mānoa offers an Honors Program to provide additional resources for students preparing to apply to professional school programs. Students complete core curriculum courses for their degrees in the Honors Program, maintain at least a cumulative 3.2 grade-point average in all courses, and complete a senior thesis project.

===Rankings===



The National Science Foundation ranked UH Mānoa 45th among 395 public universities for Research and Development (R&amp;D) expenditures in fiscal year 2014.

According to &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;″s rankings for 2021, UH Mānoa was tied at 170th overall and 159th for &quot;Best Value&quot; among national universities; tied at 83rd among public universities; and tied at 145th for its undergraduate engineering program among schools that confer doctorates.

===Distance learning===
The university offers over 50 distance learning courses, using technology to replace either all or a portion of class instruction. Students interact with their instructors and peers from different locations to further develop their education.

==Research==

With extramural grants and contracts of $436 million in 2012, research at UH Mānoa relates to Hawaii&#x27;s physical landscape, its people and their heritage. The geography facilitates advances in marine biology, oceanography, underwater robotic technology, astronomy, geology and geophysics, agriculture, aquaculture and tropical medicine. Its heritage, the people and its close ties to the Asian and Pacific region create a favorable environment for study and research in the arts, genetics, intercultural relations, linguistics, religion and philosophy.

According to the National Science Foundation, UH Mānoa spent $276 million on research and development in 2018, ranking it 84th in the nation. Extramural funding increased from $368 million in FY 2008 to nearly $436 million in FY 2012. Research grants increased from $278 million in FY 2008 to $317 million in FY 2012. Non-research awards totaled $119 million in FY 2012. Overall, extramural funding increased by 18%.

For the period of July 1, 2012 to June 20, 2013, the School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST) received the largest amount of extramural funding among the Mānoa units at $92 million. SOEST was followed by the medical school at $57 million, the College of Natural Sciences and the University of Hawaiʻi Cancer Center at $24 million, the Institute for Astronomy at $22 million, CTARH at $18 million, and the College of Social Sciences and the College of Education at $16 million.

Across the UH system, the majority of research funding comes from the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Defense, the Department of Education, the National Science Foundation, the Department of Commerce, and the National Aeronautics Space Administration (NASA). Local funding comes from Hawaii government agencies, non-profit organizations, health organizations and business and other interests.

The $150-million medical complex in Kakaʻako opened in the spring of 2005. The facility houses a biomedical research and education center that attracts significant federal funding and private sector investment in biotechnology and cancer research and development.

Research (broadly conceived) is expected of every faculty member at UH Mānoa. Also, according to the Carnegie Foundation, UH Mānoa is an RU/VH (very high research activity) level research university.

In 2013, UH Mānoa was elected to membership in the Association of Pacific Rim Universities, the leading consortium of research universities for the region. APRU represents 45 premier research universities—with a collective 2 million students and 120,000 faculty members—from 16 economies.

===Cancer Center===
The University of Hawaiʻi Cancer Center is part of the Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. Its facility in Kakaʻako was completed in 2013. It is designated as cancer center by the National Cancer Institute and represents Hawaiʻi and the Pacific. It was founded in 1971 and was named the Cancer Research Center of Hawaiʻi before 2011. , Naoto Ueno serves as the center&#x27;s director.

==Demographics==

UH is the fourth most diverse university in the U.S. According to the 2010 report of the Institutional Research Office, a plurality of students at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa are Caucasian, making up a quarter of the student body. The next largest groups were Japanese Americans (13%), native or part native Hawaiians (13%), Filipino Americans (8%), Chinese Americans (7%) and mixed race (12%). Pacific Islanders and other ethnic groups make up the balance (22%).

==Student life==

===Student housing===
All UH Mānoa residence halls are coeducational. These include the Hale Aloha Complex, Johnson Hall, Hale Laulima, and Hale Kahawai. Suite-style residence halls include Frear Hall and Gateway House. First-year undergraduates who choose to live on campus live in the traditional residence halls.

Two apartment-style complexes are Hale Noelani and Hale Wainani. Hale Noelani consists of five three-story buildings and Hale Wainani has two high rise buildings (one 14-story and one 13-story) and two low-rise buildings. Second-year undergraduates and above are permitted to live in Hale Noelani and Hale Wainani.

The university reserves some low-rise units for graduate students and families.

===Charles H. Atherton YMCA===
The University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa and the YMCA of Honolulu has enjoyed a close and robust partnership since the university&#x27;s founding. Beginning informally in 1908, the YMCA held bible classes and discussions at the University of Hawaiʻi, when it was the College of Hawaiʻi. In 1912, the YMCA of Honolulu followed the college to Mānoa valley and continued its work in Hawaiʻi Hall. In 1922, the relationship was formalized and it was one of the largest and most active groups on the university&#x27;s campus, including hosting events for high school and incoming students.

In 1932, through funding by the Atherton family, the YMCA moved across the street to a three-story cement building on University Avenue. The building, called the Charles H. Atherton House or the &quot;Pink Building&quot;, in addition to being the center for YMCA activities, also served as student housing and dining hall. In 1995, the YMCA purchased the Mary Atherton House next door to provide additional residential and activity space.

In 2017, the Atherton building was sold to the university and University of Hawaiʻi Foundation. Today, its main offices are located in the Queen Lili&#x27;uokalani Center for Student Services building on the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa, where they continue serve UH students and families throughout Hawaiʻi.

The Atherton building has since been closed and renovations began July 2021 to turn the Pink Building into student housing and an innovation center.

===Associated Students of the University of Hawaiʻi===

The Associated Students of the University of Hawaiʻi at Manoa (ASUH) is the undergraduate student government representing the 10,000+ full-time, classified, undergraduate students at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. ASUH was founded in 1910 as the Associated Students of Hawaiʻi and was chartered by the University of Hawaiʻi Board of Regents in 1912.

==Off-campus==
*The Lyon Arboretum is the only tropical arboretum belonging to any American university. The Arboretum, located in Mānoa Valley, was established in 1918 by the Hawaiian Sugar Planters&#x27; Association to demonstrate watershed restoration and test tree species for reforestation, as well as to collect living plants of economic value. In 1953, it became part of the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. Its over 15,000 accessions focus primarily on the monocot families of palms, gingers, heliconias, bromeliads and aroids.
*The Waikiki Aquarium, founded in 1904, is the third-oldest public aquarium in the United States. A part of the University of Hawaiʻi since 1919, the Aquarium is located next to a living reef on the Waikiki shoreline.

==Athletics==

The University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa competes in NCAA Division I, the only Hawaii school to do so. It competes in the Mountain West Conference for football only and the Big West Conference for most other sports. UH competes in the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation in men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s swimming and diving, and indoor track and field while the coed and women&#x27;s sailing teams are members of the Pacific Coast Collegiate Sailing Conference.

Men&#x27;s teams are known as Rainbow Warriors, and women&#x27;s teams are called Rainbow Wahine. &quot;&quot; means &quot;woman&quot; in Hawaiian. They are most notable for men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s basketball, volleyball, baseball, and football programs. The university won the 2004 Intercollegiate Sailing Association National Championships. The women&#x27;s volleyball program won NCAA championships in 1982, 1983 and 1987. The men&#x27;s volleyball won an NCAA championship in 2021. The men&#x27;s volleyball team had previously won an NCAA championship title game in 2002, but the title was later vacated due to violations.

The principal sports venues are Clarence T. C. Ching Athletics Complex, Stan Sheriff Center, Les Murakami Stadium, Rainbow Wahine Softball Stadium, and the Duke Kahanamoku Aquatic Complex.

The university&#x27;s athletic budget in FY 2008–2009 was $29.6 million.

==Notable alumni and faculty==

Notable alumni of the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa include:

*Neil Abercrombie (M.A. 1964, PhD 1974), former governor of Hawaiʻi
*Daniel Akaka (B.A. 1952, M.Ed. 1966), U.S. senator
*Arsenio Balisacan, PhD, 1985, Socioeconomic Planning Secretary and Director General of the National Economic and Development Authority of the Philippines
*Alice Augusta Ball (M.S. Chemistry, 1915), chemist
*Robert Ballard (M.S. 1966), oceanographer
*Rick Blangiardi (M.A 1973), 15th mayor of Honolulu
*Robert Blust (B.A. 1967, PhD 1974), linguist and Austronesian language expert
*Tammy Duckworth (B.A. 1990), U.S. senator
*Ann Dunham (Ph.D. 1992), anthropologist and mother of President Barack Obama
*Georgia Engel (B.A. 1967), actress
*Alan M. Friedlander (PhD. 1996), marine biologist
*Sonny Ganaden (J.D. 2006), lawyer, journalist and member of the Hawaii House of Representatives from the 30th District; later a faculty member 
*Colleen Hanabusa (B.A. 1970, M.A. 1975, J.D. 1977), former U.S. congresswoman
*Mazie Hirono (B.A. 1970), U.S. senator
*Ana Paula Höfling, dance researcher and academic
*Robert Huey, Japanologist
*Daniel Inouye (B.A. 1950), U.S. senator
*Ed Lu, postdoctoral fellow, former NASA astronaut
*Patsy Mink (B.A. 1948), former U.S. congresswoman
*Janet Mock (B.A. 2004), writer
*Esther T. Mookini, linguist and translator
*Robyn Ah Mow-Santos, 1996, USA Volleyball Team member and former Olympian
*Richard Parsons (B.A. 1968), businessman, former chairman of Citigroup
*Pat Saiki (B.S. 1952), former member of the U.S. House of Representatives and teacher
*Michael Savage (M.S., 1970, M.A., 1972), author
*Jay H. Shidler (B.B.A. 1968) entrepreneur and benefactor of the Shidler College of Business
*Linda Taira (B.A. 1978), former chief congressional correspondent for CNN
*Mark Takai (B.A. 1990, M.P.H. 1993), U.S. congressman
*Nainoa Thompson (B.A. 1986), navigator and former trustee of Kamehameha Schools
*Corinne K. A. Watanabe (J.D. 1971), judge

Notable faculty of the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa include:
*Lee Altenberg, theoretical biologist
*Mapuana Antonio, public health academic
*Tom Apple, physical chemist
*Kim Binsted, computer scientist
*Lyle Campbell, linguist
*Monique Chyba, mathematician
*Edward DeLong, atmospheric science, member of the National Academy of Sciences
*Mike Douglass, urban planner
*David Cameron Duffy, conservation biologist
*Kathy Ferguson, political scientist
*Ruth Haas, mathematician
*Richard S. Hamilton, mathematician, member of the National Academy of Sciences
*Bruce Houghton, vulcanologist
*Hope A. Ishii, geophysicist
*Reece Jones, geographer, Guggenheim Fellow
*Kenneth Y. Kaneshiro, evolutionary biologist
*David Karl, microbiologist and oceanographer, member of the National Academy of Sciences
*Klaus Keil, geophysicist
*Patrick Vinton Kirch, archaeologist, member of the National Academy of Sciences 
*Denise Konan, economist
*Michelle Manes, mathematician
*Margaret McFall-Ngai, biologist, member of the National Academy of Sciences
*Karen Jean Meech, astronomer
*Michael J. Shapiro, political scientist
*Steven M. Stanley, paleontologist and evolutionary biologist, member of the National Academy of Sciences
*Manfred B. Steger, sociologist
*Stephen Vargo, marketing
*Bin Wang, meteorologist
*Ryuzo Yanagimachi, biologist, member of the National Academy of Sciences

Notable former faculty members include:
*Isabella Abbott, ethnobotanist
*Glenn Cannon, theatre
*Hampton L. Carson, evolutionary biologist
*Milton Diamond, anatomist
*Jim Dator, political-social science 
*Wilbur Davenport, communications engineering, member of the National Academy of Engineering
*Ruth D. Gates, marine biologist
*George Herbig, astronomer, member of the National Academy of Sciences
*Robert A. Kinzie III, biologist and zoologist 
*W. Wesley Peterson, computer scientist and mathematician
*Joseph Rock, botanist
*Harold St. John, botanist
*Shunzo Sakamaki, Japanese studies
*Richard Schmidt, linguist
*Lani Stemmermann, botanist, conservation biologist
*Satosi Watanabe, theoretical physicist
*Reina Whaitiri, English literature

==See also==

*Hawai`i Institute of Marine Biology
*Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT)
*University of Hawaiʻi Marching Band

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="4" end="33" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa" label="University of Hawaii at Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="39" end="45" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="46" end="56" title="Land-grant university" label="land-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="57" end="76" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="80" end="88" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="123" end="138" title="flagship campus" label="flagship campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="146" end="167" title="University of Hawaiʻi" label="University of Hawaiʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273127" start="279" end="291" title="Manoa" label="Mānoa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="295" end="299" title="Oahu" label="Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349112" start="363" end="387" title="Kakaako Waterfront Park" label="Kakaʻako Waterfront Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758323" start="463" end="473" title="Higher education accreditation in the United States" label="accredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987478" start="481" end="526" title="WASC Senior College and University Commission" label="WASC Senior College and University Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684411" start="547" end="571" title="Hawaii State Legislature" label="Hawaii State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074688" start="636" end="675" title="Association of Pacific Rim Universities" label="Association of Pacific Rim Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="687" end="697" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978302" start="833" end="842" title="Sea grant colleges" label="sea-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978618" start="844" end="855" title="Space grant colleges" label="space-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638697" start="861" end="870" title="Sun grant colleges" label="sun-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="986" end="1009" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="1014" end="1043" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894503" start="1141" end="1179" title="University Affiliated Research Center" label="University Affiliated Research Centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="1194" end="1229" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1278" end="1296" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q399235" start="1325" end="1335" title="Patsy Mink" label="Patsy Mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q312867" start="1337" end="1351" title="Robert Ballard" label="Robert Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149305" start="1353" end="1368" title="Richard Parsons (businessman)" label="Richard Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="1389" end="1401" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q649593" start="1404" end="1420" title="Barack Obama Sr." label="Barack Obama Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q766106" start="1425" end="1443" title="Ann Dunham" label="Stanley Ann Dunham"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="1647" end="1665" title="Land-grant university" label="land-grant college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="1929" end="1944" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="2041" end="2059" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q886085" start="2181" end="2194" title="George R. Carter" label="George Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="2878" end="2896" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856124" start="3595" end="3609" title="Bank of Hawaii" label="Bank of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944955" start="3650" end="3680" title="Hawaii Territorial Legislature" label="Hawaii Territorial Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q627006" start="3996" end="4009" title="Normal school" label="Normal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="4285" end="4307" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="6010" end="6053" title="Department of Health, Education and Welfare" label="Department of Health, Education and Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684411" start="7937" end="7962" title="Hawaiʻi State Legislature" label="Hawaiʻi State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="7975" end="8003" title="University of Hawaiʻi System" label="University of Hawaiʻi System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415366" start="8719" end="8731" title="Evan Dobelle" label="Evan Dobelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="8737" end="8757" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496136" start="9526" end="9553" title="Shidler College of Business" label="Shidler College of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q13106250" start="10390" end="10410" title="tropical agriculture" label="tropical agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637030" start="10412" end="10424" title="food science" label="food science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118341" start="10741" end="10750" title="Punchbowl Crater" label="Punchbowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q828812" start="12699" end="12718" title="professional school" label="professional school"/>
<link wikidata="Q18185" start="12847" end="12866" title="Grading in education" label="grade-point average"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="13116" end="13144" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="13466" end="13483" title="distance education" label="distance learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="14269" end="14296" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="14723" end="14771" title="School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology" label="School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q604599" start="15021" end="15044" title="Institute for Astronomy (Hawaii)" label="Institute for Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="15234" end="15273" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services" label="Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="15279" end="15300" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="15306" end="15329" title="United States Department of Education" label="Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="15335" end="15362" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="15368" end="15390" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="15400" end="15441" title="NASA" label="National Aeronautics Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349111" start="16450" end="16458" title="Kakaʻako" label="Kakaʻako"/>
<link wikidata="Q664846" start="16523" end="16548" title="National Cancer Institute" label="National Cancer Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964750" start="16679" end="16689" title="Naoto Ueno" label="Naoto Ueno"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="16933" end="16942" title="White American" label="Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="17014" end="17031" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="17040" end="17071" title="native Hawaiians" label="native or part native Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="17079" end="17096" title="Filipino American" label="Filipino American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="17104" end="17120" title="Chinese American" label="Chinese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="19610" end="19628" title="student government" label="student government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758333" start="19849" end="19865" title="Board of Regents" label="Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485977" start="19896" end="19910" title="Lyon Arboretum" label="Lyon Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="19932" end="19941" title="arboretum" label="arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891869" start="20415" end="20431" title="Waikiki Aquarium" label="Waikiki Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786588" start="20760" end="20784" title="Mountain West Conference" label="Mountain West Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q859500" start="20811" end="20830" title="Big West Conference" label="Big West Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974360" start="20873" end="20907" title="Mountain Pacific Sports Federation" label="Mountain Pacific Sports Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122360" start="21052" end="21095" title="Pacific Coast Collegiate Sailing Conference" label="Pacific Coast Collegiate Sailing Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684360" start="21300" end="21310" title="Hawaii Rainbow Warriors basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005860" start="21312" end="21322" title="Hawaii Rainbow Wahine volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="21324" end="21332" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684443" start="21338" end="21346" title="Hawaii Rainbow Warriors football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045815" start="21385" end="21443" title="Intercollegiate Sailing Association National Championships" label="Intercollegiate Sailing Association National Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752700" start="21763" end="21801" title="Clarence T. C. Ching Athletics Complex" label="Clarence T. C. Ching Athletics Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597879" start="21803" end="21822" title="Stan Sheriff Center" label="Stan Sheriff Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529766" start="21824" end="21844" title="Les Murakami Stadium" label="Les Murakami Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q469689" start="22091" end="22107" title="Neil Abercrombie" label="Neil Abercrombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q359366" start="22159" end="22171" title="Daniel Akaka" label="Daniel Akaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796473" start="22211" end="22228" title="Arsenio Balisacan" label="Arsenio Balisacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059113" start="22366" end="22384" title="Alice Ball" label="Alice Augusta Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q312867" start="22418" end="22432" title="Robert Ballard" label="Robert Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q98590286" start="22461" end="22476" title="Rick Blangiardi" label="Rick Blangiardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="22503" end="22511" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107536" start="22513" end="22525" title="Robert Blust" label="Robert Blust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036410" start="22592" end="22607" title="Tammy Duckworth" label="Tammy Duckworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q766106" start="22635" end="22645" title="Ann Dunham" label="Ann Dunham"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="22699" end="22711" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q125237" start="22713" end="22726" title="Georgia Engel" label="Georgia Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q118903080" start="22749" end="22768" title="Alan M. Friedlander" label="Alan M. Friedlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q105064596" start="22800" end="22813" title="Sonny Ganaden" label="Sonny Ganaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q909676" start="22864" end="22895" title="Hawaii House of Representatives" label="Hawaii House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q276359" start="22945" end="22961" title="Colleen Hanabusa" label="Colleen Hanabusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16476" start="23024" end="23036" title="Mazie Hirono" label="Mazie Hirono"/>
<link wikidata="Q63456651" start="23064" end="23081" title="Ana Paula Höfling" label="Ana Paula Höfling"/>
<link wikidata="Q65548592" start="23114" end="23125" title="Robert Huey" label="Robert Huey"/>
<link wikidata="Q312845" start="23141" end="23154" title="Daniel Inouye" label="Daniel Inouye"/>
<link wikidata="Q709931" start="23182" end="23187" title="Ed Lu" label="Ed Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q399235" start="23233" end="23243" title="Patsy Mink" label="Patsy Mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153507" start="23284" end="23294" title="Janet Mock" label="Janet Mock"/>
<link wikidata="Q98066357" start="23316" end="23333" title="Esther T. Mookini" label="Esther T. Mookini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770446" start="23360" end="23379" title="Robyn Ah Mow-Santos" label="Robyn Ah Mow-Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149305" start="23435" end="23450" title="Richard Parsons (businessman)" label="Richard Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="23496" end="23505" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q458473" start="23507" end="23516" title="Pat Saiki" label="Pat Saiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292044" start="23594" end="23608" title="Michael Savage" label="Michael Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096538" start="23643" end="23657" title="Jay H. Shidler" label="Jay H. Shidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q109475584" start="23736" end="23747" title="Linda Taira" label="Linda Taira"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197299" start="23811" end="23821" title="Mark Takai" label="Mark Takai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878402" start="23866" end="23881" title="Nainoa Thompson" label="Nainoa Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q89936549" start="23947" end="23969" title="Corinne K. A. Watanabe" label="Corinne K. A. Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q68124266" start="24054" end="24067" title="Lee Altenberg" label="Lee Altenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q94478382" start="24092" end="24107" title="Mapuana Antonio" label="Mapuana Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149558" start="24133" end="24142" title="Tom Apple" label="Tom Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095352" start="24162" end="24173" title="Kim Binsted" label="Kim Binsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450352" start="24195" end="24208" title="Lyle Campbell" label="Lyle Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q99517011" start="24220" end="24233" title="Monique Chyba" label="Monique Chyba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342553" start="24250" end="24263" title="Edward DeLong" label="Edward DeLong"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="24300" end="24328" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846607" start="24330" end="24343" title="Mike Douglass (urban planner)" label="Mike Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233096" start="24360" end="24379" title="David Duffy" label="David Cameron Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28033886" start="24405" end="24419" title="Kathy Ferguson" label="Kathy Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47535932" start="24442" end="24451" title="Ruth Haas" label="Ruth Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q239904" start="24468" end="24487" title="Richard S. Hamilton" label="Richard S. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="24518" end="24546" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977678" start="24548" end="24562" title="Bruce Houghton" label="Bruce Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q71332721" start="24579" end="24592" title="Hope Ishii" label="Hope A. Ishii"/>
<link wikidata="Q53316628" start="24608" end="24619" title="Reece Jones (geographer)" label="Reece Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="24633" end="24650" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135948" start="24652" end="24672" title="Peripatric speciation" label="Kenneth Y. Kaneshiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q30171734" start="24698" end="24708" title="David Karl" label="David Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="24758" end="24786" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313541" start="24788" end="24798" title="Klaus Keil" label="Klaus Keil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147793" start="24814" end="24834" title="Patrick Vinton Kirch" label="Patrick Vinton Kirch"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="24865" end="24893" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257696" start="24896" end="24908" title="Denise Konan" label="Denise Konan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56706011" start="24921" end="24935" title="Michelle Manes" label="Michelle Manes"/>
<link wikidata="Q57585352" start="24952" end="24972" title="Margaret McFall-Ngai" label="Margaret McFall-Ngai"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="24999" end="25027" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369738" start="25029" end="25045" title="Karen Jean Meech" label="Karen Jean Meech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479023" start="25059" end="25077" title="Michael J. Shapiro" label="Michael J. Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347598" start="25100" end="25117" title="Steven M. Stanley" label="Steven M. Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="25176" end="25204" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748541" start="25206" end="25223" title="Manfred B. Steger" label="Manfred B. Steger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610746" start="25238" end="25251" title="Stephen Vargo" label="Stephen Vargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157397" start="25264" end="25272" title="Bin Wang (meteorologist)" label="Bin Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385560" start="25289" end="25306" title="Ryuzo Yanagimachi" label="Ryuzo Yanagimachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="25333" end="25361" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077932" start="25404" end="25419" title="Isabella Abbott" label="Isabella Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568716" start="25436" end="25448" title="Glenn Cannon" label="Glenn Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646164" start="25459" end="25476" title="Hampton L. Carson (biologist)" label="Hampton L. Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q425166" start="25502" end="25516" title="Milton Diamond" label="Milton Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194531" start="25529" end="25538" title="Jim Dator" label="Jim Dator"/>
<link wikidata="Q188867" start="25540" end="25564" title="Futures studies" label="political-social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000172" start="25567" end="25583" title="Wilbur Davenport" label="Wilbur Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="25627" end="25658" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q57947960" start="25660" end="25673" title="Ruth Gates" label="Ruth D. Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q470827" start="25693" end="25706" title="George Herbig" label="George Herbig"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="25734" end="25762" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q118120773" start="25764" end="25784" title="Robert A. Kinzie III" label="Robert A. Kinzie III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709618" start="25812" end="25830" title="W. Wesley Peterson" label="W. Wesley Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q78631" start="25870" end="25881" title="Joseph Rock" label="Joseph Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840308" start="25893" end="25908" title="Harold St. John" label="Harold St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q55948471" start="25920" end="25935" title="Shunzo Sakamaki" label="Shunzo Sakamaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328922" start="25955" end="25970" title="Richard Schmidt (linguist)" label="Richard Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36617456" start="25982" end="25998" title="Lani Stemmermann" label="Lani Stemmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950796" start="26034" end="26049" title="Satosi Watanabe" label="Satosi Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q115609823" start="26074" end="26088" title="Reina Whaitiri" label="Reina Whaitiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684640" start="26125" end="26160" title="Hawai`i Institute of Marine Biology" label="Hawai`i Institute of Marine Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684340" start="26162" end="26186" title="Hawaii Ocean Time-series" label="Hawaii Ocean Time-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895481" start="26194" end="26229" title="University of Hawaii Marching Band" label="University of Hawaiʻi Marching Band"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646745" wikidata="Q874381" url="?curid=646745" title="Momo (novel)">
<text>Momo, also known as The Grey Gentlemen or The Men in Grey, is a fantasy novel by Michael Ende, published in 1973. It is about the concept of time and how it is used by humans in modern societies. The full title in German (&quot;Momo oder Die seltsame Geschichte von den Zeit-Dieben und von dem Kind, das den Menschen die gestohlene Zeit zurückbrachte&quot;) translates to &quot;Momo, or the strange story of the time-thieves and the child who brought the stolen time back to the people&quot;. The book won the Deutscher Jugendliteraturpreis in 1974.

==Plot==

In the ruins of an amphitheatre just outside an unnamed city lives Momo, a little girl of mysterious origin. She came to the ruin, parentless and wearing a long, used coat. She is illiterate and cannot count, and she doesn&#x27;t know how old she is. When asked, she replies, &quot;As far as I remember, I&#x27;ve always been around.&quot; She is remarkable in the neighbourhood because she has the extraordinary ability to listen—really listen. By simply being with people and listening to them, she can help them find answers to their problems, make up with each other, and think of fun games. The advice given to people &quot;go and see Momo!&quot; has become a household phrase and Momo makes many friends, especially an honest, silent street-cleaner, Beppo, and a poetic, extroverted tour guide, Gigi (Guido in some translations).

This pleasant atmosphere is spoiled by the arrival of the Men in Grey, eventually revealed as a species of paranormal parasites stealing the time of humans. Appearing in the form of grey-clad, grey-skinned, bald men, these strange individuals present themselves as representing the Timesavings Bank and promote the idea of &quot;timesaving&quot; among the population: supposedly, time can be deposited in the Bank and returned to the client later with interest. After encountering the Men in Grey, people are made to forget all about them, but not about the resolution to save as much time as possible for later use. Gradually, the sinister influence of the Men in Grey affects the whole city: life becomes sterile, devoid of all things considered time-wasting, like social activities, recreation, art, imagination, or sleeping. Buildings and clothing are made exactly the same for everyone, and the rhythms of life become hectic. In reality, the more time people save, the less they have; the time they save is actually lost to them. Instead, it is consumed by the Men in Grey in the form of cigars made from the dried petals of the hour-lilies that represent time. Without these cigars, the Men in Grey cannot exist.

Momo, however, is a wrench in the plans of the Men in Grey and the Timesavings Bank, thanks to her special personality. The Men in Grey try various plans to deal with her, to derail her from stopping their scheme, but they all fail. When even her closest friends fall under the influence of the Men in Grey in one way or another, Momo&#x27;s only hope to save the time of mankind are the administrator of Time, Master Secundus Minutus Hora, and Cassiopeia, a tortoise who can communicate through writing on her shell and can see thirty minutes into the future. Momo&#x27;s adventure takes her from the depths of her heart, which her own time flows from in the form of hour-lilies, to the lair of the Men in Grey themselves, where the time that people believe they are saving is hoarded.

After Master Hora stops time, but gives Momo a single hour-lily to carry with her, she has exactly one hour to defeat the Men in Grey in a frozen world where only they and she are still moving. She surreptitiously follows them to their underground lair and observes as they decimate their own number in order to stretch their supply of time as far as possible. With the advice of Cassiopeia and by using the hour-lily, Momo is able to shut the door to the vault where the stolen lilies are kept. Now facing extinction as soon as their cigars are consumed, the few remaining Men in Grey pursue Momo, perishing one by one. The last Man in Grey finally begs her to give him the hour-lily so that he can open the vault. When she refuses, he too vanishes remarking that &quot;it is good it is over&quot;.

Using the last minute she has before her hour-lily crumbles, Momo opens the vault again, releasing the millions of hour-lilies stored within. The stolen time returns to its proper owners and goes back to their hearts, causing time to start again (without people knowing it had ever halted). Momo is reunited with her friends, and elsewhere Master Hora rejoices together with Cassiopeia.

==Major themes==

The main theme of &quot;Momo&quot; can be seen as a criticism of consumerism and stress. It describes the personal and social losses produced by unnecessary consumption, and the danger to be driven by a hidden interest group with enough power to induce people into this life style. Michael Ende has also stated to have had the concept of currency demurrage in mind when writing &quot;Momo&quot;.

Childhood is also an important subject in many of Ende&#x27;s books. In &quot;Momo&quot; it is used to offer contrast with the adult society. As children have &quot;all the time in the world&quot;, they are a difficult target for the Men in Grey: children can&#x27;t be convinced that their games are time-wasting. The author uses a mockery of Barbie dolls and other expensive toys as symbols to show how anyone can be persuaded, even indirectly, into consumerism.

Robert N. Peck described that &quot;Momo&quot; has five principle elements: taking time, listening, imagining, persons and music.

==Literary significance==

An article by philosopher David Loy and literature professor Linda Goodhew called &quot;Momo&quot; &quot;one of the most remarkable novels of the late twentieth century&quot;. They further state that: &quot;One of the most amazing things about &quot;Momo&quot; is that it was published in 1973. Since then, the temporal nightmare it depicts has become our reality.&quot;

Ende himself has said that &quot;&quot;Momo&quot; is a tribute of gratitude to Italy and also a declaration of love,&quot; indicating that the author idealized the Italian way of life. Loy and Goodhew suggested that Ende&#x27;s perspective on time coincided with his interest in Buddhism and that for example the deliberately slow character of Beppo might be regarded as a Zen master, even though Ende wrote the book long before his visits to Japan.

When the book was published in the U.S. in 1985, Natalie Babbit from the &quot;Washington Post&quot; commented: &quot;Is it a children&#x27;s book? Not here in America.&quot; &quot;Momo&quot; was republished by Puffin Press on January 19, 2009.

Then Norwegian Prime Minister Thorbjørn Jagland, in his New Year Address to the nation on January 1, 1997, referenced Ende&#x27;s book and its plot: &quot;People are persuaded to save time by eliminating everything not useful. One of the people so influenced cuts out his girlfriend, sells his pet, stops singing, reading and visiting friends. In this way he will supposedly become an efficient man getting something out of life. What is strange is that he is in a greater hurry than ever. The saved-up time disappears - and he never sees it again.&quot; Prime Minister Jagland went on to say that to many people, &quot;time&quot; has become the scarcest resource of all, contrary to their attempt at saving as much of it as possible.

==Adaptations==

* &quot;Momo&quot; was made into a film of Italian/German production in 1986, in which Michael Ende himself played a small role as the narrator who encounters Professor Hora (performed by John Huston) at the beginning of the film (and at the end of the book). The role of Momo was performed by German actress and model Radost Bokel.
* &quot;Momo&quot; (2001) is an Italian animated film based on the novel. It is directed by Enzo D&#x27;Alò and features a soundtrack by Gianna Nannini, an Italian popular singer. In 2003, a 26-episode animated television series based directly on this adaptation was released, serving as an extended re-telling of the film.
* The book has also been acted in radio programmes.
* A German dramatized audiobook under the title &quot;Momo&quot; (Karussell/Universal Music Group 1984, directed by Anke Beckert, narrated by Harald Leipnitz, music by Frank Duval, 3 parts on LP and MC, 2 parts on CD)
* There have been a number of stage adaptations, including an opera written by Ende himself and an English-language version by Andy Thackeray.
* &quot;Legend of Raana&quot; (2014), animated miniseries directed by Majid Ahmady
* In 2015, the Royal Danish Opera commissioned composer Svitlana Azarova to write &quot;Momo and the Time Thieves&quot;. Its world premiere occurred at the Copenhagen Opera House in October, 2017.
* In January 2023, it was announced that Christian Ditter would direct an English-language film adaptation of the novel with Christian Becker producing.

==Translations==
The book was originally published in 1973 in Germany as &quot;Momo&quot;.

Momo has been translated into various languages including Arabic, Asturian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Catalan, Chinese (Simplified), Chinese (Traditional), Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French, Galician, Greek, Hebrew, Hungarian, Icelandic, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Latvian, Lithuanian, Mongolian, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Slovenian, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, Thai, Ukrainian, Vietnamese and Sinhalese.

The original English translation &quot;The Grey Gentlemen&quot; by Frances Lobb was published in 1974. A new English translation, &quot;Momo&quot;, was published in 1984. A newly translated, newly illustrated U.S. edition was released by McSweeney&#x27;s in August 2013, in celebration of the book&#x27;s fortieth anniversary. The McSweeney edition was scheduled for a new release in January 2017. However, some illustrations (created by Marcel Dzama) in the McSweeney release, such as Momo&#x27;s appearance, do not conform to the text in the book.

The Spanish translation &quot;Momo, o la extraña historia de los ladrones del tiempo y la niña que devolvió el tiempo a los hombres&quot; was made by Susana Constante in 1978 for Ediciones Alfaguara: it was a great success in Spain and Latin America, having dozens of reprints since.

The Persian translation was published several times (first time in 1988) by Zarrin Publishers in Tehran. At the time of publication, it enjoyed great popularity in Iran, but due to the absence of any new printings since 1992, it is now inaccessible to the Iranian children. This, along with a stop in publishing other children&#x27;s books by German and other European writers, is part of an ongoing trend in publishing American and English children&#x27;s fiction in Iran.

==In popular culture==
*An episode of the anime adaptation of &quot;Sailor Moon&quot; features a plot similar to the plot of the Men in Grey where the villain Jadeite steals the time of the people of Tokyo.
* The story of Momo plays a role in the Korean TV series &quot;My Lovely Sam Soon&quot;, where the main character&#x27;s niece chooses to not speak due to post-traumatic stress of having both her parents killed in a car accident. The lead character buys the book and reads it (by himself and also to his niece) to try to understand his love interest more.
* The novel is referred to in each episode of the Japanese TV series &quot;A Girl of 35&quot;, starring Ko Shibasaki and Kentaro Sakaguchi (2020). The lead character wakes up after 25 years in a coma and feels her time has been stolen. She uses the Momo characters to learn how to grow up and come to terms with the tragic consequences her accident had for her whole family.
* The Korean girl group Momoland was named after this novel.
* One of the short stories within the &quot;Monogatari Series&quot; (Yotsugi Future) focuses on one of the characters&#x27; perception of the novel, which she compares the concept of time to herself, and adults who waste valuable time.
*K-pop singer and leader of the group Exo, Suho, was inspired by the novel in creating the concept and title for his sophomore album Grey Suit, as well at the title-track.

== References ==
==External links==
* Quotations from the book</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1057172" start="64" end="77" title="fantasy novel" label="fantasy novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q76498" start="81" end="93" title="Michael Ende" label="Michael Ende"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="141" end="145" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="214" end="220" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q691086" start="510" end="540" title="Deutscher Jugendliteraturpreis" label="Deutscher Jugendliteraturpreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="580" end="592" title="amphitheatre" label="amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="1850" end="1858" title="interest" label="interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194627" start="2537" end="2543" title="lily" label="lilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46360" start="3077" end="3085" title="tortoise" label="tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q344" start="3171" end="3177" title="future" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194627" start="3291" end="3297" title="lilies" label="lilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="4678" end="4689" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="4694" end="4700" title="stress (medicine)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296265" start="4951" end="4969" title="Demurrage (currency)" label="currency demurrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="5354" end="5360" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236798" start="5660" end="5669" title="David Loy" label="David Loy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5695" end="5708" title="Linda Goodhew" label="Linda Goodhew"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="6085" end="6090" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209611" start="6733" end="6750" title="Thorbjørn Jagland" label="Thorbjørn Jagland"/>
<link wikidata="Q570967" start="7491" end="7495" title="Momo (1986 film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q51575" start="7644" end="7655" title="John Huston" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q85640" start="7775" end="7787" title="Radost Bokel" label="Radost Bokel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319768" start="7797" end="7801" title="Momo (2001 film)" label="Momo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346090" start="7881" end="7896" title="Enzo D&amp;#x27;Alò" label="Enzo D&amp;#x27;Alò"/>
<link wikidata="Q232468" start="7912" end="7922" title="Momo (album)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q232468" start="7926" end="7940" title="Gianna Nannini" label="Gianna Nannini"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="7991" end="7999" title="animated television series" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="8147" end="8152" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="8187" end="8196" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q607681" start="8624" end="8642" title="Royal Danish Opera" label="Royal Danish Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q455606" start="8665" end="8681" title="Svitlana Azarova" label="Svitlana Azarova"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058145" start="8697" end="8722" title="Momo and the Time Thieves" label="Momo and the Time Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q838297" start="8765" end="8787" title="Copenhagen Opera House" label="Copenhagen Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q104373" start="8847" end="8863" title="Christian Ditter" label="Christian Ditter"/>
<link wikidata="Q107649" start="8931" end="8947" title="Christian Becker" label="Christian Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q29507" start="9118" end="9126" title="Asturian language" label="Asturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519850" start="9596" end="9608" title="Frances Lobb" label="Frances Lobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853389" start="9767" end="9783" title="McSweeney&amp;#x27;s" label="McSweeney&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643098" start="10908" end="10919" title="Sailor Moon" label="Sailor Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="11040" end="11045" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q485870" start="11110" end="11128" title="My Lovely Sam Soon" label="My Lovely Sam Soon"/>
<link wikidata="Q253690" start="11507" end="11519" title="Ko Shibasaki" label="Ko Shibasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q17158653" start="11524" end="11541" title="Kentaro Sakaguchi" label="Kentaro Sakaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27820706" start="11802" end="11810" title="Momoland" label="Momoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773554" start="11883" end="11900" title="Monogatari Series" label="Monogatari Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="12076" end="12081" title="K-pop" label="K-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q494717" start="12113" end="12116" title="Exo" label="Exo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10822003" start="12118" end="12122" title="Suho" label="Suho"/>
<link wikidata="Q111620817" start="12208" end="12217" title="Grey Suit" label="Grey Suit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646746" wikidata="Q398646" url="?curid=646746" title="Tejas">
<text>Tejas may refer to: 

==Places==
* Texas, a U.S. state
* Spanish Texas, colonial province
* Mexican Texas, territory of post-independence Mexico
** Coahuila y Tejas, a state under the 1824 Mexican constitution that included the region of present-day Texas
* Tejas, Humacao, Puerto Rico, a barrio
* Tejas, Las Piedras, Puerto Rico, a barrio
* Tejas, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico, a barrio

==People==
* Tejas, a Native American tribe of the Hasinai confederation of North America (present day Texas)
* Vernon Tejas, American mountain climber and mountain guide

==Arts, entertainment, media==
* &quot;Tejas&quot; (album), the fifth album by the blues-rock band ZZ Top
* &quot;Tejas&quot; (film), a Bollywood film
* &quot;Tejas&quot; (musician), an Indian singer-songwriter and guitarist

==Transportation and vehicular==
* Tejas Express train of India
* HAL Tejas, an Indian combat aircraft

==Other uses==
* &quot;Tejas&quot;, roofing tiles used in late (post-1790) California mission architecture
* Tejas and Jayhawk, code names for a microprocessor developed by Intel
* Tejas Club, a student organization at the University of Texas at Austin

==See also==

* Teja (disambiguation)

* Teyas
* Texas (disambiguation)
* Teas (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q398646" start="0" end="5" title="Tejas" label="Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="35" end="40" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505587" start="57" end="70" title="Spanish Texas" label="Spanish Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315810" start="92" end="105" title="Mexican Texas" label="Mexican Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q949898" start="148" end="164" title="Coahuila y Tejas" label="Coahuila y Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392724" start="258" end="285" title="Tejas, Humacao, Puerto Rico" label="Tejas, Humacao, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140288" start="298" end="329" title="Tejas, Las Piedras, Puerto Rico" label="Tejas, Las Piedras, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140290" start="342" end="369" title="Tejas, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico" label="Tejas, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357832" start="432" end="439" title="Hasinai" label="Hasinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q27733928" start="493" end="505" title="Vernon Tejas" label="Vernon Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653252" start="586" end="611" title="Tejas (album)" label="&amp;quot;Tejas&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122925760" start="661" end="685" title="Tejas (film)" label="&amp;quot;Tejas&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127273697" start="706" end="734" title="Tejas (musician)" label="&amp;quot;Tejas&amp;quot; (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27894564" start="814" end="827" title="Tejas Express" label="Tejas Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q175940" start="845" end="854" title="HAL Tejas" label="HAL Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="958" end="989" title="Architecture of the California missions#Building materials" label="California mission architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982614" start="992" end="1009" title="Tejas and Jayhawk" label="Tejas and Jayhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981743" start="1064" end="1074" title="Tejas Club" label="Tejas Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695163" start="1153" end="1174" title="Teja (disambiguation)" label="Teja (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708543" start="1178" end="1183" title="Teyas" label="Teyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572485" start="1186" end="1208" title="Texas (disambiguation)" label="Texas (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867853" start="1211" end="1232" title="Teas (disambiguation)" label="Teas (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646748" wikidata="Q423071" url="?curid=646748" title="Midazolam">
<text>Midazolam, sold under the brand name Versed among others, is a benzodiazepine medication used for anesthesia, premedication before surgical anesthesia, and procedural sedation, and to treat severe agitation. It induces sleepiness, decreases anxiety, and causes anterograde amnesia.

The drug does not cause an individual to become unconscious, merely to be sedated. It is also useful for the treatment of prolonged (lasting over five minutes) seizures. Midazolam can be given by mouth, intravenously, by injection into a muscle, by spraying into the nose, or through the cheek. When given intravenously, it typically begins working within five minutes; when injected into a muscle, it can take fifteen minutes to begin working; when taken orally, it can take 10–20 minutes to begin working.
Side effects can include a decrease in efforts to breathe, low blood pressure, and sleepiness. Tolerance to its effects and withdrawal syndrome may occur following long-term use. Paradoxical effects, such as increased activity, can occur especially in children and older people. There is evidence of risk when used during pregnancy but no evidence of harm with a single dose during breastfeeding.
Midazolam was patented in 1974 and came into medical use in 1982. It is on the World Health Organization&#x27;s List of Essential Medicines. Midazolam is available as a generic medication. In many countries, it is a controlled substance.

==Medical uses==

===Seizures===
Midazolam is sometimes used for the acute management of prolonged seizures. Long-term use for the management of epilepsy is not recommended due to the significant risk of tolerance (which renders midazolam and other benzodiazepines ineffective) and the significant side effect of sedation. A benefit of midazolam is that in children it can be given in the cheek or in the nose for acute seizures, including status epilepticus.

Drawbacks include a high degree of breakthrough seizures—due to the short half-life of midazolam—in over 50% of people treated, as well as treatment failure in 14–18% of people with refractory status epilepticus. Tolerance develops rapidly to the anticonvulsant effect, and the dose may need to be increased by several times to maintain anticonvulsant therapeutic effects. With prolonged use, tolerance and tachyphylaxis can occur and the elimination half-life may increase, up to days. Buccal and intranasal midazolam may be both easier to administer and more effective than rectally administered diazepam in the emergency control of seizures.

===Procedural sedation===
Intravenous midazolam is indicated for procedural sedation (often in combination with an opioid, such as fentanyl), preoperative sedation, for the induction of general anesthesia, and for sedation of people who are ventilated in critical care units. Midazolam is superior to diazepam in impairing memory of endoscopy procedures, but propofol has a quicker recovery time and a better memory-impairing effect. It is the most popular benzodiazepine in the intensive care unit (ICU) because of its short elimination half-life, combined with its water solubility and its suitability for continuous infusion. However, for long-term sedation, lorazepam is preferred due to its long duration of action, and propofol has advantages over midazolam when used in the ICU for sedation, such as shorter weaning time and earlier tracheal extubation.

Midazolam is sometimes used in neonatal intensive care units. When used, additional caution is required in newborns; midazolam should not be used for longer than 72 hours due to risks of tachyphylaxis, and the possibility of development of a benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome, as well as neurological complications. Bolus injections should be avoided due to the increased risk of cardiovascular depression, as well as neurological complications.

Sedation using midazolam can be used to relieve anxiety and manage behaviour in children undergoing dental treatment.

===Agitation===
Midazolam, in combination with an antipsychotic drug, is indicated for the acute management of schizophrenia when it is associated with aggressive or out-of-control behaviour.

===End of life care===
In the final stages of end-of-life care, midazolam is routinely used at low doses via subcutaneous injection to help with agitation, restlessness or anxiety in the last hours or days of life. At higher doses during the last weeks of life, midazolam is considered a first line agent in palliative continuous deep sedation therapy when it is necessary to alleviate intolerable suffering not responsive to other treatments, but the need for this is rare.

=== Administration ===

Routes of administration of midazolam can be oral, intranasal, buccal, intravenous, and intramuscular.
==Contraindications==
Benzodiazepines require special precaution if used in the elderly, during pregnancy, in children, in alcohol- or other drug-dependent individuals or those with comorbid psychiatric disorders. Additional caution is required in critically ill patients, as accumulation of midazolam and its active metabolites may occur. Kidney or liver impairments may slow down the elimination of midazolam leading to prolonged and enhanced effects.

==Side effects==

Side effects of midazolam in the elderly are listed above. People experiencing amnesia as a side effect of midazolam are generally unaware their memory is impaired, unless they had previously known it as a side effect.

Long-term use of benzodiazepines has been associated with long-lasting deficits in memory, and show only partial recovery six months after stopping benzodiazepines. It is unclear whether full recovery occurs after longer periods of abstinence. Benzodiazepines can cause or worsen depression. Paradoxical excitement occasionally occurs with benzodiazepines, including a worsening of seizures. Children and elderly individuals or those with a history of excessive alcohol use and individuals with a history of aggressive behavior or anger are at increased risk of paradoxical effects. Paradoxical reactions are particularly associated with intravenous administration. After nighttime administration of midazolam, residual &#x27;hangover&#x27; effects, such as sleepiness and impaired psychomotor and cognitive functions, may persist into the next day. This may impair the ability of users to drive safely and may increase the risk of falls and hip fractures. Sedation, respiratory depression and hypotension due to a reduction in systematic vascular resistance, and an increase in heart rate can occur. If intravenous midazolam is given too quickly, hypotension may occur. A &quot;midazolam infusion syndrome&quot; may result from high doses, is characterised by delayed arousal hours to days after discontinuation of midazolam, and may lead to an increase in the length of ventilatory support needed.

In rare susceptible individuals, midazolam has been known to cause a paradoxical reaction, a well-documented complication with benzodiazepines. When this occurs, the individual may experience anxiety, involuntary movements, aggressive or violent behavior, uncontrollable crying or verbalization, and other similar effects. This seems to be related to the altered state of consciousness or disinhibition produced by the drug. Paradoxical behavior is often not recalled by the patient due to the amnesia-producing properties of the drug. In extreme situations, flumazenil can be administered to inhibit or reverse the effects of midazolam. Antipsychotic medications, such as haloperidol, have also been used for this purpose.

Midazolam is known to cause respiratory depression. In healthy humans, 0.15 mg/kg of midazolam may cause respiratory depression, which is postulated to be a central nervous system (CNS) effect. When midazolam is administered in combination with fentanyl, the incidence of hypoxemia or apnea becomes more likely.

Although the incidence of respiratory depression/arrest is low (0.1–0.5%) when midazolam is administered alone at normal doses, the concomitant use with CNS acting drugs, mainly analgesic opiates, may increase the possibility of hypotension, respiratory depression, respiratory arrest, and death, even at therapeutic doses. Potential drug interactions involving at least one CNS depressant were observed for 84% of midazolam users who were subsequently required to receive the benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil. Therefore, efforts directed toward monitoring drug interactions and preventing injuries from midazolam administration are expected to have a substantial impact on the safe use of this drug.

===Pregnancy and breastfeeding===
Midazolam, when taken during the third trimester of pregnancy, may cause risk to the neonate, including benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome, with possible symptoms including hypotonia, apnoeic spells, cyanosis, and impaired metabolic responses to cold stress. Symptoms of hypotonia and the neonatal benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome have been reported to persist from hours to months after birth. Other neonatal withdrawal symptoms include hyperexcitability, tremor, and gastrointestinal upset (diarrhea or vomiting). Breastfeeding by mothers using midazolam is not recommended.

===Elderly===
Additional caution is required in the elderly, as they are more sensitive to the pharmacological effects of benzodiazepines, metabolise them more slowly, and are more prone to adverse effects, including drowsiness, amnesia (especially anterograde amnesia), ataxia, hangover effects, confusion, and falls.

===Tolerance, dependence, and withdrawal===
A benzodiazepine dependence occurs in about one-third of individuals who are treated with benzodiazepines for longer than 4 weeks, which typically results in tolerance and benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome when the dose is reduced too rapidly. Midazolam infusions may induce tolerance and a withdrawal syndrome in a matter of days. The risk factors for dependence include dependent personality, use of a benzodiazepine that is short-acting, high potency and long-term use of benzodiazepines. Withdrawal symptoms from midazolam can range from insomnia and anxiety to seizures and psychosis. Withdrawal symptoms can sometimes resemble a person&#x27;s underlying condition. Gradual reduction of midazolam after regular use can minimise withdrawal and rebound effects. Tolerance and the resultant withdrawal syndrome may be due to receptor down-regulation and GABAA receptor alterations in gene expression, which causes long-term changes in the function of the GABAergic neuronal system.

Chronic users of benzodiazepine medication who are given midazolam experience reduced therapeutic effects of midazolam, due to tolerance to benzodiazepines. Prolonged infusions with midazolam results in the development of tolerance; if midazolam is given for a few days or more a withdrawal syndrome can occur. Therefore, preventing a withdrawal syndrome requires that a prolonged infusion be gradually withdrawn, and sometimes, continued tapering of dose with an oral long-acting benzodiazepine such as clorazepate dipotassium. When signs of tolerance to midazolam occur during intensive care unit sedation the addition of an opioid or propofol is recommended. Withdrawal symptoms can include irritability, abnormal reflexes, tremors, clonus, hypertonicity, delirium and seizures, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, tachycardia, hypertension, and tachypnea.

===Overdose===

A midazolam overdose is considered a medical emergency and generally requires the immediate attention of medical personnel. Benzodiazepine overdose in healthy individuals is rarely life-threatening with proper medical support; however, the toxicity of benzodiazepines increases when they are combined with other CNS depressants such as alcohol, opioids, or tricyclic antidepressants. The toxicity of benzodiazepine overdose and the risk of death are also increased in the elderly and those with obstructive pulmonary disease or when used intravenously. Treatment is supportive; activated charcoal can be used within an hour of the overdose. The antidote for an overdose of midazolam (or any other benzodiazepine) is flumazenil. While effective in reversing the effects of benzodiazepines it is not used in most cases as it may trigger seizures in mixed overdoses and benzodiazepine dependent individuals.

Symptoms of midazolam overdose can include:
* Ataxia
* Dysarthria
* Nystagmus
* Slurred speech
* Somnolence (difficulty staying awake)
* Mental confusion
* Hypotension
* Respiratory arrest
* Vasomotor collapse

* Impaired motor functions
** Impaired reflexes
** Impaired coordination
** Impaired balance
** Dizziness
* Coma
* Death
===Detection in body fluids===
Concentrations of midazolam or its major metabolite, 1-hydroxymidazolam glucuronide, may be measured in plasma, serum, or whole blood to monitor for safety in those receiving the drug therapeutically, to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized patients, or to assist in a forensic investigation of a case of fatal overdosage. Patients with renal dysfunction may exhibit prolongation of elimination half-life for both the parent drug and its active metabolite, with accumulation of these two substances in the bloodstream and the appearance of adverse depressant effects.

== Interactions ==

Protease inhibitors, nefazodone, sertraline, grapefruit, fluoxetine, erythromycin, diltiazem, clarithromycin inhibit the metabolism of midazolam, leading to a prolonged action. St John&#x27;s wort, rifapentine, rifampin, rifabutin, phenytoin enhance the metabolism of midazolam leading to a reduced action. Sedating antidepressants, antiepileptic drugs such as phenobarbital, phenytoin and carbamazepine, sedative antihistamines, opioids, antipsychotics and alcohol enhance the sedative effects of midazolam. Midazolam is metabolized almost completely by cytochrome P450-3A4. Atorvastatin administration along with midazolam results in a reduced elimination rate of midazolam. St John&#x27;s wort decreases the blood levels of midazolam. Grapefruit juice reduces intestinal 3A4 and results in less metabolism and higher plasma concentrations.

==Pharmacology==
Midazolam is a short-acting benzodiazepine in adults with an elimination half-life of 1.5–2.5 hours. In the elderly, as well as young children and adolescents, the elimination half-life is longer. Midazolam is metabolised into an active metabolite alpha-hydroxymidazolam. Age-related deficits, renal and liver status affect the pharmacokinetic factors of midazolam as well as its active metabolite. However, the active metabolite of midazolam is minor and contributes to only 10% of biological activity of midazolam. Midazolam is poorly absorbed orally, with only 50% of the drug reaching the bloodstream. Midazolam is metabolised by cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes and by glucuronide conjugation. Oxidation of midazolam is the major metabolite in human liver microsome (HLM). The half life (t) of midazolam in HLM is 3.3 minutes. The therapeutic as well as adverse effects of midazolam are due to its effects on the GABA receptors; midazolam does not activate GABA receptors directly but, as with other benzodiazepines, it enhances the effect of the endogenous neurotransmitter GABA on the GABA receptors (increasing the frequency of Cl channel opening) resulting in neural inhibition. Almost all of the properties can be explained by the actions of benzodiazepines on GABA receptors. This results in the following pharmacological properties being produced: sedation, induction of sleep, reduction in anxiety, anterograde amnesia, muscle relaxation and anticonvulsant effects.

==History==
Midazolam is among about 35 benzodiazepines currently used medically, and was synthesized in 1975 by Walser and Fryer at Hoffmann-LaRoche, Inc in the United States. Owing to its water solubility, it was found to be less likely to cause thrombophlebitis than similar drugs. The anticonvulsant properties of midazolam were studied in the late 1970s, but not until the 1990s did it emerge as an effective treatment for convulsive status epilepticus. , it is the most commonly used benzodiazepine in anesthetic medicine. In acute medicine, midazolam has become more popular than other benzodiazepines, such as lorazepam and diazepam, because it is shorter lasting, is more potent, and causes less pain at the injection site. Midazolam is also becoming increasingly popular in veterinary medicine due to its water solubility. In 2018 it was revealed the CIA considered using midazolam as a &quot;truth serum&quot; on terrorist suspects in project &quot;Medication&quot;.

==Society and culture==

===Cost===
Midazolam is available as a generic medication.

===Availability===
Midazolam is available in the United States as a syrup or as an injectable solution.

Dormicum brand midazolam is marketed by Roche as white, oval, 7.5 mg tablets in boxes of two or three blister strips of 10 tablets, and as blue, oval, 15 mg tablets in boxes of two (Dormonid 3x) blister strips of 10 tablets. The tablets are imprinted with &quot;Roche&quot; on one side and the dose of the tablet on the other side. Dormicum is also available as 1, 3, and 10 mL ampoules at a concentration of 5 mg/mL. Another manufacturer, Novell Pharmaceutical Laboratories, makes it available as Miloz in 3 and 5 mL ampoules. Midazolam is the only water-soluble benzodiazepine available. Another maker is Roxane Laboratories; the product in an oral solution, midazolam HCl Syrup, 2 mg/mL clear, in a red to purplish-red syrup, cherry in flavor. It becomes soluble when the injectable solution is buffered to a pH of 2.9–3.7. Midazolam is also available in liquid form. It can be administered intramuscularly, intravenously, intrathecally, intranasally, buccally, or orally.

===Legal status===
In the Netherlands, midazolam is a List II drug of the Opium Law.
Midazolam is a Schedule IV drug under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances. In the United Kingdom, midazolam is a Schedule 3/Class C controlled drug. In the United States, midazolam (DEA number 2884) is on the Schedule IV list of the Controlled Substances Act as a non-narcotic agent with low potential for abuse.

===Marketing authorization===
In 2011, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) granted a marketing authorisation for a buccal application form of midazolam, sold under the brand name Buccolam. Buccolam was initially approved for the treatment of prolonged, acute, convulsive seizures in people from three months to less than 18 years of age. This is the first application of a paediatric-use marketing authorisation by the EMA.

=== Use in executions ===
The drug has been introduced for use in executions by lethal injection in certain jurisdictions in the United States in combination with other drugs. It was introduced to replace pentobarbital after the latter&#x27;s manufacturer disallowed that drug&#x27;s use for executions. Midazolam acts as a sedative, resulting in the prisoner being in a state of deep anesthesia comparable to that experienced during surgery. One or more other drugs are usually used to stop the prisoner&#x27;s heart, rendering them medically dead.

Midazolam has been used as part of a three-drug cocktail with vecuronium bromide and potassium chloride in Florida and Oklahoma prisons and has also been used along with hydromorphone in a two-drug protocol in Ohio and Arizona.

====Notable incidents====
The state of Florida used midazolam to execute William Frederick Happ in October 2013.

The state of Ohio used midazolam in the execution of Dennis McGuire in January 2014; he was heavily anesthetized and unconscious within 4 minutes of starting the administration of midazolam and 20 more minutes after that point before he was declared medically dead. Controversy arose after he was observed gasping and appeared to choke during that time according to reporters who were allowed to be present, leading to questions about the dosing and timing of the drug administration, as well as the choice of drugs.

The usage of midazolam in executions became controversial after condemned inmate Clayton Lockett apparently regained consciousness and started speaking midway through his 2014 execution when the state of Oklahoma attempted to execute him with an untested three-drug lethal injection combination including 100mg of midazolam. Prison officials reportedly discussed taking him to a hospital before he was pronounced dead of a heart attack 40 minutes after the execution began. An observing doctor stated that Lockett&#x27;s vein had ruptured. It is not clear whether his death was caused by one or more of the drugs or by a problem in the administration procedure, nor is it clear what quantities of vecuronium bromide and potassium chloride were released to his system before the execution was cancelled.

According to news reports, the execution of Ronald Bert Smith in the state of Alabama on 8 December 2016 allegedly went awry due to the fact he displayed movement soon after midazolam was injected, although prison staff confirmed twice that he was still unconscious before injecting the two fatal drugs. This controversy again stirred concern among the public regarding the effectiveness of the drug in question.

In October 2016, the state of Ohio announced that it would resume executions in January 2017, using a formulation of midazolam, vecuronium bromide, and potassium chloride, but this was blocked by a federal judge. On 26 July 2017, Ronald Phillips was executed with a three-drug cocktail including midazolam after the Supreme Court refused to grant a stay. Prior to this, the last execution in Ohio had been that of Dennis McGuire. Murderer Gary Otte&#x27;s lawyers unsuccessfully challenged his Ohio execution, arguing that midazolam might not protect him from serious pain when the other drugs are administered. He died without incident in about 14 minutes on 13 September 2017.

In April 2017, the state of Arkansas carried out a double-execution, of Jack Harold Jones, 52, and Marcel Williams, 46. Arkansas attempted to execute eight people before its supply of midazolam expired on 30 April 2017. Two of them were granted a stay of execution, and another, Ledell Lee, 51, was executed on 20 April 2017.

In October 2021, the state of Oklahoma executed inmate John Marion Grant, 60, using midazolam as part of its three-drug cocktail hours after the U.S. Supreme Court ruled to lift a stay of execution for Oklahoma death row inmates. The execution was the state&#x27;s first since 2015. Witnesses to the execution said that when the first drug, midazolam, began to flow at 4:09p.m., Grant started convulsing about two dozen times and vomited. Grant continued breathing, and a member of the execution team wiped the vomit off his face. At 4:15p.m., officials said Grant was unconscious, and he was pronounced dead at 4:21p.m.

====Legal challenges====
In &quot;Glossip v. Gross&quot;, attorneys for three Oklahoma inmates argued that midazolam could not achieve the level of unconsciousness required for surgery, meaning severe pain and suffering was likely. They argued that midazolam was cruel and unusual punishment and thus contrary to the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution. In June 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that they had failed to prove that midazolam was cruel and unusual when compared to known, available alternatives.

The state of Nevada is also known to use midazolam in execution procedures. In July 2018, one of the manufacturers accused state officials of obtaining the medication under pretences. This incident was the first time a drug company successfully, though temporarily, halted an execution. A previous attempt in 2017, to halt an execution in the state of Arizona by another drug manufacturer was not successful.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Inchem - Midazolam</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q423071" start="0" end="9" title="Midazolam" label="Midazolam"/>
<link wikidata="Q423071" start="37" end="43" title="Midazolam" label="Versed"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="63" end="77" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="98" end="108" title="anesthesia" label="anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589604" start="110" end="123" title="premedication" label="premedication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247155" start="156" end="175" title="procedural sedation" label="procedural sedation"/>
<link wikidata="Q394129" start="190" end="206" title="psychomotor agitation" label="severe agitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q572111" start="261" end="280" title="anterograde amnesia" label="anterograde amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="443" end="450" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q285166" start="476" end="484" title="Oral administration" label="by mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="486" end="499" title="intravenously" label="intravenously"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="504" end="527" title="Intramuscular injection" label="injection into a muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966562" start="550" end="554" title="intranasal" label="nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963239" start="571" end="576" title="buccal administration" label="cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="850" end="868" title="hypotension" label="low blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425425" start="886" end="895" title="Drug tolerance" label="Tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119887" start="915" end="934" title="Benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome" label="withdrawal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q948919" start="970" end="989" title="Paradoxical reaction" label="Paradoxical effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="1173" end="1186" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="1267" end="1327" title="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q506319" start="1357" end="1375" title="generic medication" label="generic medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q850692" start="1404" end="1424" title="controlled substance" label="controlled substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="1526" end="1533" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963239" start="1809" end="1821" title="buccal administration" label="in the cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966562" start="1825" end="1836" title="intranasally" label="in the nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q980709" start="1867" end="1885" title="status epilepticus" label="status epilepticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464757" start="2295" end="2308" title="tachyphylaxis" label="tachyphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963239" start="2375" end="2381" title="Buccal tablets" label="Buccal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966562" start="2386" end="2396" title="intranasal" label="intranasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="2486" end="2494" title="diazepam" label="diazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="2649" end="2655" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q407541" start="2665" end="2673" title="fentanyl" label="fentanyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="2720" end="2738" title="general anesthesia" label="general anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q813243" start="2775" end="2785" title="medical ventilator" label="ventilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q679690" start="2789" end="2802" title="intensive-care medicine" label="critical care"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="2835" end="2843" title="diazepam" label="diazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q422740" start="2893" end="2901" title="propofol" label="propofol"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="3060" end="3081" title="Biological half-life" label="elimination half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q408265" start="3196" end="3205" title="lorazepam" label="lorazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q750195" start="3383" end="3393" title="extubation" label="extubation"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="3503" end="3511" title="neonates" label="newborns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464757" start="3583" end="3596" title="tachyphylaxis" label="tachyphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q607561" start="3713" end="3718" title="Bolus (medicine)" label="Bolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="4074" end="4087" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045105" start="4202" end="4218" title="end-of-life care" label="end-of-life care"/>
<link wikidata="Q179661" start="4444" end="4460" title="first line agent" label="first line agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490242" start="4475" end="4507" title="continuous deep sedation therapy" label="continuous deep sedation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414874" start="4941" end="4949" title="comorbid" label="comorbid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="4950" end="4971" title="psychiatric disorders" label="psychiatric disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q572111" start="5311" end="5318" title="Anterograde amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="5914" end="5921" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q948919" start="6035" end="6055" title="Paradoxical reaction" label="Paradoxical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="6250" end="6259" title="cognitive" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q240856" start="6394" end="6407" title="hip fractures" label="hip fractures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641494" start="6419" end="6441" title="respiratory depression" label="respiratory depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="6446" end="6457" title="hypotension" label="hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282244" start="7242" end="7255" title="disinhibition" label="disinhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q421920" start="7412" end="7422" title="flumazenil" label="flumazenil"/>
<link wikidata="Q251347" start="7526" end="7537" title="haloperidol" label="haloperidol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="7735" end="7757" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="8664" end="8679" title="third trimester" label="third trimester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753547" start="8804" end="8813" title="hypotonia" label="hypotonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q754424" start="8815" end="8822" title="apnoeic" label="apnoeic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192120" start="8831" end="8839" title="cyanosis" label="cyanosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="8854" end="8863" title="metabolic" label="metabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6993502" start="9034" end="9053" title="neonatal withdrawal" label="neonatal withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="9149" end="9162" title="Breastfeeding" label="Breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q572111" start="9460" end="9479" title="anterograde amnesia" label="anterograde amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640840" start="10324" end="10339" title="rebound effects" label="rebound effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q60147" start="10432" end="10446" title="GABAA receptor" label="GABAA receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q418850" start="11065" end="11088" title="clorazepate dipotassium" label="clorazepate dipotassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q29299" start="11255" end="11267" title="irritability" label="irritability"/>
<link wikidata="Q179405" start="11278" end="11286" title="reflexes" label="reflexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="11288" end="11294" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424895" start="11297" end="11303" title="clonus" label="clonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q925744" start="11305" end="11318" title="hypertonicity" label="hypertonicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q160796" start="11320" end="11328" title="delirium" label="delirium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="11333" end="11341" title="seizures" label="seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="11343" end="11349" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="11351" end="11359" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="11361" end="11369" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="11371" end="11382" title="tachycardia" label="tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="11384" end="11396" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q570920" start="11402" end="11411" title="tachypnea" label="tachypnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="11925" end="11954" title="obstructive pulmonary disease" label="obstructive pulmonary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q194168" start="12075" end="12083" title="antidote" label="antidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q421920" start="12146" end="12156" title="flumazenil" label="flumazenil"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="12382" end="12388" title="Ataxia" label="Ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225957" start="12391" end="12401" title="Dysarthria" label="Dysarthria"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="12404" end="12413" title="Nystagmus" label="Nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077823" start="12433" end="12443" title="Somnolence" label="Somnolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="12492" end="12503" title="Hypotension" label="Hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774744" start="12506" end="12524" title="Respiratory arrest" label="Respiratory arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430227" start="12527" end="12536" title="Vasomotor" label="Vasomotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916362" start="12643" end="12652" title="Dizziness" label="Dizziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="12655" end="12659" title="Coma" label="Coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="12662" end="12667" title="Death" label="Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q55761529" start="13300" end="13319" title="Protease inhibitor (pharmacology)" label="Protease inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q416632" start="13321" end="13331" title="nefazodone" label="nefazodone"/>
<link wikidata="Q407617" start="13333" end="13343" title="sertraline" label="sertraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q41350" start="13345" end="13355" title="grapefruit" label="grapefruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q422244" start="13357" end="13367" title="fluoxetine" label="fluoxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213511" start="13369" end="13381" title="erythromycin" label="erythromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422229" start="13383" end="13392" title="diltiazem" label="diltiazem"/>
<link wikidata="Q118551" start="13394" end="13408" title="clarithromycin" label="clarithromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158289" start="13477" end="13496" title="Hypericum perforatum" label="St John&amp;#x27;s wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935297" start="13498" end="13509" title="rifapentine" label="rifapentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422652" start="13511" end="13519" title="rifampin" label="rifampin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135705" start="13521" end="13530" title="rifabutin" label="rifabutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410400" start="13532" end="13541" title="phenytoin" label="phenytoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407241" start="13661" end="13674" title="phenobarbital" label="phenobarbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q410412" start="13690" end="13703" title="carbamazepine" label="carbamazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="13705" end="13713" title="sedative" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q324089" start="13714" end="13728" title="antihistamines" label="antihistamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="13730" end="13736" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="13739" end="13753" title="antipsychotics" label="antipsychotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="13758" end="13765" title="ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q424440" start="13855" end="13874" title="CYP3A4" label="cytochrome P450-3A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q668093" start="13876" end="13888" title="Atorvastatin" label="Atorvastatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="14795" end="14810" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q137786" start="14832" end="14855" title="glucuronide conjugation" label="glucuronide conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212646" start="15771" end="15792" title="Hoffmann-LaRoche, Inc" label="Hoffmann-LaRoche, Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q377978" start="15886" end="15902" title="thrombophlebitis" label="thrombophlebitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q408265" start="16256" end="16265" title="lorazepam" label="lorazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="17701" end="17716" title="intramuscularly" label="intramuscularly"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="17718" end="17731" title="intravenously" label="intravenously"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320251" start="17733" end="17746" title="intrathecally" label="intrathecally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966562" start="17748" end="17760" title="intranasally" label="intranasally"/>
<link wikidata="Q47038" start="17762" end="17770" title="cheek" label="buccally"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17775" end="17781" title="mouth" label="orally"/>
<link wikidata="Q316572" start="17858" end="17867" title="Opium Law" label="Opium Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429332" start="17911" end="17948" title="Convention on Psychotropic Substances" label="Convention on Psychotropic Substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q928770" start="18108" end="18133" title="Controlled Substances Act" label="Controlled Substances Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="18232" end="18257" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124059" start="18562" end="18600" title="paediatric-use marketing authorisation" label="paediatric-use marketing authorisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210035" start="18694" end="18710" title="lethal injection" label="lethal injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="18743" end="18756" title="Capital punishment in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q409632" start="18819" end="18832" title="pentobarbital" label="pentobarbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q303646" start="19335" end="19348" title="hydromorphone" label="hydromorphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q107232102" start="19548" end="19575" title="execution of Dennis McGuire" label="execution of Dennis McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747437" start="19814" end="19821" title="Agonal respiration" label="gasping"/>
<link wikidata="Q107049995" start="20107" end="20122" title="Execution of Clayton Lockett" label="Clayton Lockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q210035" start="20292" end="20308" title="lethal injection" label="lethal injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q35814140" start="21474" end="21489" title="Ronald Phillips (murderer)" label="Ronald Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q41450350" start="21683" end="21692" title="Gary Otte" label="Gary Otte"/>
<link wikidata="Q101208543" start="21996" end="22013" title="Jack Harold Jones" label="Jack Harold Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q130251255" start="22023" end="22038" title="Murder of Stacy Errickson" label="Marcel Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q29532773" start="22203" end="22213" title="Ledell Lee" label="Ledell Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q110677115" start="22306" end="22323" title="John Marion Grant" label="John Marion Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q852376" start="22644" end="22654" title="Convulsion" label="convulsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="22681" end="22686" title="vomit" label="vomit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19885296" start="22907" end="22923" title="Glossip v. Gross" label="Glossip v. Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374304" start="23136" end="23164" title="cruel and unusual punishment" label="cruel and unusual punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q270938" start="23190" end="23240" title="Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="23260" end="23278" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646750" wikidata="Q7767077" url="?curid=646750" title="The Structure of Liberty">
<text>The Structure of Liberty: Justice and the Rule of Law is a book by legal theorist Randy Barnett which offers a libertarian theory of law and politics. Barnett calls his theory &quot;the liberal conception of justice&quot;, emphasizing the relationship between legal libertarianism and classical liberalism.

Barnett argues that private adjudication and enforcement of law, with market forces eliminating inefficiencies and inequities, is the only legal system that can provide adequate solutions to the problems of interest, power, and knowledge. Barnett uses the term &quot;polycentric constitutional order&quot; for anarcho-capitalism in his argument in favor of this philosophy.

==Problems in human interaction==
Barnett&#x27;s argument for the liberal conception focuses on three problems of human interaction:
* the problem of knowledgeeach individual has unique knowledge about his or her own interests and situation and about how resources can best be used.
* the problem of interesteach individual has self-interests which can be coordinated through the creation of decentralized property rights.
* the problem of powergiven that those with the power to impose punishments will be partial to their own interests, the power to punish or to use force to compel restitution is likely to be abused.
Barnett argues that each of these problems must be solved in order for individuals to be able to pursue their happiness under conditions of social peace.

==Liberal conception of justice==
Barnett argues that these the problems of knowledge, interest, and power can best be solved by a form of social organization that respects the liberal conception of justice. The liberal conception has five elements:
# Property rights, defined as rights to acquire, possess, use, and dispose of scarce physical resources.
# The right to acquire property through first possession.
# The right of freedom of contract, which specifies that a rightholder&#x27;s consent is both necessary (freedom from contract) and sufficient (freedom to contract) to transfer alienable property rights.
# The right of restitution, which requires that one who violates the rights of others must compensate the victim.
# The right of self-defense.
Barnett argues that the liberal conception of justice can best be realized by a polycentric constitutional order, which substitutes private police and dispute resolution mechanisms instead of the state ones.

== Editions ==
* &quot;The Structure of Liberty&quot;. (2014 edition), Oxford University Press, , 

== References ==
== External links ==
* Official website of The Structure of Liberty
* The Structure of Liberty: Justice and the Rule of Law, review in Google Books



 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="67" end="81" title="legal theory" label="legal theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q986354" start="82" end="95" title="Randy Barnett" label="Randy Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="111" end="122" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541432" start="260" end="280" title="Libertarian theories of law" label="legal libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="285" end="305" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319993" start="575" end="607" title="polycentric law" label="polycentric constitutional order"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="618" end="636" title="anarcho-capitalism" label="anarcho-capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="2499" end="2522" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="2680" end="2692" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646753" wikidata="Q371601" url="?curid=646753" title="Technics SL-1200">
<text>The Technics SL-1200 is a series of direct-drive turntables manufactured from October 1972 to 2010, with production resuming in 2016, by Matsushita Electric (now Panasonic Corporation) under the brand name of Technics. Originally released as a high fidelity consumer record player, it quickly became adopted among radio and disco club disc jockeys. The direct drive, high torque motor design made it suitable for push-button cueing for selecting tracks on radio broadcasts and in dance clubs. Additionally, the Technics SL-1200 series also had the capability for pitch control, allowing the user to change the turning speed of the record, and thereby tempo, gradually from -8% to +8%. This feature was specifically interesting for DJs who were mixing two or more records, especially in dance clubs.

When the use of slipmats for cueing and beat-mixing (and scratching) became popular in hip hop music, the quartz-controlled high torque motor system enabled records to be mixed with consistency and accuracy. A primary design goal was for high fidelity, but having good build quality, control over wow and flutter, and minimized resonance made the equipment particularly suitable for use in nightclubs and other public-address applications. Since its release in 1979, the SL-1200MK2 and its successors were the most common turntables for DJing and scratching.

SL-1200s are commonly used in recording studios and for non-electronic live music performances. More than 3 million units were sold. Many 1970s units are still in heavy use. In the autumn of 2010, Panasonic announced that the series was to be discontinued. The Technics brand was discontinued at the same time, but relaunched in 2014, focusing on higher end and more expensive products. The company was aware that Technics was expected to eventually make turntables again, so at the 2016 Consumer Electronics Show, Panasonic announced that they would return in two models named &quot;Grand Class&quot;: one a limited run of 1200 units globally (1200GAE), and the other a consumer product (1200G); a lighter and less expensive 1200GR model was also announced. The more affordable and DJ-oriented SL-1200 MK7 followed in 2019.

At the London Science Museum, an SL-1210MK2 is on display as one of the pieces of technology that were responsible for &quot;making the Modern World&quot;.

==History==

The SL-1200 was developed in 1971 by a team led by Shuichi Obata at Matsushita and was released to the market in 1972. It was adopted by New York City hip hop DJs such as Grandmaster Flash in the 1970s. As they experimented with the SL-1200 decks, they developed scratching techniques when they found that the motor would continue to spin at the correct RPM even if the DJ wiggled the record back and forth on the platter.

==Legacy models==

===Original model (1972)===

====SL-1200====
The SL-1200 was introduced in 1972 as an evolution to the popular SL-1100. It was dubbed &quot;The Middle Class Player System&quot;. It was delivered in two different versions: the SL-1200 and the SL-120. The SL-1200 came with a tonearm section. The SL-120 came without a tonearm section.

===MK2 models (1979-2010)===
The SL-1200 Mark 2 was introduced in 1979 as an update to the SL-1200. It represented a culmination of Technics Turntable Innovations. It was dubbed &quot;The Middle Class Quartz Direct Drive&quot;. It soon found its way into discos as well as radio stations for airplay because of its vibration-damping ability and resistance to feedback, and eventually, it became popular with pioneering hip-hop DJs. Following their established formula, Technics offered different model numbers in Europe: the 1200 (silver) and the 1210 (matte black), which were equipped with switchable dual voltage (110V or 220V) power supplies. Initially, there were only silver models (all named 1200 MK2) in the official distribution in Japan and the US, single voltage of 100V/120V accordingly. However, later the 1200 was available in both silver and matte black finishes (in Japan, the introduction of the MK3 in 1989 marked the first official introduction of a black version).

Since 1997, the MK2 had the pitch slide potentiometer changed from 6-pin to 8-pin mounting with part number SFDZ122N11 and later from 20k ohm to 22k ohm, part number SFDZ122N11-1 up until late 1996. After which, part number SFDZ122N11-2 was the preferred option which had a +/- 0.5mm quartz travel lock, much shorter than previous versions. This meant that the null point on the centre voltage tap was slightly bigger, thus removing the quartz lock conflict.

The earlier MK2 models, between 1978 and 1983 or so, also have a different construction in the rubber base of the turntable. These turntables were made with a base that was completely rubber, whereas the newer version has 2 separate parts: rubber outside and a bakelite inlay, which was implemented for the purpose of ease of access when disassembling.

====SL-1200MK2====
Released in the summer of 1979, this model came in both silver and matte black. The matte black version was available for a limited time in the US market in a 2-pack, SL-1200MK2PK. Technics improved the motor and shock resistance and changed the rotary pitch control to a slider style. This became the base model and is the oldest whose production continued until 2010. The older version of this model that was sold from 1979 until around 1983 has a large plate where the RCA and ground wires enter the unit, while the newer version has a smaller hole in the rubber where the RCA and ground enter. International versions of the SL-1200MK2 included switches for line voltage and frequency beneath the platter.

====SL-1210MK2====

This model came in a satin black metallic finish and is nearly the same in function as the SL-1200MK2, although some of the circuitry inside is updated to use fewer types of potentiometers and resistors. The Technics 1210 series also had a switch to change between voltages on the underside of the platter. It was unavailable from official Panasonic dealers in the United States.

===MK3 models (1989-1997)===
====SL-1200MK3====
Released in 1989, it has a matte black finish like the MK2, gold RCA plugs, and a small gold-foil Technics label on the back. It was intended only for the Japanese market.

====SL-1200MK3D====
Manufactured for the Japanese market only, this version includes factory gold RCA cables, with a black or silver finish. It also includes a pitch reset button. This version was released in 1997.

====SL-1200M3D====
Released in 1997, this version has a silver finish like the MK2 (besides the silver finish, there are copies with a &quot;champagne-ish&quot; color). It&#x27;s features include a detached dust cover (no hinges), a recessed power switch to prevent DJs from accidentally turning the deck off during use, and no self-locking detent (&quot;click&quot;) at the zero point of the pitch adjustment slider, allowing more precise control of pitch near that point. It has a reset button that sets the pitch adjustment to zero, regardless of the actual position of the pitch adjustment slider. In addition, the M3D series has unique details: the brand and model label is printed in a single line instead of two and the stroboscopic light is red with a slightly orange tone. This model also introduced a slot near the counterweight allowing for storage of a second headshell. The M&#x27;K&#x27;3D was designed for Japanese markets, while the M3D without the K was European/US.

====SL-1210M3D====
This model is the same as the SL-1200M3D except with a matte black finish like the MK2.

===MK4 models (1996)===
====SL-1200MK4====
The SL-1200 Mark 4 was introduced in 1996. It was an update to the SL-1200MK2. It was available only in Japan and priced at around $650. It has a matte black finish. This model is aimed at the high-end audiophile market rather than DJs. It is the last model made with the detent (&quot;click&quot;) in the neutral position (+/- 0%) of the pitch adjustment slider. In addition to the existing 33 RPM and 45 RPM buttons, the MK4 added a 78 RPM button. It is designed to be used with regular removable RCA cables (along with a removable ground/earth cable) rather than hard-wired RCA cables like all other 1200/1210 models. The tonearm was different from those in the previous models, as it was made from titanium.

===MK5 models (2000-2010)===
====SL-1200MK5====
Released on 1 November 2000, this model has a silver finish like the MK2. It includes an increased range of anti-skate settings, increasing the settings range from 0–3 grams-force (0–30 mN) of older models to 0–6 grams-force (0–60 mN) of this newer model. The 1200MK5 also has the voltage selector under the platter like the previously improved upon &#x27;1210&#x27; models. Height adjustment can be set between 0 and 6mm. It carries over many of the improved upon features of the MK3D, like the lack of 0 crossing quartz lock for better pitch control and the added spare cartridge holder. MK5 models have a removable lid, as opposed to the MK2 and MK3 removable hinged lid. The MK5 is the last 1200 model to retain an analog, quartz-clock-based pitch control. Brake speed can be adjusted by using a small screwdriver in a hole located below the turntable plate.

====SL-1210MK5====
SL-1210MK5 has a black finish (noir) like the MK2, and is &#x27;functionally&#x27; exactly the same as the SL-1200MK5. This model is not to be confused with the M5G model.

====SL-1200MK5G====
Released in 2002, the 1200MK5G model (not to be confused with MK5 models) was the first Technics turntable to introduce a &#x27;digitally controlled&#x27; pitch adjustment. With typical pitch ranges between ±8%, the MK5G included the previous ±8% value, but with the addition of a ±16% button. The globe on the target light was changed from an incandescent bulb to an LED. See the SL-1210M5G section of this article for more detailed changes.

====SL-1210M5G====
Released on 1 November 2002, this model has a glossy black finish with silver speckles. It was a special 30th-anniversary edition. It was initially launched in Japan only (together with the MK5) but then became internationally available. The pitch adjustment switches between the ±8% and ±16% ranges, and the pitch control is digital. Digital pitch control became the standard for all 1200 models from this point on. It also features blue target lights and blue pitch-number illumination. Unlike previous models, the brake strength potentiometer is adjustable using a small plastic knob (although it is still located beneath the platter as with previous models). Minor improvements in this model versus previous MK2, MK3, MK4, and 1200LTD models include improved tonearm mounting and oxygen-free copper wire, improved vibration damping in the body, improved pitch control accuracy, and better LEDs. This version is available as a 120-volt model for the North American market.

===MK6 models (2007-2008)===
* SL-1200MK6-K &amp; SL-1200MK6-S Released in February 2008 (in Japan) with minor improvements including improved tonearm mounting and oxygen-free copper wire, improved vibration damping in the body, improved pitch control accuracy, and better LEDs. The -S model has a silver finish like the MK2.
* SL-1200MK6K1 Released on 12 December 2007 (in Japan) as a special 35th-anniversary limited edition of 1200 units. It consisted of a standard black MK6 packaged with a booklet and gold record.

===Special models===
These were limited edition versions with 24-karat gold-plated metal parts, including tonearm and buttons. Many &quot;non-official&quot; special models of the SL-1200 and SL-1210 appeared over the years, mainly given away as prizes for turntablism. Most notably during the DMC World Championship, which awarded the winner a pair of 24K gold-plated Technics turntables. Due to the customization trend that has grown in the DJ community, many local events or competitions gave away custom colored or finished units.

====SL-1200LTD (1995)====
The SL-1200 Limited Edition was introduced in 1995 commemorating two million units in sales. Only 5,000 units were made. Due to popular demand, an extra 500 units were said to be made at the end of the production run. Like the MK3D, it has a pitch reset button, but differs in that it also has a self-locking detent at the zero position of pitch adjustment. This model has a piano black gloss finish and gold-plated hardware. It was priced at about US$1200.

====SL-1200GLD (2004)====
Released in 2004, the 1200GLD was another limited edition model, with only 3,000 units manufactured. Five hundred were released in Japan, with the rest split between the US and international markets. It is based on the MK5G model, with blue target lights (instead of the regular white), a piano black gloss finish, and gold-plated hardware. It was &quot;created to commemorate the 3 Million turntables sold by technics in the last 30 years&quot;.

==Current models==
===Grand Class SL-1200 Series (2016-2020)===

These models came from the development of a completely rebuilt SL-1200 from the ground up with the intent to create a new system for hi-fi use and to redefine the direct-drive turntable reference.

====SL-1200G====
Announced in January 2016 at CES in Las Vegas and released in October 2016, the SL-1200 Grand Class is an aluminum bound turntable with a high–damping matte magnesium tonearm, a four–layer turntable cabinet, and three-layer platter. It is complete with a microprocessor and the use of a newly developed coreless twin-rotor direct-drive motor with no iron core with rotary positing sensors to eliminate cogging, as well as providing 78 rpm speed compatibility.

====SL-1200GAE====

Announced in January 2016 at CES in Las Vegas and released in April 2016, the SL-1200 Grand Class 50th Anniversary Edition was a limited edition of 1,200 units. It is the same as the SL-1200G (see above), but has a high polish tonearm tube finish and a different viscous material in the turntable feet. Both the G and GAE had an approximate MSRP of £3,100 / €3,499 / $4,000.

====SL-1210GAE====
On 28 May 2020, Technics hosted an online launch event to reveal the SL-1210GAE as an alternative for the cancelled High End Munich 2020 event at which they initially planned to reveal it. It is their 55th Anniversary Edition turntable - a limited edition of 1,210. Each unit has a plaque on it with its production number engraved in it. The SL-1210GAE is the black counterpart of the SL-1200GAE and is the same in every aspect except the color and the additional feature to turn off the strobe light. It had an approximate MSRP of €4,499 (approximately US$4,940). 

====SL-1200GR====

Announced in January 2017 at CES, the GR model is a stripped-down budget version of the G, cutting the price tag more than half at an approximate MSRP of £1,299 / US$1,700. It differs in body construction in that it uses a more traditional cast aluminum design similar to the older decks and a one-piece cast platter, which brings an overall weight difference between the G/GAE. The G/GAE and GR both use what is essentially the same 9-pole motor. Whereas the G has twin rotors, the GR has a single rotor, giving it less torque. The GR differs from the G in its use of a feedback generator coil system (as used in the original SL1200) instead of an optical encoder.

====SL-1210GR====
This is the same as the SL-1200GR, except with a matte finish.

===MK7 models (2019-2023)===
The MK7 models were launched as the first new Technics standard DJ turntable in approximately nine years. The MK7, along with the Grand Class models, no longer have &quot;QUARTZ&quot; printed on the plinth nor dust cover.

==Design==
The SL-1200 series was developed as a special project by Technics parent company Matsushita in an attempt to solve problems related to turntable design. The task included minimizing acoustic feedback, unwanted resonances, wow and flutter and speed errors. This was achieved by designing a heavy plinth (base) made of a non-resonant composite sandwiched between a cast alloy top plate and a solid rubber base. In addition, the adjustable rubber-damped feet are insulated against acoustic feedback, which can be a serious problem when operating a turntable in close proximity to loudspeakers (a common situation for DJs). The underside of the platter is coated with a 1.2mm layer of rubber to reduce ringing, and the platter design is reliant on the use of the supplied 2mm rubber mat.
Most users remove the rubber turntable mat and replace it with a slipmat for mixing. However, without the rubber mat, the platter is prone to resonance at 250 Hz when used near a large club sound system.

The drive system designed by Matsushita is direct-drive rather than the more commonly found belt-drive type, a less expensive design. The direct-drive design, which was developed to reduce wow and flutter, produces a very quiet turntable that, for a direct-drive turntable, has minimal motor and bearing noise, (although the bearing rumble does tend to become characteristic in well-used turntables). This was partially achieved through the fact that the SL1210/1200 made the platter a part of the motor mechanism.

On the underside of the platter, a large magnet is placed over the spindle, surrounding the coils and forming the motor drive, thus eliminating loss through power transfer. The SL-1200 utilizes a Frequency Generator Servo Control Quartz Lock system that is claimed to produce the most accurate and consistent speed possible. The system is immune to static and dynamic stylus drag, which otherwise cause unwanted speed variances that change the pitch and tempo of the music.

==Termination==
On 1 November 2010, Panasonic announced stopping the production of Technics analog turntables through a statement on the DMC World DJ Championships home page.

==Re-launch petition==
Due to the increasing popularity of vinyl by DJs, a petition has been underway for the re-launch of the Technics SL1200/SL1210 series turntables. As of September 2015 the petition had 27,000 supporters, while 35,000 is the target Panasonic requested. On 5 January 2016, Technics agreed to relaunch both the SL-1200G and the SL-1200GAE .

===Resuming production===
At the 2016 Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Panasonic announced it would be resuming production with a new line of turntables, beginning with the limited edition SL-1200GAE. 

At the 2019 Consumer Electronics Show, Panasonic confirmed the future production of a new turntable, the SL-1200 Mk7 in matte black, adding new features, fixing known issues with previous models, and an all new lighter construction of aluminum and fiberglass.

In 2021 Panasonic ceased manufacturing Technics turntables in Japan and moved all turntable production to Malaysia.

==See also==
* Audio-Technica ATLP-120

==References==
==External links==
* Technics website
* Panasonic (Technics) product page [From Archive.org as link has now been removed from Technics.com website]
* Frequently asked questions on Hyperreal on the Technics SL-1200MK2/SL-1210MK2 Turntables
* Technics SL-1200 MK2 at Vinyl Heaven - a hi-fi perspective
* Technics SL-1200 MK2 at TNT Audio - an audiophile review
* Technics SL-1200 History - With timescales and images. (Archive.org)
* Technics 1200 History - Technics global site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q371601" start="4" end="20" title="Technics SL-1200" label="Technics SL-1200"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973802" start="36" end="58" title="direct-drive turntable" label="direct-drive turntable"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="137" end="156" title="Panasonic" label="Matsushita Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="162" end="183" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="195" end="205" title="brand name" label="brand name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426394" start="209" end="217" title="Technics (brand)" label="Technics"/>
<link wikidata="Q26674" start="244" end="257" title="high fidelity" label="high fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="267" end="280" title="Phonograph" label="record player"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="324" end="329" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="335" end="346" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027065" start="563" end="576" title="pitch control" label="pitch control"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="651" end="656" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252693" start="816" end="823" title="slipmat" label="slipmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="887" end="900" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="1128" end="1137" title="resonance" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="1337" end="1339" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413166" start="1347" end="1357" title="scratching" label="scratching"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="1557" end="1566" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426394" start="1621" end="1629" title="Technics (brand)" label="Technics"/>
<link wikidata="Q783794" start="1751" end="1758" title="company" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="1815" end="1825" title="Phonograph" label="turntables"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="1848" end="1873" title="Consumer Electronics Show" label="Consumer Electronics Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="2193" end="2214" title="Science Museum (London)" label="London Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="2424" end="2434" title="Panasonic" label="Matsushita"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2493" end="2506" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="2507" end="2514" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q506900" start="2527" end="2544" title="Grandmaster Flash" label="Grandmaster Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413166" start="2619" end="2629" title="scratching" label="scratching"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="2710" end="2713" title="revolutions per minute" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="3407" end="3421" title="Radio broadcasting" label="radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="3553" end="3560" title="Hip hop" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q399653" start="6383" end="6393" title="RCA connector" label="RCA cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265658" start="6842" end="6848" title="detent" label="detent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="7768" end="7769" title="United States dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q216880" start="8566" end="8577" title="gram-force" label="grams-force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="8584" end="8586" title="newton (unit)" label="mN"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="11187" end="11190" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401905" start="11497" end="11505" title="24 karat" label="24-karat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265658" start="12305" end="12311" title="detent" label="detent"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="13238" end="13241" title="Consumer Electronics Show" label="CES"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="13245" end="13254" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q549712" start="13611" end="13618" title="Cogging torque" label="cogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="13641" end="13667" title="Gramophone records" label="78 rpm speed compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144077" start="14031" end="14035" title="MSRP" label="MSRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="15764" end="15774" title="Panasonic" label="Matsushita"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973802" start="16715" end="16727" title="direct-drive turntable" label="direct-drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531117" start="16764" end="16774" title="belt-drive turntable" label="belt-drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205611" start="17800" end="17826" title="DMC World DJ Championships" label="DMC World DJ Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426394" start="17966" end="17974" title="Technics (brand)" label="Technics"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="18092" end="18101" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="18422" end="18447" title="Consumer Electronics Show" label="Consumer Electronics Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q30644776" start="18803" end="18826" title="Audio-Technica AT-LP120" label="Audio-Technica ATLP-120"/>
<link wikidata="Q26674" start="19125" end="19130" title="high fidelity" label="hi-fi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646756" wikidata="Q2243491" url="?curid=646756" title="Tintern">
<text>Tintern () is a village in the community of Wye Valley, on the west bank of the River Wye in Monmouthshire, Wales, close to the border with England, about north of Chepstow. It is popular with tourists, in particular for the scenery and the ruined Tintern Abbey. Modern Tintern has been formed by the coalescence of two historic villages: Tintern Parva, forming the northern end of the village, and Chapel Hill, which forms the southern end. The village is designated as a Conservation Area.

In 2022 the community was renamed from &quot;Tintern&quot; to &quot;Wye Valley&quot; and had boundary changes.

==History==

===Early history===
The name Tintern may derive from the Welsh &quot;din&quot; + &quot;d/teyrn&quot;, meaning &quot;rocks of the king&quot;.

A ford, known as Tintern Ford, stretched across the tidal River Wye and was in use in Roman times. After the Romans withdrew from Wales, the kingdom of Gwent emerged, and, according to tradition, one of their 6th century kings, Tewdrig, abdicated to become a hermit in Tintern. He came out of retirement to defeat the invading Saxons in battle: probably at Tintern ford, shown as a 6th century battle site on Ordnance Survey records. Three cairns on a hillside 200 m and 1800 m above and to the west of the ford are known locally as &quot;Devil&#x27;s Lap Stones&quot;. There is a local tradition that they are burial mounds of soldiers killed in a battle in the vicinity. Although the distance and height difference between the ford and cairns is considerable, it is possible that there may be a connection between the two sites. Local legend also suggests a battle site at Pont y Saison — Welsh for Bridge of the Saxons or English – in the Angiddy Valley but the name is more likely to refer to the architect of the stone bridge. 


===The abbey===

Tintern Abbey was founded beside the river by Walter de Clare on 9 May 1131, during the reign of King Henry I. It was the second Cistercian foundation in Britain, and its monks came from a daughter house of Cîteaux in France.

The present-day remains at Tintern are a mixture of building works covering several centuries. Between 1270 and 1301 the abbey was rebuilt, and when it was completed around four hundred monks lived in the complex. The abbey&#x27;s land was divided into agricultural units or granges, and local people provided farm labour and served the abbey and its many visitors. For 400 years, it dominated the economy of its surrounding area. During some of this period the area was contested between the Welsh and English, the closest battle being won in 1404 by Owain Glyndŵr, at Craig y Dorth near Monmouth. The area also had to contend with the Black Death, and it is suspected that the neighbouring village of Penterry disappeared at that time. The abbey remained in operation until the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536.

===Brass, iron and wire works===
It has been suggested that the monks or lay brethren of Tintern Abbey exploited the woodlands and river power for operating iron forges, but evidence of this is lacking. Industrial activity began in 1568 when the newly-established Company of Mineral and Battery Works built a wireworks. It is possible that brass was made, but the works mainly made iron wire. This was used to produce a wide variety of goods: cards for the woollen industry, nails, pins, knitting needles and fish hooks. The site was convenient, because the Wye offered transportation, the Angiddy stream provided water power, trees in nearby woods were used for charcoal fuel, and the locality provided a ready supply of minerals. The company began letting their works. Farmers of the works in the 17th century included Sir Basil Brooke, Thomas Foley, the important ironmaster and his son Thomas Foley. A blast furnace and forges were built in the valley in the 17th century and operated with the wireworks until the end of the 19th century. 

For 300 years, the numerous works and forges along the Angidy Valley dominated the village and surrounding communities. A branch from the Wye Valley Railway to the Lower Wireworks by way of a bridge (the &#x27;Wireworks Bridge&#x27;) was completed in 1875, but this was too late to stop them going out of business. In 1878 a new company leased the site to manufacture tinplate, but by 1895 it was reported as closed and only some ruins, associated ponds, leats and culverts are now visible. The bridge was used in the early 20th century for a horse-drawn tramway and now carries a tourist footpath to the opposite bank. In March 2021, discovery of an underground structure paralleling Angiddy Brook was initially thought to be a &quot;secret medieval tunnel system&quot;. Subsequent investigation identified the structure as an original leat system for one of the &quot;missing&quot; mills associated with Tintern Abbey.

===The tourist industry===
By the late 18th century, tourism had started in the Wye Valley, with many visitors travelling on the river to see the abbey and other &quot;picturesque&quot; sites in the area. William Wordsworth stayed in the village in 1798 and wrote Lines Written a Few Miles above Tintern Abbey. The completion of the turnpike road (now the A466) in the valley in 1829, and the arrival of the Wye Valley Railway in the 1870s, greatly increased the number of visitors, and tourism became the mainstay of Tintern&#x27;s economy and remains so today. The grade II listed Wild Hare Inn, formerly the Royal George Hotel, was established soon after the turnpike road opened.

==Areas of interest==

===Tintern Abbey===

Tintern Abbey was founded on 9 May 1131 by Walter de Clare, Lord of Chepstow. It was the first Cistercian foundation in Wales, and only the second in Britain (after Waverley Abbey).

The abbey fell into ruin after the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 16th century. Its remains have been celebrated in poetry and painting from the 18th century onwards. In 1984, Cadw took over responsibility for managing the site. Tintern Abbey is visited by approximately 70,000 people every year.

===St Mary the Virgin on Chapel Hill===
Medieval in origin, it is believed that the chapel was founded for workers building Tintern Abbey, but the Chapel Hill site was, according to historian Sir Joseph Bradney, previously dedicated to 5th century Welsh saint St Andras. The church was restored over 1863-68 by John Prichard. A Grade II listing was awarded in 1971 in recognition of Prichard&#x27;s work. St Mary&#x27;s reredos has been transferred to nearby St Michael&#x27;s Church for safe-keeping, but interesting architectural features include the following: medieval stonework concentrated at the east end; 14th and 15th century tracery; undated but pre-Victorian stonework such as the stoup, niche, piscina and unusual saddleback stone-tiled tower. Victorian features are limited to the expanded vestry and south wall.

Also Grade II and listed in the surrounding area: the neoclassical monument to J S Brown (d. 1840), a rare 18th or 19th century pyramid tomb, an 18th or 19th century Neoclassical or Baroque sarcophagus tomb of Richard White (d. 1765), and the revetment wall and adjoining paved road leading up to the churchyard. Other monuments of interest include one to Peter Carr who died in the 1913 Senghenydd colliery disaster and a war grave of Private BB Hall, an American citizen who enlisted in the Lancashire Fusiliers and died at Connaught. 

The church is privately owned. The working churchyard is owned by the Church in Wales and is maintained by volunteers.

===Water Mill===
A disused water-driven mill lies in the Abbey Mill area northwest of the abbey. Visitor information and shops can be found close by.

===Parva Farm Vineyard===
The village also has an award-winning vineyard.

===The Moon and Sixpence===
The former public house, The Moon and Sixpence, was originally known as the Mason&#x27;s Arms, but changed its name in 1948 following a visit by Somerset Maugham, author of the 1919 novel of the same name. It has been converted into a group of three private houses.

===St Michael&#x27;s Church, Tintern Parva===
The church of St Michael, Tintern Parva dates back to medieval times: a church on the site was recorded around 1348. It was substantially rebuilt in 1846 (although pictorial records suggest it was relatively similar in appearance before and after the rebuilding) and has remained largely unchanged since. The south porch may date to the 15th century. The churchyard includes various 19th century memorials, including one for John Loraine Baldwin, former warden of the abbey.

===Old railway station===
Tintern railway station was on the former Wye Valley Railway. From the north, approaching Tintern, immediately after Tintern Station the railway crossed the Wye to bypass the village on the other bank. Closed to passengers in 1959, the station, a mile&#x27;s walk above Tintern, functions as a tourist centre. 
===Walks===
Tintern is home to an extensive network of local footpaths, linking with two long-distance paths: On the Welsh side, the Wye Valley Walk passes nearby, and on the English side, the Offa&#x27;s Dyke path is also near. The former wireworks railway bridge north of the abbey crosses the River Wye, and is open to the public. It leads, on the English side of the river, to several clearly marked walking paths, most notably a path to the &quot;Devil&#x27;s Pulpit&quot;, and other paths which also lead to Offa&#x27;s Dyke.

==References==
==External links==
* Tintern Village Website
* Tintern Conservation Area survey
* The BBC Virtual Tintern
* Genuki info on Tintern
* Genuki info on Chapel Hill
* Tintern railway photos and info
* Kelly&#x27;s 1901 Directory of Monmouthshire
* Ruins of St. Marys, Chapel Hill
* www.geograph.co.uk : photos of Tintern and surrounding area</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2243491" start="0" end="7" title="Tintern" label="Tintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630741" start="31" end="40" title="community (Wales)" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44" end="54" title="Wye Valley (community)" label="Wye Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19695" start="80" end="89" title="River Wye" label="River Wye"/>
<link wikidata="Q207176" start="93" end="106" title="Monmouthshire" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q771986" start="164" end="172" title="Chepstow" label="Chepstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439379" start="248" end="261" title="Tintern Abbey" label="Tintern Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162904" start="473" end="490" title="Conservation Area (United Kingdom)" label="Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743" start="762" end="766" title="Ford (crossing)" label="ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594661" start="901" end="917" title="kingdom of Gwent" label="kingdom of Gwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088014" start="988" end="995" title="Tewdrig" label="Tewdrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="1087" end="1093" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q131538470" start="1702" end="1716" title="Angidy River" label="Angiddy Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947565" start="1858" end="1873" title="Walter de Clare" label="Walter de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="1909" end="1921" title="Henry I of England" label="King Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="1941" end="1951" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969259" start="1966" end="1973" title="Britain in the Middle Ages" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q843261" start="2019" end="2026" title="Cîteaux" label="Cîteaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2030" end="2036" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="2225" end="2229" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="2257" end="2262" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098590" start="2314" end="2321" title="monastic grange" label="granges"/>
<link wikidata="Q317279" start="2591" end="2604" title="Owain Glyndŵr" label="Owain Glyndŵr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2609" end="2622" title="Cwmcarvan#Craig-y-Dorth" label="Craig y Dorth"/>
<link wikidata="Q156990" start="2628" end="2636" title="Monmouth" label="Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="2676" end="2687" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265933" start="2742" end="2750" title="Penterry" label="Penterry"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="2819" end="2849" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155549" start="3124" end="3160" title="Company of Mineral and Battery Works" label="Company of Mineral and Battery Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q551997" start="3169" end="3173" title="wire" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="3242" end="3246" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411858" start="3303" end="3308" title="carding" label="cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q20590907" start="3317" end="3333" title="Woollen industry in Wales" label="woollen industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="3523" end="3531" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867126" start="3681" end="3697" title="Basil Brooke (metallurgist)" label="Sir Basil Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789702" start="3699" end="3711" title="Thomas Foley (1616–1677)" label="Thomas Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789701" start="3750" end="3762" title="Thomas Foley (c.1641-1701)" label="Thomas Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="3766" end="3779" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823342" start="3784" end="3790" title="finery forge" label="forges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403548" start="4043" end="4061" title="Wye Valley Railway" label="Wye Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14556915" start="4360" end="4364" title="leat" label="leat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="4370" end="4377" title="culvert" label="culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q14556915" start="4742" end="4746" title="leat" label="leat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332478" start="4907" end="4917" title="Wye Valley" label="Wye Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627825" start="4995" end="5006" title="picturesque" label="picturesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="5032" end="5050" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553651" start="5091" end="5136" title="Lines Written a Few Miles above Tintern Abbey" label="Lines Written a Few Miles above Tintern Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q406633" start="5160" end="5168" title="Turnpike trust" label="turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403548" start="5235" end="5253" title="Wye Valley Railway" label="Wye Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374218" start="5410" end="5423" title="Wild Hare Inn, Tintern" label="Wild Hare Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439379" start="5556" end="5569" title="Tintern Abbey" label="Tintern Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947565" start="5599" end="5614" title="Walter de Clare" label="Walter de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q771986" start="5624" end="5632" title="Chepstow" label="Chepstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="5651" end="5661" title="Cistercian" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="5676" end="5681" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295286" start="5721" end="5735" title="Waverley Abbey" label="Waverley Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="5774" end="5804" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025341" start="5922" end="5926" title="Cadw" label="Cadw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281666" start="6236" end="6254" title="Joseph Bradney" label="Sir Joseph Bradney"/>
<link wikidata="Q541594" start="6355" end="6368" title="John Prichard" label="John Prichard"/>
<link wikidata="Q642861" start="6736" end="6741" title="stoup" label="stoup"/>
<link wikidata="Q695992" start="6743" end="6748" title="niche (architecture)" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q423944" start="6750" end="6757" title="piscina" label="piscina"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="7037" end="7049" title="Neoclassical sculpture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="7053" end="7060" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742014" start="7114" end="7123" title="revetment" label="revetment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404150" start="7259" end="7287" title="Senghenydd colliery disaster" label="Senghenydd colliery disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089788" start="7480" end="7495" title="Church in Wales" label="Church in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="7795" end="7807" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="7929" end="7945" title="Somerset Maugham" label="Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792726" start="7966" end="7988" title="The Moon and Sixpence" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q10938513" start="8522" end="8542" title="John Loraine Baldwin" label="John Loraine Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808500" start="8599" end="8622" title="Tintern railway station" label="Tintern railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403548" start="8641" end="8659" title="Wye Valley Railway" label="Wye Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8999" end="9018" title="Long-distance trails#United Kingdom" label="long-distance paths"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039721" start="9043" end="9058" title="Wye Valley Walk" label="Wye Valley Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127343" start="9103" end="9119" title="Offa&amp;#x27;s Dyke" label="Offa&amp;#x27;s Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808499" start="9150" end="9174" title="Tintern Wireworks Branch" label="wireworks railway bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376295" start="9362" end="9381" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Pulpit, Gloucestershire" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Pulpit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646760" wikidata="Q350902" url="?curid=646760" title="Billy Martin (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Billy Martin]] (1928–1989) was a Major League Baseball player and manager.

Billy Martin or Bill Martin may also refer to:
==Music==
* Bill Martin (songwriter) (1938– 2020), Scottish songwriter
* Billy Martin (percussionist) (born 1963), drummer for jazz trio Medeski Martin &amp; Wood
* William E. Martin (1945–2016), American songwriter, screenwriter, and voice actor
* Billy Martin (guitarist) (born 1981), guitarist for American band Good Charlotte
* Bill Martin, a briefly-used stage name of Billy Joel around 1972
* Billy Martin, an alias used by Paul McCartney to record his debut solo album, &quot;McCartney&quot;, in Abbey Road Studios

==Sports==
* C. W. Martin (1887–1978), known as Bill, head football coach at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 1912
* Billy Martin (shortstop) (1894–1949), American baseball player
* Billy Martin (curler) (born c. 1933), Canadian curler
* Bill Martin (cyclist), winner of the 1901 Austral Wheel Race
* Billy Martin (halfback) (1938–1976), American football player
* Billy Martin (tight end) (1942–2018), American football player
* Billy Martin (tennis) (born 1956), American tennis player in the 1970s
* Bill Martin (basketball) (born 1962), American basketball player
* Bill Martin (rugby league), rugby league footballer of the 1960s for Great Britain and Workington Town
* Bill Martin (footballer) (1883–1954), English footballer
* Bill Martin (athletic director), American college athletics administrator
* Bill Martin (runner) (born 1957), winner of the 1000 yards at the 1981 USA Indoor Track and Field Championships

==Writers==
* Bill Martin Jr. (1916–2004), American children&#x27;s book author
* Billy Martin (author) (born 1967), known professionally as Poppy Z. Brite, American author

==Other==
* Bill Martin (artist) (1943–2008), California visionary painter
* Bill Martin (philosopher) (born 1956), American philosopher at DePaul University
* Bill Martin (sociologist), Australian sociologist
* Billy Martin (lawyer), lawyer with Dorsey &amp; Whitney LLP
* Bill Martin (politician), American politician

==See also==
*William Martin (disambiguation)
*William Flynn Martin (born 1950), American energy economist, educator and international diplomat</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350902" start="0" end="16" title="Billy Martin (disambiguation)" label="[[Billy Martin]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q350902" start="78" end="90" title="Billy Martin (disambiguation)" label="Billy Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q350902" start="94" end="105" title="Billy Martin (disambiguation)" label="Bill Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862284" start="137" end="161" title="Bill Martin (songwriter)" label="Bill Martin (songwriter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q863178" start="198" end="226" title="Billy Martin (percussionist)" label="Billy Martin (percussionist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008271" start="290" end="307" title="William E. Martin" label="William E. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q485220" start="374" end="398" title="Billy Martin (guitarist)" label="Billy Martin (guitarist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q194333" start="499" end="509" title="Billy Joel" label="Billy Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="555" end="569" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006953" start="661" end="673" title="C. W. Martin" label="C. W. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912955" start="781" end="805" title="Billy Martin (shortstop)" label="Billy Martin (shortstop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19661596" start="846" end="867" title="Billy Martin (curler)" label="Billy Martin (curler)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="902" end="923" title="Bill Martin (cyclist)" label="Bill Martin (cyclist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823390" start="944" end="962" title="Austral Wheel Race" label="Austral Wheel Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912953" start="965" end="988" title="Billy Martin (halfback)" label="Billy Martin (halfback)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912951" start="1029" end="1053" title="Billy Martin (tight end)" label="Billy Martin (tight end)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903676" start="1094" end="1115" title="Billy Martin (tennis)" label="Billy Martin (tennis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639989" start="1167" end="1191" title="Bill Martin (basketball)" label="Bill Martin (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910041" start="1234" end="1260" title="Bill Martin (rugby league)" label="Bill Martin (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105820878" start="1339" end="1363" title="Bill Martin (footballer)" label="Bill Martin (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006351" start="1398" end="1429" title="Bill Martin (athletic director)" label="Bill Martin (athletic director)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1474" end="1494" title="Bill Martin (runner)" label="Bill Martin (runner)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130130718" start="1540" end="1585" title="1981 USA Indoor Track and Field Championships" label="1981 USA Indoor Track and Field Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910037" start="1601" end="1616" title="Bill Martin Jr." label="Bill Martin Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q450868" start="1669" end="1690" title="Billy Martin (author)" label="Billy Martin (author)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910038" start="1773" end="1793" title="Bill Martin (artist)" label="Bill Martin (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910039" start="1838" end="1863" title="Bill Martin (philosopher)" label="Bill Martin (philosopher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062173" start="1921" end="1946" title="Bill Martin (sociologist)" label="Bill Martin (sociologist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912954" start="1973" end="1994" title="Billy Martin (lawyer)" label="Billy Martin (lawyer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707492" start="2035" end="2059" title="Bill Martin (politician)" label="Bill Martin (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q412759" start="2096" end="2127" title="William Martin (disambiguation)" label="William Martin (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009180" start="2129" end="2149" title="William Flynn Martin" label="William Flynn Martin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646761" wikidata="Q1278653" url="?curid=646761" title="Trans-Nzoia County">
<text>Trans-Nzoia County is a county in the former Rift Valley Province, Kenya, located between the Nzoia River and Mount Elgon, 380 km northwest of Nairobi. At its centre is the town of Kitale which is the county capital and largest town. It is bordered by the Republic of Uganda to the west, Bungoma and Kakamega Counties to the south, West Pokot County to the east, and Elgeyo Marakwet and Uasin Gishu Counties to the southeast. Trans Nzoia covers an area of 2495.5 square kilometres. The county has a cool and temperate climate, with daytime temperatures ranging from 23.4°C to 29.2°C and nighttime temperatures from 11.0°C to 13.5°C. It receives moderate rainfall, making it suitable for agriculture

Earliest known written records about the region show that Trans Nzoia was inhabited by the Sabaot 
people who, by the time of the arrival of colonial settlers, had died or left the district, some had died of illness, others had been killed in intertribal wars with the Suk (Pokot), and the remainder had mostly gone off in the direction of Ravine, though some had gone up the Elgon. After independence, many of the farms vacated by white settlers were bought by individuals from other ethnic groups in Kenya. Kitale, its capital town, is now majorly Luhya with inhabitants from other tribes in Kenya occupying almost less than 1% of the population.

The county is largely agricultural with both large scale and small scale wheat, maize and dairy farming. The county is referred to as the bread basket of Kenya for its role in food production in the country. The majority of its inhabitants are however generally poor.

Trans Nzoia is one of Kenya&#x27;s forty-seven counties, established under the 2010 constitution. It is locally governed by the County Government of Trans Nzoia. The County Government Act allows the County Government to further decentralize its functions and services below the village with the approval of the Trans-Nzoia County Assembly. Governors are elected every five years in the Kenya General Elections. George Natembeya is the current governor since 2022, succeeding Patrick Khaemba who was the first governor of Trans Nzoia and led the county from 2013 to 2022.

== Physiographic and natural conditions ==
Trans Nzoia County features predominantly flat terrain with gentle undulations rising towards the Cherang&#x27;any Hills in the east and Mount Elgon in the northwest. Mount Elgon, shared with Bungoma County and Uganda, is Kenya&#x27;s second-highest peak and a significant environmental and wildlife conservation site. The county&#x27;s altitude varies from 1,660 meters in Sikhendu Ward to 4,299 meters at Mount Elgon&#x27;s peak.

The county is home to 15 rivers, including Sabwani, Rongai, Noigamaget, Suam, Kaptega, and Losourwa, which contribute to the Nzoia River system draining into Lake Victoria and Lake Turkana. These rivers are crucial for domestic use, small-scale irrigation, and have potential for hydroelectric power generation. However, they face threats from human activities such as encroachment and agriculture, which impact their catchment areas.

Trans Nzoia&#x27;s forests, primarily located in Mount Elgon and Cherang&#x27;any Hills, are essential for the county&#x27;s climate and water catchment. Human activities have reduced forest cover from 17% in 2013 to 15.1%, posing challenges for the local environment.

The county enjoys a cool, temperate climate with mean maximum daytime temperatures ranging from 23.4°C to 29.2°C and mean minimum nighttime temperatures between 11.0°C and 13.5°C. The highest temperature, about 34.2°C, occurs in February, and the lowest, around 6.5°C, is recorded in January. Annual rainfall varies from 1,000mm to 1,700mm, distributed across three main seasons: long rains (March-May), intermediate rains (June-August), and short rains (October-December). The long and intermediate rainy seasons are more reliable for agriculture. However, recent climate changes have led to increased occurrences of droughts, dry spells, and floods.

==Demographics and sub-divisions==
Trans Nzoia comprises five sub-counties: Kiminini, Saboti, Endebess, Kwanza, and Cherangany, which are further divided into 25 wards. As of the 2019 Census, the population was 990,341, consisting of 489,107 males, 501,206 females, and 28 intersex individuals. The county had 223,808 households with an average size of 4.4 people per household.

Kitale serves as the county&#x27;s administrative center and main commercial hub. Other significant market centers include Kiminini, Kachibora, Saboti, and Endebess. The county is highly diverse, with residents from nearly all of Kenya&#x27;s 44 ethnic groups, including the predominant Luhya and Kalenjin communities, as well as Kikuyu, Kisii, Luo, Teso, and Turkana among others.

Historically a white highland, Trans Nzoia&#x27;s economy is primarily driven by agriculture, benefiting from fertile soils and favorable climatic conditions. It is renowned for large-scale maize production, earning it the nickname &quot;Kenya’s breadbasket.&quot; Other significant economic activities include trade and tourism, supported by the presence of Mt. Elgon and Cherangany Hills, which are part of Kenya&#x27;s five water towers. The county boasts both indigenous and exotic forests, contributing to a tree cover of 17%, surpassing the national target of 10%.

Strategically located, Trans Nzoia serves as a gateway to South Sudan via West Pokot and Turkana counties and to Uganda through the Suam Border. It is well-connected by major roads, including the National Trunk Road 1A, linking it to Tanzania, South Sudan, and the Kenyan capital, Nairobi. The county also has a modern airstrip and extensive road networks, enhancing its status as a regional economic hub.


== History ==

=== Toponymy ===
Trans Nzoia County derives its name from the Nzoia River, a prominent geographical feature in the region. Here&#x27;s an exploration of the toponymy related to Trans Nzoia:

# Nzoia River: The county is named after the Nzoia River, which flows through the region. The name &quot;Nzoia&quot; is believed to have its origins in local dialects, though the exact etymology might vary.
# &quot;Trans&quot; Prefix: The prefix &quot;Trans&quot; indicates &quot;across&quot; or &quot;beyond&quot; in Latin, suggesting that the name signifies &quot;beyond the Nzoia River&quot; or &quot;across the Nzoia River&quot;. This term was commonly used during the colonial era to denote areas located on the other side of a prominent geographical feature.
# Colonial Influence: During British colonial rule, the area around the Nzoia River and its surroundings were designated as &quot;Trans Nzoia&quot; to demarcate administrative regions. This naming convention persisted into the post-independence period, and Trans Nzoia County was formally established as an administrative unit within Kenya.
# Historical Context: The naming of Trans Nzoia County reflects its geographical and historical significance as a region defined by the Nzoia River and its cultural, economic, and political interactions over time.

Overall, Trans Nzoia County&#x27;s toponymy highlights the fusion of geographical, historical, and cultural elements that define its identity within Kenya.

=== Early Settlement and Initial Development ===
Initially, the region was dominated by natural features like Mount Elgon, the Cherangani Hills, and the Nzoia River, which marked its boundaries. Early maps, such as those depicting &quot;Qitale,&quot; show its significance as a route for slave traders from Uganda to the coast. Kitale, now the central town of Trans Nzoia, was even used as a resting place for these traders.

An article titled &quot;At the Sign of the World&#x27;s Cross Roads: Tsetse Fly and the Trans-Nzoia&quot; from &quot;The Field&quot; magazine in September 1919 provides a detailed account of the early settlement and the challenges faced by settlers in the Trans-Nzoia region of Kenya. It highlights the following key points:

# Tsetse Fly Infestation: One of the significant challenges in Trans-Nzoia was the presence of the tsetse fly, which caused sleeping sickness in both humans and animals. This pest was a major obstacle to settlement and agriculture, as it affected livestock and made large areas uninhabitable.
# Early Settlement: The article discusses the arrival of early European settlers who faced numerous hardships, including diseases, lack of infrastructure, and the remoteness of the region. Despite these challenges, the settlers were determined to develop the land.
# Agricultural Potential: Despite the difficulties, the region was recognized for its fertile soil and potential for agriculture. The settlers worked hard to clear the land, establish farms, and introduce crops and livestock that could thrive in the environment.
# Infrastructure Development: The article notes the gradual development of infrastructure, including roads and railways, which facilitated better access to markets and resources. This development was crucial for the economic growth of the region.
# Community Efforts: There was a strong sense of community among the settlers, who supported each other in overcoming the various challenges. They established social and support networks to improve living conditions and promote development.
# Government Involvement: The colonial government played a role in supporting the settlement efforts by providing resources, conducting surveys, and implementing policies to encourage more settlers to move to Trans-Nzoia.

This early period in Trans-Nzoia&#x27;s history is characterized by the settlers&#x27; resilience and the collaborative efforts to transform a challenging environment into a productive agricultural region.

=== Administrative and Economic Development ===
The first formal attempts to settle Trans Nzoia began in 1913, when the government auctioned farms. However, the outbreak of World War I slowed this process, leaving many farms vacant. After the war, the Soldier Settlement Scheme in 1920-21 brought new settlers, marking the start of structured development. Despite initial hardships, including the lack of nearby banks and railheads, settlers persevered. Kitale started to emerge as an administrative and business center, and the appointment of a District Commissioner at Hoey’s Bridge facilitated governance and infrastructure development.

=== Social and Cultural Growth ===
The social fabric of Trans Nzoia began to take shape with the establishment of various institutions. The Kitale Club, founded in 1924, became a hub for social activities. Religious institutions like St. Luke&#x27;s Church and a Roman Catholic Church were built, catering to the spiritual needs of the community. Medical facilities were initially scarce, with a private house serving as a hospital run by nursing sisters. Over time, the district saw the establishment of more comprehensive healthcare and educational facilities, reflecting its growing complexity and self-sufficiency.

=== Agricultural Expansion ===
Agriculture played a pivotal role in Trans Nzoia’s development. The fertile plains and favorable climate conditions made it ideal for cultivating maize, wheat, pyrethrum, coffee, and tea. The success of these crops attracted more settlers and investment. The extension of the railway to Kitale, a project championed by Governor Sir Edward Grigg, significantly boosted agricultural and economic activities by improving the transport of goods and people.

=== Environmental and Geographical Features ===
Trans Nzoia’s landscape is marked by significant geographical features that contribute to its biodiversity and agricultural productivity. Mount Elgon, with its vast base and rich natural resources, and the Cherangani Hills, known for their varied scenery and rare wildlife, form natural boundaries and habitats. These areas support diverse flora and fauna, including the rare Bongo and the Lammergeyer. The district’s altitude ranges from 6,000 to 8,000 feet, with an average annual rainfall of 48 inches, further enhancing its suitability for agriculture.

=== Key Historical Figures and Events ===
The history of Trans Nzoia is also marked by notable figures and events. Abu Bakr, an early observer, provides a vivid account of the region in the early 20th century, describing its uninhabited state and the challenges faced by early settlers. Significant visits by royalty, such as the Prince of Wales (October 1928) and Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother (1959), highlight the district’s growing importance over time.

== Economy and industry ==
Trans Nzoia County boasts a diverse and vibrant economy, with agriculture playing a central role. The county is known for its significant contributions to Kenya&#x27;s food security, primarily through large-scale maize production. To enhance this sector, the County Government of Trans Nzoia has established milling plants in Kitale Town, Endebess, and Matisi, promoting value addition to agricultural produce. Furthermore, there is a strong focus on agricultural training, with colleges disseminating modern farming technologies. The county also invests in irrigation systems in areas like Endebess, Kwanza, Saboti, Cherangani, and Kiminini to ensure a reliable water supply for crops. Mechanization is made more accessible through subsidized agricultural machinery, including tractors, ploughs, and planters, supporting farmers in maximizing their productivity.

Tourism is another growing sector in Trans Nzoia County, with initiatives aimed at improving infrastructure and diversifying the tourism experience. Efforts include the preservation and protection of key sites, the establishment of tourist information centers, and the modernization of traditional bomas at the Kitale Museum. The county is also developing new tourism products such as amusement parks and eco-tourism ventures. To attract more visitors, comprehensive tourism marketing and investment strategies are being implemented, along with the classification of tourist establishments to ensure high standards of service.

Trade and commerce are vital to the county&#x27;s economy, with significant investments in market infrastructure. The County Government of Trans Nzoia is renovating existing markets and constructing new business kiosks and sanitation blocks to create a conducive environment for traders. Trade shows and exhibitions are regularly hosted to promote local products and foster business growth. Additionally, the county is enhancing cross-border trade by forming and operationalizing cross-border associations, facilitating smoother trade relations with neighboring regions.

Through these strategic initiatives, Trans Nzoia County is steadily strengthening its economic foundation, ensuring sustainable growth and development across agriculture, tourism, and trade sectors.

== Religion and culture ==

=== Religion ===
Majority of people living in Trans Nzoia County are Christians. Prominent churches in the county include Anglican (ACK), Roman Catholic, Friends (Quakers), Seven-Day Adventist (SDA), and Presbyterians. There are numerous evangelical churches among them the Deliverance, African Inland Church (AIC), Africa Gospel Church (AGC),the Redeemed Church, PEFA, Christian Church International (CCI), Full Gospel and Kenya Assemblies of God (KAG). Other faiths such as Islam and Hinduism are also professed especially in major towns.

Jainism is also practiced by Oshwals in Kitale which is a religion that prescribes a path of non-violence towards all living beings while emphasising spiritual independence and equality.
The indigenous Sabaot tribe or the &#x27;Elgon Maasai&#x27; live near Mount Elgon and are a Kalenjin sub tribe. They value their culture and guard it with pride. They are traditionally pastoralists. They used to believe that their god lived in elevated places where they could not reach such as on top of Mount Elgon or up in the sky. However, due to influence of Christianity, education and intermarriage, most of these traditions have been replaced by modern culture, a reason why the one time pastoralists are now big farmers in the region.

Religion in Trans-Nzoia County 


=== Culture ===
The Kitale Film Week is an annual film festival held in Trans Nzoia. This event celebrates and promotes local and international films, providing a platform for filmmakers to showcase their work and engage with audiences. The festival often includes film screenings, workshops, panel discussions, and networking opportunities for filmmakers, industry professionals, and film enthusiasts. It aims to support the growth of the film industry in the region and foster cultural exchange through the art of cinema. It was founded in 2022 by Peter Pages Bwire and had its maiden edition in 2023.

== Major towns ==

Located between Mt. Elgon and Cherangany Hills, Kitale is the largest town and Trans Nzoia&#x27;s administrative capital. Mainly an agricultural town, Kitale has recently shown a lot of economic potential, with agribusiness, real estate and commercial businesses booming the most. The town is home to over 220,000 people and as the last stop of the Kenya railway line, it is an important center for movement of goods in the North Rift. 

Matisi, meaning &quot;swampy area&quot;, is a fast growing town located in the outskirts of Kitale town along Kitale-Suam road.

Kiminini is a small yet busy town located some 22 kilometers along Kitale Webuye road. It is a significant agricultural center. St. Brigids National Girls High School is located at this town.

Maili Saba means &quot;seven miles&quot; in Swahili. It is located along Kitale-Kapenguria road.

Situated at the foot of Mt. Elgon, some 17 kilometers North Western side of Kitale town, Endebess is an important agricultural town, which also serves as a local administrative and commercial center for Kwanza sub county.

Kachibora is situated at the junction of Kitale-Ziwa-Eldoret road/Kitale-Kapcherop-Kapsowar road, about 30 kilometres from Kitale town. Kachibora is a fast growing agricultural town. It is the administrative headquarters of the Trans Nzoia East sub county.

== Healthcare and health facilities ==
Trans Nzoia County&#x27;s healthcare system is structured into three main sectors: Medical Services, Corporate Health, and Public Health and Sanitation, each with specific roles. The County&#x27;s health vision is to create a globally competitive, healthy, and productive region. Its mission focuses on developing a progressive, responsive, sustainable, technology-driven, evidence-based, and client-centered healthcare system, aiming for the highest health standards for all residents.

The County&#x27;s healthcare goals include achieving high-quality, accessible, affordable, and equitable healthcare. To accomplish this, the County prioritizes several strategies, such as enhancing promotive and preventive healthcare, improving environmental health and sanitation, and strengthening community health services. Additionally, there is a focus on managing communicable diseases and neglected tropical diseases, increasing immunization coverage, enhancing reproductive, maternal, newborn, child, and adolescent health (RMNCAH) services, improving nutrition services, and expanding mental health care access.

The county also aims to increase access to curative and rehabilitative services by providing more specialized health care, strengthening emergency and referral services, and developing health infrastructure. Furthermore, the County plans to enhance health administration, management, and support services, including increasing medical supplies, bolstering the medical workforce, promoting health research and development, and advancing universal health care coverage.

The healthcare infrastructure in Trans Nzoia County includes 15 hospitals, 22 health centers, 124 dispensaries, 51 private clinics, and 2 nursing homes. The County has a total bed capacity of 673, distributed across its sub-counties, with Kiminini and Saboti having the highest capacities. However, there is a notable shortage of ICU beds, with only 8 available across the entire county.

Despite these facilities, the healthcare system faces challenges, including uneven distribution of health services, understaffing, inadequate medical equipment, and insufficient supporting infrastructure. The doctor-to-patient ratio is 1:11,363, while the nurse-to-patient ratio is 1:1,739, indicating a significant shortfall in healthcare personnel. Clinical officers and laboratory technicians are also in short supply, further straining the healthcare system.

To address these issues, the County has proposed several strategies and projects. These include completing and operationalizing the Trans Nzoia County Referral Hospital, renovating existing hospitals, expanding and equipping sub-county hospitals and rural health centers, constructing new dispensaries, and establishing a reliable drug management system. The County also plans to recruit more healthcare workers, create mobile clinics, and provide adequate resources for medical supplies. Moreover, identifying suitable sites for medical-related amenities like public mortuaries, cemeteries, and crematoriums in Saboti and Kwanza sub-counties is part of the strategic plan.

== Education ==

=== Education in Trans Nzoia County ===
The County Government of Trans Nzoia is responsible for fostering a conducive environment for quality education and vocational training, aiming to empower individuals with the skills necessary for self-employment and global competitiveness. The county&#x27;s education sector encompasses early childhood development education (ECDE), vocational training, primary and secondary education, tertiary education, and adult literacy programs.

==== Early Childhood Development Education ====
The county has made significant strides in early childhood education over the years. There are 434 public ECDE centers with a total enrolment of 44,327 children. These centers are staffed by 761 teachers, resulting in a teacher-to-pupil ratio of 1:58. Additionally, there are 462 private ECDE centers catering to 28,002 children with a more favorable teacher-to-pupil ratio of 1:37. The county is focused on improving ECDE infrastructure, enhancing human resource capacity, increasing learning materials, and implementing school feeding initiatives.

==== Primary and Secondary Education ====
Trans Nzoia County has 384 public primary schools with an enrolment of 237,662 pupils and 4,742 teachers, resulting in a teacher-to-pupil ratio of 1:50. In addition, there are 218 private primary schools with 25,096 pupils and a teacher-to-pupil ratio of 1:16. The dropout, enrolment, and retention rates are key metrics monitored by the county, although specific figures are not provided.

For secondary education, there are 241 public secondary schools with a total enrolment of 106,975 students and 2,924 teachers, yielding a teacher-to-student ratio of 1:37. The county also supports vocational training centers, with 32 centers enrolling 3,200 students and employing 156 instructors.

==== Tertiary Education and Vocational Training ====
Trans Nzoia County boasts 31 accredited TVET institutions, providing a variety of educational opportunities beyond secondary school. The enrolment figures for these institutions show a higher male participation, with 7,201 males and 5,592 females enrolled in TVETs. The county also supports adult literacy through 38 centers, which have an enrolment of 1,764 learners, focusing on improving literacy rates among adults.

== Places of interest ==

Most outstanding places of interest include Mount Elgon National Park, Saiwa Swamp National Park and Kitale Nature Conservancy. Mount Elgon National Park is located approximately 11 kilometers from Kitale town. Some of the wild animals found here include elephants, buffalos, black and white colobus, giant forest hog and over 420 bird species.

Saiwa Swamp National Park is located some 27 kilometers from Kitale town towards Kitale – Kapenguria road and is good for game viewing and camping. Kitale Museum, located in the heart of Kitale town is one of the most interesting places in the county. Apart from hosting varieties of traditional artifacts, the museum is also home to different snake species as well as having one of the largest crocodile pits in Kenya.

== Sector development issues ==
The County Integrated Development Plan for Trans Nzoia County identifies several critical development issues impacting the region. These issues span across multiple sectors, including healthcare, infrastructure, agriculture, and governance, and are rooted in various systemic challenges.

Healthcare: Trans Nzoia County faces significant healthcare challenges. These include low immunization coverage, inadequate access to Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child, and Adolescent Health (RMNCAH) services, and insufficient mental health care services. Nutrition services are also limited, contributing to overall poor health outcomes. The county&#x27;s healthcare infrastructure is inadequate, with insufficient medical supplies and a lack of specialized health services. Additionally, there is a weak emergency and referral system, coupled with inadequate human resources for health. Financial constraints further exacerbate these issues, leading to limited access to medical cover and weak health governance.

Infrastructure: The county&#x27;s infrastructure is underdeveloped, with inadequate road and transport networks posing significant challenges. Technical skills and resources are insufficient, hindering the development of critical infrastructure. Collaboration with the national government and private sector is necessary to improve energy and transport infrastructure. Moreover, there is a need for better maintenance of government buildings and enhanced capacity to respond to fire emergencies and other disasters.

Agriculture: Agriculture, being the backbone of Trans Nzoia’s economy, faces several issues. Poor farming practices and environmental degradation have led to reduced agricultural productivity. There is a need to promote sustainable agricultural practices and enhance value addition in processing local produce. The county&#x27;s agricultural sector also suffers from inadequate market infrastructure and poor transport networks, which limit access to markets and hinder economic growth.

Governance: Weak governance structures and inadequate legislative frameworks are significant hurdles in the county&#x27;s development. The lack of structured inter-sectoral collaboration frameworks hampers coordinated efforts in addressing the county&#x27;s development needs. Additionally, financial constraints and limited human resources affect the implementation of key development projects and programs.

== Access ==

From Nairobi, Trans Nzoia is accessible by road via Nakuru-Eldoret, a 380km journey that normally takes 5–6 hours. Trans Nzoia can also be accessed by air through Kitale&#x27;s small airport, located about 7 kilometers from Kitale town. The road from Nairobi to Kitale is tarmacked and smooth.

== Notable people ==
* Milcah Chemos, Commonwealth games champion
* Zipporah Kittony, politician and activist
* Eugene Wamalwa, politician
* Paul Ereng, 1988 Olympic champion and former two-time indoor world champion record holder
* Michael Kijana Wamalwa, former vice president and first to die in office
* Wesley Korir, a long-distance runner who is a former Cherangany Member of Parliament
* Masinde Muliro, a central figure in Kenya&#x27;s politics
* Joseph Magutt, former Kenyan envoy to Germany, who declared in 2019 his interest to contesting for the position of governor in Trans Nzoia County
* Johnson Sakaja, Governor of Nairobi
* Ezra Chiloba, former IEBC Commissioner
* Musalia Mudavadi, Prime Cabinet Secretary of the Republic of Kenya
* Orie Rogo Manduli, Kenyan diplomat, activist and rally driver
* Fred Gumo, politician
* Susan Wafula Nakhumicha, former health cabinet secretary of Kenya

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1278653" start="0" end="18" title="Trans-Nzoia County" label="Trans-Nzoia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q269218" start="24" end="30" title="Counties of Kenya" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q38587" start="45" end="65" title="Rift Valley Province, Kenya" label="Rift Valley Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="67" end="72" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915185" start="94" end="105" title="Nzoia River" label="Nzoia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q732838" start="110" end="121" title="Mount Elgon" label="Mount Elgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="143" end="150" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q523000" start="181" end="187" title="Kitale" label="Kitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="256" end="274" title="Uganda" label="Republic of Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928204" start="288" end="295" title="Bungoma County" label="Bungoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721867" start="300" end="308" title="Kakamega County" label="Kakamega"/>
<link wikidata="Q590860" start="332" end="342" title="West Pokot County" label="West Pokot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15216433" start="367" end="382" title="Elgeyo-Marakwet County" label="Elgeyo Marakwet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121429" start="387" end="398" title="Uasin Gishu County" label="Uasin Gishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q180154" start="470" end="480" title="Kilometres per hour" label="kilometres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573955" start="969" end="980" title="Pokot people" label="Suk (Pokot)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009186" start="1040" end="1046" title="Eldama Ravine" label="Ravine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348287" start="1185" end="1198" title="list of tribes of Kenya" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="1221" end="1233" title="Capital city" label="capital town"/>
<link wikidata="Q277647" start="1250" end="1255" title="Luhya people" label="Luhya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1747" end="1779" title="County Government of Trans Nzoia" label="County Government of Trans Nzoia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1930" end="1957" title="Trans-Nzoia County Assembly" label="Trans-Nzoia County Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2030" end="2046" title="George Natembeya" label="George Natembeya"/>
<link wikidata="Q59656119" start="2094" end="2109" title="Patrick Khaemba" label="Patrick Khaemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505" start="2825" end="2838" title="Lake Victoria" label="Lake Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182719" start="2843" end="2855" title="Lake Turkana" label="Lake Turkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="3938" end="3952" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q47463434" start="4102" end="4110" title="Kiminini Constituency" label="Kiminini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396314" start="4112" end="4118" title="Saboti Constituency" label="Saboti"/>
<link wikidata="Q47463433" start="4120" end="4128" title="Endebess Constituency" label="Endebess"/>
<link wikidata="Q6450207" start="4130" end="4136" title="Kwanza Constituency" label="Kwanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091828" start="4142" end="4152" title="Cherangany Constituency" label="Cherangany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994796" start="4804" end="4818" title="White Highlands" label="white highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915185" start="5846" end="5857" title="Nzoia River" label="Nzoia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q732838" start="7363" end="7374" title="Mount Elgon" label="Mount Elgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8526587" start="7380" end="7396" title="Cherang&amp;#x27;any Hills" label="Cherangani Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915185" start="7406" end="7417" title="Nzoia River" label="Nzoia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894532" start="10315" end="10328" title="Hoey&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="Hoey’s Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10521" end="10536" title="The Kitale Club" label="The Kitale Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11355" end="11380" title="Governor Sir Edward Grigg" label="Governor Sir Edward Grigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q732838" start="11676" end="11687" title="Mount Elgon" label="Mount Elgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="12426" end="12441" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="12461" end="12493" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12844" end="12876" title="County Government of Trans Nzoia" label="County Government of Trans Nzoia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14196" end="14228" title="County Government of Trans Nzoia" label="County Government of Trans Nzoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="15420" end="15427" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15449" end="15456" title="Oshwals" label="Oshwals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16202" end="16222" title="The Kitale Film Week" label="The Kitale Film Week"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16736" end="16753" title="Peter Pages Bwire" label="Peter Pages Bwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q523000" start="16858" end="16864" title="Kitale" label="Kitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q396622" start="17021" end="17033" title="agribusiness" label="agribusiness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20752" end="20788" title="Trans Nzoia County Referral Hospital" label="Trans Nzoia County Referral Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21356" end="21388" title="County Government of Trans Nzoia" label="County Government of Trans Nzoia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23722" end="23747" title="Kitale Nature Conservancy" label="Kitale Nature Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273335" start="23749" end="23774" title="Mount Elgon National Park" label="Mount Elgon National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636810" start="23967" end="23992" title="Saiwa Swamp National Park" label="Saiwa Swamp National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15036543" start="24115" end="24128" title="Kitale Museum" label="Kitale Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q117239" start="27177" end="27190" title="Milcah Chemos" label="Milcah Chemos"/>
<link wikidata="Q111188709" start="27222" end="27238" title="Zipporah Kittony" label="Zipporah Kittony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407838" start="27266" end="27280" title="Eugene Wamalwa" label="Eugene Wamalwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q364094" start="27295" end="27305" title="Paul Ereng" label="Paul Ereng"/>
<link wikidata="Q593552" start="27387" end="27409" title="Michael Kijana Wamalwa" label="Michael Kijana Wamalwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q447119" start="27462" end="27474" title="Wesley Korir" label="Wesley Korir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783285" start="27549" end="27563" title="Masinde Muliro" label="Masinde Muliro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285228" start="27609" end="27622" title="Joseph Magutt" label="Joseph Magutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967580" start="27757" end="27771" title="Johnson Sakaja" label="Johnson Sakaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q113293892" start="27795" end="27807" title="Ezra Chiloba" label="Ezra Chiloba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954003" start="27836" end="27852" title="Musalia Mudavadi" label="Musalia Mudavadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123570903" start="27905" end="27922" title="Orie Rogo Manduli" label="Orie Rogo Manduli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495322" start="27969" end="27978" title="Fred Gumo" label="Fred Gumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q114880042" start="27993" end="28016" title="Susan Nakhumicha Wafula" label="Susan Wafula Nakhumicha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646768" wikidata="Q6841610" url="?curid=646768" title="Middle Tennessee">
<text>Middle Tennessee is one of the three Grand Divisions of Tennessee that composes roughly the central portion of the state. It is delineated according to state law as 41 of the state&#x27;s 95 counties. Middle Tennessee contains the state&#x27;s capital and largest city, Nashville, as well as Clarksville, the state&#x27;s fifth largest city, and Murfreesboro, the state&#x27;s sixth largest city and largest suburb of Nashville. The Nashville metropolitan area, located entirely within the region, is the most populous metropolitan area in the state, and the Clarksville metropolitan area is the state&#x27;s sixth most populous. Middle Tennessee is both the largest, in terms of land area, and the most populous of the state&#x27;s three Grand Divisions.

Geographically, Middle Tennessee is composed of the Highland Rim, which completely surrounds the Nashville Basin. The Cumberland Plateau is located in the eastern part of the region. Culturally, Middle Tennessee is considered part of the Upland South. Commodity crops such as cotton and tobacco were cultivated by migrant settlers in the region in the antebellum era, who were largely dependent on the labor of enslaved African Americans. In addition, planters bred and trained livestock, such as the world-famous Tennessee Walking Horse, which was developed as a breed in the region during this time.

Middle Tennessee was a crucial region during the American Civil War. Tennessee was occupied by Federal troops from 1862 through the end of the war. Many battles and campaigns were waged by Confederates in this region, especially in efforts to control the major rivers. Confederate General Nathan Bedford Forrest conducted extensive raids through this area, destroying many Union assets in the 1864 Battle of Johnsonville. The bloodiest major battle of the American Civil War by the proportion of engaged soldiers who became casualties, the Battle of Stones River, was also fought here.

In the 20th century, the &quot;Grand Ole Opry&quot; was established in Nashville, enhancing the city as the home of country music. Since the early 1970s, the region has been transformed by the entry of many new economic sectors, including automotive manufacturing, healthcare, finance, technology, tourism, and professional services. Both the Nashville and Clarksville metropolitan areas are among the fastest-growing regions in the nation.

==History==
===Native Americans===
Throughout the past 10,000 years, a number of different Native peoples are believed to have inhabited what is now Middle Tennessee. The region is believed to have been rich in game animals favored by Ice Age hunter-gatherers. During the Mississippian period (1000–1600 AD), Native Americans established chiefdoms and constructed numerous earthwork mounds in the region, such as Mound Bottom in Cheatham County and the Castalian Springs site in Sumner County. By the late 17th century, for unknown reasons, there were few Native Americans left in Middle Tennessee, but the Cherokee and the Chickasaw claimed the region as their hunting grounds. Natives that had occupied what is now Middle Tennessee prior to this time may have died as a result of new infectious diseases indirectly introduced by European explorers.

===Exploration and colonization===

The first Europeans to reach what is now Middle Tennessee were probably an expedition in 1540–1541 led by Spanish conquistador Hernando De Soto. By the late 17th century, the French had begun to explore the Cumberland River valley in Middle Tennessee. In 1714, a group of French traders constructed a trading post at a site along the Cumberland River in modern-day Nashville that became known as French Lick. These settlers quickly established an extensive fur trading network with the local Native Americans, but by the 1740s the settlement had largely been abandoned. In the 1750s and 1760s, longhunters from Virginia explored much of Middle Tennessee, especially the Cumberland Plateau. In 1769, French-born fur trader Timothy Demonbreun established residence along the Cumberland River in present-day Nashville.

In 1779, James Robertson and John Donelson led two groups of settlers from the Washington District in what is now East Tennessee to the French Lick. These settlers constructed Fort Nashborough, which they named for Francis Nash, a brigadier general of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War. The next year, the settlers signed the Cumberland Compact, which established the Cumberland Association, a representative form of government based on the government known as the Watauga Association that had been established by the settlers of East Tennessee. Fort Nashborough later developed as the city of Nashville, and a number of other settlements were established nearby in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. The first settlements in Middle Tennessee became known as the Cumberland Settlements. In 1790, what is now Tennessee became the Southwest Territory, and the settlements in Middle Tennessee were organized into the Mero District, named after Spanish territorial governor Esteban Rodríguez Miró.

In 1795, a survey conducted by the territorial legislature found that the majority of residents of Middle Tennessee were opposed to statehood, while the majority of residents of East Tennessee, of which there were approximately three times more, were in favor. Tennessee was admitted to the Union as the 16th state the following year. During the antebellum era, a slavery-based agrarian economy took hold in Middle Tennessee, especially in the fertile soils of the Nashville Basin. Planters primarily grew cotton in the Nashville Basin, and tobacco and corn were cultivated in the Highland Rim. By 1860, enslaved African Americans composed about 29% of the population of Middle Tennessee. After the election of Abraham Lincoln that year, a majority of Middle Tennesseans voted against the state&#x27;s ordinance of secession in February 1861. Many of these white voters supported the continuation of slavery but were skeptical about leaving the Union.

===Civil War and Reconstruction===

Following the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter in April 1861, which started the Civil War, and President Lincoln&#x27;s call to raise federal troops in response, many Middle Tennesseans changed their opinions about secession. In June 1861, Middle Tennessee voted in favor of Tennessee&#x27;s second ordnance of secession, which resulted in Tennessee joining the Confederate States of America (CSA), although a few counties in the extreme southwest (Wayne) and northeast (Macon and Fentress) continued to favor the Union.

A number of crucial campaigns and battles of the Civil War took place in Middle Tennessee. General Ulysses S. Grant and the U.S. Navy captured control of the Tennessee and Cumberland rivers in February 1862 at the battles of Fort Henry and Fort Donelson, essentially establishing Union control of Middle Tennessee. Union troops occupied the state for the duration of the war.

Union strength in the area, however, was tested by a series of Confederate offensives beginning in the summer of 1862, which culminated in Union General William Rosecrans&#x27;s Army of the Cumberland routing Confederate General Braxton Bragg&#x27;s Army of Tennessee at the Battle of Stones River in Murfreesboro in December 1862 and January 1863. This was one of the bloodiest battles of the entire war. In February, the Confederates took about 670 to 870 casualties in the Battle of Dover when Colonel Abner C. Harding defeated the 2500 Confederate troops with 800 Union soldiers. The next summer, Rosecrans&#x27;s Tullahoma campaign forced Bragg&#x27;s remaining troops in Middle Tennessee to flee to Chattanooga with little fighting. The last major battles in Middle Tennessee occurred during the Franklin–Nashville campaign in the fall of 1864, when the Army of Tennessee under the command of General John Bell Hood unsuccessfully tried to lure Union General William Tecumseh Sherman, who was conducting the Atlanta campaign in Georgia, back into the region. Hood was defeated at the Battle of Franklin in November, then completely dispersed from the state by General George Thomas at the Battle of Nashville the following month. The United States Colored Troops (USCT) played a major role in this campaign.

During Reconstruction, Middle Tennessee&#x27;s economy fell into a state of disrepair. The Ku Klux Klan was formed in Pulaski in December 1865 as a vigilante organization to advance the interests of former Confederates, including maintenance of white supremacy. In the years following the Civil War, African Americans and their White allies in Middle Tennessee were targeted with acts of violence by former Confederates. Many freedmen (former slaves) became sharecroppers following the end of slavery, and were often disadvantaged by the planters&#x27; recordkeeping and contracts.

===Late 19th and earlier 20th century===
The post-Reconstruction era in Middle Tennessee was characterized by continued White violence against African Americans, especially related to elections, and many were lynched in a cycle often related to economic tensions and settlement of finances after harvest. In the late 19th century, African Americans began fleeing Middle Tennessee to booming industrial cities in the Northeast and Midwest. This mass migration, which occurred in every Southern state and accelerated between 1915 and 1930, became known as the first wave of the Great Migration. It continued until 1970.

The region&#x27;s economy continued to be based primarily on agriculture, but coal mining expanded extensively in the Cumberland Plateau in Middle Tennessee in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. In 1897, Tennessee celebrated its centennial of statehood one year late with the Tennessee Centennial and International Exposition in Nashville. A full-scale replica of the Parthenon in Athens was designed by architect William Crawford Smith and constructed for the celebration The site of the exposition is now a city park called Centennial Park.

The worst rail accident in U.S. history occurred on July 9, 1918, in Nashville when two passenger trains collided head on, killing 101 people and injuring 171. Human error was ultimately deemed to be the main cause of the accident.

The &quot;Grand Ole Opry&quot; was first broadcast in 1925 in Nashville, and remains the longest-running radio program in the nation. This radio program helped establish Nashville as the national home of country music.

During World War II Camp Forrest, located in Tullahoma, was one of the U.S. Army&#x27;s largest training bases. It was also used to house German, Italian, and Japanese prisoners of war. After the war, it was adapted as Arnold Air Force Base. The Vultee Aircraft Corporation operated a plant in Nashville during the war, employing mostly women.

On February 25 and 26, 1946, a civil disturbance known as the &quot;Columbia Race Riot&quot; occurred in Columbia, instigated by a fight between a Black Navy veteran and a White repair apprentice. Described by the press as the &quot;first major racial confrontation&quot; following World War II, the event garnered national attention. It marked a new era of resistance by African-American veterans and others following their participation in World War II, which they believed had earned them their full rights as citizens.

===Mid 20th century to present===
During the early years of the civil rights movement, the Highlander Folk School near Monteagle provided training to a number of activists in the movement, including Martin Luther King Jr., Ralph Abernathy, John Lewis, and Rosa Parks. The Nashville Student Movement was organized as part of workshops on nonviolence taught by activist James Lawson. Between February and May 1960, the group organized a series of sit-ins at segregated lunch counters in Nashville, which successfully resulted in the desegregation of facilities in the city.

The construction of the Interstate Highway System in the latter 20th century facilitated suburbanization in the region and brought new industries to Middle Tennessee. Since 1970, the Nashville and Clarksville metropolitan areas have been two of the fastest-growing regions in the United States. This growth has accelerated since 1990, causing Middle Tennessee to surpass East Tennessee as the most populous of the state&#x27;s grand divisions in the 2000s. The region&#x27;s economy has been transformed by new economic sectors, including the automotive, healthcare, banking, technology, and entertainment industries.

==Geography==
Unlike the geographic designations of regions of most U.S. states, the term &quot;Middle Tennessee&quot; has legal as well as socioeconomic and cultural meaning. Middle Tennessee comprises one of the state&#x27;s three Grand Divisions, whose boundaries are defined by state law. The others are East Tennessee and West Tennessee, each with distinctive history, geography, and demographics. The total land area of Middle Tennessee is , representing 41.27% of the state&#x27;s total land area.

According to custom, Middle Tennessee consists of the portion of the state east of the Tennessee River&#x27;s western crossing of the state (in which it flows northward back into Tennessee after having flowed through northern Alabama) and west of the dividing line between the Eastern and Central time zones. Exceptions to this rule are that Hardin County, which is bisected by the Tennessee River, is defined by state law to be entirely within West Tennessee and that Bledsoe, Cumberland, and Marion counties are defined as part of East Tennessee despite being in the Central Time Zone. Consequently, Sequatchie County is often considered part of East Tennessee, despite being defined by law as part of Middle Tennessee. Two northeastern counties of Middle Tennessee, Fentress and Pickett, that supported the Union during the American Civil War are sometimes culturally considered part of East Tennessee, which had strongly supported the Union.

===Topography===

Most of Middle Tennessee is located within the Highland Rim and Nashville Basin, both of which are part of the Interior Low Plateaus of the larger Interior Plains. The Highland Rim is an elevated plain that which completely surrounds the Nashville Basin, a geological dome. Both regions are characterized by porous limestone bedrock that lies close to the surface of the ground. This results in karst, which forms caves, underground streams, sinkholes, and depressions throughout the region.

The Highland Rim is often divided into eastern and western halves. The Eastern Highland Rim is relatively flat, with gentle rolling hills, and the eastern Nashville Basin has similar terrain but is dotted with more distinct hills in places. The western Nashville Basin and Western Highland Rim are more rugged, consisting of irregular knob-like hills separated by steep ravines and crooked stream valleys. The eastern Highland Rim has a higher average elevation, however, than the western portion. The eastern portion of Middle Tennessee consists of the western portion of the Cumberland Plateau, part of the larger Appalachian Plateau of the Appalachian Mountains.

The Cumberland Plateau has an average elevation of , and is characterized by flat-topped tablelands separated by long, crooked stream valleys and rocky cliffs with numerous waterfalls. Middle Tennessee&#x27;s highest elevation, at , is found on the Cumberland Plateau in Grundy County.

===Counties===
Under the most common definition, the following 41 counties are included in Middle Tennessee:
*Bedford
*Cannon
*Cheatham
*Clay
*Coffee
*Davidson
*DeKalb
*Dickson
*Fentress
*Franklin
*Giles
*Grundy
*Hickman
*Houston
*Humphreys
*Jackson
*Lawrence
*Lewis
*Lincoln
*Macon
*Marshall
*Maury
*Montgomery
*Moore
*Overton
*Perry
*Pickett
*Putnam
*Robertson
*Rutherford
*Sequatchie
*Smith
*Stewart
*Sumner
*Trousdale
*Van Buren
*Warren
*Wayne
*White
*Williamson
*Wilson
The Official Tourism Website of Tennessee has a definition of Middle Tennessee slightly different from the legal definition; the website includes Cumberland County while excluding Grundy and Sequatchie counties.

==Population and demographics==

Middle Tennessee is the largest in area and most populated of the state&#x27;s three Grand Divisions. At the 2020 census it had 2,883,086 inhabitants living in its 41 counties, an increase of 427,175, or 17.39%, over the 2010 figure of 2,455,911 inhabitants. This represented the region&#x27;s largest net population increase in history. Its population was 41.72% of the state&#x27;s total. Its population density was , making it the second-most densely populated Grand Division, behind East Tennessee. Prior to the 2010 census, Middle Tennessee was the second-most populous of the state&#x27;s Grand Divisions, behind East Tennessee.

===Cities and metropolitan areas===
Nashville, the state&#x27;s capital and largest city, is located in north-central Middle Tennessee. It has nearly 700,000 residents, and anchors a 13-county metropolitan area with about 2 million residents that has been Tennessee&#x27;s largest since the early 1990s. Clarksville, with a population of about 170,000, is Middle Tennessee&#x27;s second-largest city and the fifth-largest statewide. It is located in the northwest corner of the region near Kentucky. Murfreesboro, located about southeast of Nashville, is Middle Tennessee&#x27;s third-largest city, with more than 150,000 residents. It is also the sixth-largest city in Tennessee and the largest suburb of Nashville. Other important suburbs of Nashville include Franklin, Hendersonville, Smyrna, Spring Hill, Gallatin, Mount Juliet, Lebanon, Columbia, Dickson, and Springfield.

In addition to the Nashville and Clarksville metropolitan areas, Cookeville, located in the eastern part of the region, and Shelbyville, located about southeast of Nashville, anchor important population centers in Middle Tennessee. Other important cities in the region include Manchester, McMinnville, Tullahoma, Winchester, Lewisburg, and Lawrenceburg.

==Economy==
A diversity of sectors drives Middle Tennessee&#x27;s economy, including music and entertainment, automotive manufacturing, healthcare, and technology. The region&#x27;s economy is reportedly one of the fastest growing in the United States.

===Music and entertainment===
Nicknamed &quot;Music City&quot;, Nashville is perhaps best known as the home of country music. The Big Three record labels, as well as numerous independent labels, have offices in Nashville, mostly in the Music Row area. Today, Nashville is the second-largest music recording center, behind New York City. Nashville&#x27;s music industry is estimated to have a total economic impact of about $10billion per year and to contribute approximately 56,000 jobs to the Nashville area.

===Business===
The largest service industry in Middle Tennessee is healthcare. More than 300 healthcare firms are based in the Nashville area, including Hospital Corporation of America (HCA), the world&#x27;s largest private operator of hospitals, Community Health Systems, the largest provider of general hospital services in the United States, Envision Healthcare, Vanguard Health Systems, Ardent Health Services, and LifePoint Health. Other important business sectors in the region include banking, finance, insurance, and publishing. The technology sector is also rapidly becoming an important aspect of Middle Tennessee&#x27;s economy, with such tech giants as Amazon and Oracle pledging investments in the area in 2018 and 2021, respectively, that are expected to employ thousands. Other major corporations headquartered in Middle Tennessee include Caterpillar Inc. in Nashville, Acadia Senior Living in Franklin, Dollar General in Goodlettsville, Tractor Supply Company and Delek US in Brentwood, and Cracker Barrel in Lebanon.

===Industry===
Automotive manufacturing is the largest manufacturing sector in Middle Tennessee. Nissan operates an assembly plant in Smyrna, which is the largest automotive assembly plant in North America, and also operates an engine plant in Decherd. General Motors operates an assembly plant in Spring Hill that was formerly the sole manufacturing facility for Saturn Corporation. Nissan relocated its North American headquarters from California to Franklin in 2005, and Mitsubishi Motors did the same in 2019. Bridgestone has its North American corporate headquarters in Nashville, and operates manufacturing facilities throughout the region. Middle Tennessee is home to several automotive parts suppliers scattered throughout the region. Other products manufactured in Middle Tennessee include processed foods, consumer electronics, electrical equipment, computer products, chemicals, and firearms.

===Agriculture===
Soybeans and tobacco are grown throughout Middle Tennessee, and beef cattle is raised throughout the region. Middle Tennessee is perhaps best known for its horticultural products and for being a prime breeding ground for horses. Warren County is one of the top producers of nursery products in the nation, and is nicknamed the &quot;Nursery Capitol of the World&quot;. The soils of the Nashville Basin reportedly produce grasses which are favorable to horses, and as a result, the region is a top equestrian location. The Tennessee Walking Horse was first bred in the region in the late 18th century and is today one of the most recognized horse breeds in the world. The Cumberland Plateau is a major source of timber, and reportedly ranks as one of the top producers of hardwood in the country.

===Energy===
The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) provides electric power to Middle Tennessee. TVA operates coal and gas fired plants in the region, including the Cumberland Fossil Plant, Gallatin Fossil Plant, and the Johnsonville Combustion Turbine Plant, as well as several hydroelectric dams. In addition, TVA also purchases power from dams on the Cumberland River and its tributaries operated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The largest provider of power to the region, however, is the Browns Ferry Nuclear Plant in northern Alabama, the second-largest nuclear plant in the United States.

===Tourism===

Tourism plays a major role in Middle Tennessee&#x27;s economy. Nashville has the largest tourism economy in the state, and contains many attractions, mostly related to its musical heritage. Top attractions in the region include the Grand Ole Opry, Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum, Ryman Auditorium, Gaylord Opryland Resort &amp; Convention Center, Johnny Cash Museum, National Museum of African American Music, Frist Art Museum, The Parthenon, the Tennessee State Museum, and Jack Daniel&#x27;s Distillery. A number of antebellum residences are preserved in the region, including The Hermitage, the home of Andrew Jackson, the Belle Meade Plantation, and several homes in Franklin. As well as the President James K. Polk Home &amp; Museum in Columbia. The National Park Service preserves two Civil War battlefields in Middle Tennessee: Fort Donelson National Battlefield near Dover, and Stones River National Battlefield in Murfreesboro. In addition, the American Battlefield Trust operates the Franklin Battlefield. The Natchez Trace Parkway begins in Nashville, and runs through the southwestern part of Middle Tennessee. In addition, the state operates many state parks in Middle Tennessee that preserve historic sites and natural features of the region.

==Education==
Middle Tennessee has an abundance of institutions of higher learning—most notably Vanderbilt, Belmont, Lipscomb, and Tennessee State universities in Nashville and Tennessee Tech University in Cookeville. Other prominent universities are Austin Peay State University in Clarksville, the University of the South in Sewanee, Cumberland University in Lebanon, University of Tennessee Southern in Pulaski and Middle Tennessee State University in Murfreesboro, which is the state&#x27;s second-largest institution of higher learning, just behind the University of Tennessee in Knoxville.

==Legal structure==
Unlike the geographic designations of regions of most U.S. states, the term Middle Tennessee has legal as well as socioeconomic meaning. Middle Tennessee, West Tennessee, and East Tennessee are the state&#x27;s three Grand Divisions. According to the Tennessee State Constitution, no more than two of the state supreme court&#x27;s five justices can come from any one Grand Division. The Supreme Court rotates meeting in courthouses in each of the three divisions. The Supreme Court building for Middle Tennessee is in Nashville. A similar rule applies to certain other commissions and boards, in order to prevent a geographic bias.

==Health care==


==Climate==
 The weather in Nashville is a decent mix of extremes. Plenty of sunshine in the summer, and crisp, cold air throughout the winter.

==Transportation==
===Roads===
Interstate 40 (I-40) traverses Middle Tennessee in an east to west alignment, passing through Nashville and its suburbs to the east. Interstate 65 (I-65) runs north to south through the region, serving Nashville and its suburbs to the north and south, including Brentwood, Franklin, and Spring Hill. Interstate 24 (I-24) enters the region in Clarksville and runs in a southeast to northwest alignment, passing through Nashville and its southeastern suburbs of La Vergne, Smyrna, and Murfreesboro, before exiting the region in the southeast. I-440 serves as a bypass around downtown Nashville, and I-840 is an outer bypass around Nashville, passing though suburban counties to the south. Other important freeways in Middle Tennessee include State Route 155 (SR 155/Briley Parkway), a northern bypass around downtown Nashville, Ellington Parkway, part of U.S. Route 31E (US 31E) in Nashville, SR 386 (Vietnam Veterans Boulevard), which serves Nashville&#x27;s northwestern suburbs of Hendersonville and Gallatin, and SR 396 (Saturn Parkway), which connects Spring Hill and its General Motors plant to I-65. Middle Tennessee also has several other important corridors that are part of the National Highway System (NHS), including U.S. Routes 43, 64, 70S, 79, and 231, and State Routes 55 and 111.

===Air, rail, and water===
Nashville International Airport (BNA) is the region&#x27;s primary airport and the busiest airport in Tennessee. The WeGo Star is a commuter rail service that serves Nashville and its eastern suburbs of Mt. Juliet and Lebanon. CSX Transportation operates most freight trackage in Middle Tennessee, and runs a classification yard in Nashville called Radnor Yard. Both the Cumberland and Tennessee rivers are navigable in Middle Tennessee.
==Politics==
Historically, Middle Tennessee was predominately Democratic following the American Civil War, but the significant minority of African Americans joined the Republican Party. The white-dominated state legislature in the 1880s passed four laws that effectively disenfranchised most blacks and many poor whites, particularly due to the requirement of payment of a poll tax in order to register to vote, which reduced the competitiveness of the Republican Party in this part of the state.

=== Government ===
Middle Tennessee is represented by the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th congressional districts.

The Supreme Court building for Middle Tennessee is in Nashville. Similar rules apply to certain other state commissions and boards, as well, to prevent them from showing any geographical biases.

=== Mayoral elections in Middle Tennessee ===

* Mayoral elections in Clarksville, Tennessee
* Mayoral elections in Murfreesboro, Tennessee

=== Nashville ===

* 2015 Nashville mayoral election
* 2018 Nashville mayoral special election
* 2019 Nashville mayoral election
* 2023 Nashville mayoral election

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
*Travel and Discover Middle Tennessee – the part of the official Tennessee Tourism website dedicated to Middle Tennessee.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6841610" start="0" end="16" title="Middle Tennessee" label="Middle Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594490" start="37" end="65" title="Grand Divisions of Tennessee" label="Grand Divisions of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="270" end="279" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q328941" start="292" end="303" title="Clarksville, Tennessee" label="Clarksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q501766" start="346" end="358" title="Murfreesboro, Tennessee" label="Murfreesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967032" start="433" end="460" title="Nashville metropolitan area" label="Nashville metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628448" start="519" end="536" title="list of metropolitan areas of Tennessee" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127704" start="559" end="588" title="Clarksville metropolitan area" label="Clarksville metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984113" start="809" end="821" title="Highland Rim" label="Highland Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966945" start="854" end="869" title="Nashville Basin" label="Nashville Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="875" end="893" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="995" end="1007" title="Upland South" label="Upland South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1033" end="1039" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="1044" end="1051" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="1109" end="1123" title="Antebellum South" label="antebellum era"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="1168" end="1194" title="Slavery in the United States" label="enslaved African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708738" start="1271" end="1294" title="Tennessee Walking Horse" label="Tennessee Walking Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1409" end="1427" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q366102" start="1649" end="1671" title="Nathan Bedford Forrest" label="Nathan Bedford Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871346" start="1758" end="1780" title="Battle of Johnsonville" label="Battle of Johnsonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272132" start="1900" end="1922" title="Battle of Stones River" label="Battle of Stones River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="1978" end="1992" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="2063" end="2076" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="2480" end="2486" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="2600" end="2604" title="game (hunting)" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="2624" end="2631" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="2632" end="2647" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="2661" end="2681" title="Mississippian period" label="Mississippian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642488" start="2727" end="2735" title="chiefdom" label="chiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710093" start="2802" end="2814" title="Mound Bottom" label="Mound Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q495072" start="2818" end="2833" title="Cheatham County, Tennessee" label="Cheatham County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049584" start="2842" end="2859" title="Castalian Springs Mound Site" label="Castalian Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q506175" start="2868" end="2881" title="Sumner County, Tennessee" label="Sumner County"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="2996" end="3004" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="3013" end="3022" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="3404" end="3420" title="Hernando De Soto" label="Hernando De Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143718" start="3484" end="3500" title="Cumberland River" label="Cumberland River"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="3734" end="3745" title="fur trading" label="fur trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673898" start="3871" end="3882" title="longhunters" label="longhunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="3947" end="3965" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807152" start="3999" end="4017" title="Timothy Demonbreun" label="Timothy Demonbreun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142258" start="4103" end="4118" title="James Robertson (explorer)" label="James Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181366" start="4123" end="4136" title="John Donelson" label="John Donelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971844" start="4173" end="4192" title="Washington District, North Carolina" label="Washington District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471739" start="4270" end="4286" title="Fort Nashborough" label="Fort Nashborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482007" start="4309" end="4321" title="Francis Nash" label="Francis Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="4325" end="4342" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="4350" end="4366" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="4378" end="4404" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193859" start="4445" end="4463" title="Cumberland Compact" label="Cumberland Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193835" start="4487" end="4509" title="Cumberland Association" label="Cumberland Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973025" start="4584" end="4603" title="Watauga Association" label="Watauga Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548588" start="4953" end="4972" title="Southwest Territory" label="Southwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411994" start="5094" end="5116" title="Esteban Rodríguez Miró" label="Esteban Rodríguez Miró"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="5465" end="5479" title="Antebellum South" label="antebellum era"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="5483" end="5490" title="slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966945" start="5584" end="5599" title="Nashville Basin" label="Nashville Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="5625" end="5631" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="5660" end="5667" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="5672" end="5676" title="corn" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984113" start="5700" end="5712" title="Highland Rim" label="Highland Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975563" start="5717" end="5721" title="1860 United States census" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="5830" end="5845" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="5934" end="5943" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q543165" start="6134" end="6155" title="Battle of Fort Sumter" label="attack on Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="6189" end="6198" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="6471" end="6500" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q494970" start="6558" end="6563" title="Wayne County, Tennessee" label="Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q502072" start="6580" end="6585" title="Macon County, Tennessee" label="Macon"/>
<link wikidata="Q494760" start="6590" end="6598" title="Fentress County, Tennessee" label="Fentress"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="6730" end="6746" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="6755" end="6764" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366089" start="6856" end="6866" title="Battle of Fort Henry" label="Fort Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q601359" start="6871" end="6884" title="Battle of Fort Donelson" label="Fort Donelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q541708" start="7161" end="7178" title="William Rosecrans" label="William Rosecrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q689891" start="7186" end="7208" title="Army of the Cumberland" label="Army of the Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q380562" start="7237" end="7250" title="Braxton Bragg" label="Braxton Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q689849" start="7258" end="7275" title="Army of Tennessee" label="Army of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272132" start="7283" end="7305" title="Battle of Stones River" label="Battle of Stones River"/>
<link wikidata="Q501766" start="7309" end="7321" title="Murfreesboro, Tennessee" label="Murfreesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352722" start="7484" end="7499" title="Battle of Dover (1863)" label="Battle of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668116" start="7513" end="7529" title="Abner C. Harding" label="Abner C. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q860220" start="7626" end="7644" title="Tullahoma campaign" label="Tullahoma campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="7713" end="7724" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522212" start="7810" end="7837" title="Franklin–Nashville campaign" label="Franklin–Nashville campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q553533" start="7915" end="7929" title="John Bell Hood" label="John Bell Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="7973" end="7997" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q756118" start="8022" end="8038" title="Atlanta campaign" label="Atlanta campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q370671" start="8098" end="8116" title="Battle of Franklin (1864)" label="Battle of Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q740330" start="8182" end="8195" title="George Henry Thomas" label="George Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752689" start="8203" end="8222" title="Battle of Nashville" label="Battle of Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550735" start="8248" end="8276" title="United States Colored Troops" label="United States Colored Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="8330" end="8344" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="8414" end="8426" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410885" start="8441" end="8448" title="Pulaski, Tennessee" label="Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="8568" end="8583" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="8781" end="8794" title="sharecropping" label="sharecroppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="9115" end="9122" title="Lynching in the United States" label="lynched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="9482" end="9497" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137832" start="9603" end="9614" title="Coal mining in the United States" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300483" start="9806" end="9855" title="Tennessee Centennial and International Exposition" label="Tennessee Centennial and International Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467467" start="9872" end="9890" title="Parthenon (Nashville)" label="full-scale replica"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="9898" end="9907" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="9911" end="9917" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019420" start="9944" end="9966" title="William Crawford Smith" label="William Crawford Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4457388" start="10056" end="10071" title="Centennial Park (Nashville)" label="Centennial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q26977" start="10078" end="10113" title="Great Train Wreck of 1918" label="worst rail accident in U.S. history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305019" start="10179" end="10195" title="head-on collision" label="collided head on"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="10317" end="10331" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="10511" end="10524" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10534" end="10546" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027178" start="10547" end="10559" title="Camp Forrest" label="Camp Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292530" start="10572" end="10581" title="Tullahoma" label="Tullahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="10598" end="10607" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863339" start="10746" end="10767" title="Arnold Air Force Base" label="Arnold Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q639966" start="10773" end="10788" title="Vultee Aircraft" label="Vultee Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675279" start="10977" end="10985" title="Columbia, Tennessee" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11314" end="11326" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="11460" end="11481" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759304" start="11487" end="11509" title="Highlander Research and Education Center" label="Highlander Folk School"/>
<link wikidata="Q646230" start="11515" end="11524" title="Monteagle, Tennessee" label="Monteagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="11595" end="11617" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q545488" start="11619" end="11634" title="Ralph Abernathy" label="Ralph Abernathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45380" start="11636" end="11646" title="John Lewis" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41921" start="11652" end="11662" title="Rosa Parks" label="Rosa Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004512" start="11668" end="11694" title="Nashville Student Movement" label="Nashville Student Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="11733" end="11744" title="nonviolence" label="nonviolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137869" start="11764" end="11776" title="James Lawson (activist)" label="James Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700283" start="11831" end="11848" title="Nashville sit-ins" label="series of sit-ins"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="11993" end="12018" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091971" start="12058" end="12073" title="suburbanization" label="suburbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594490" start="12821" end="12836" title="Grand Divisions (Tennessee)" label="Grand Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329493" start="12896" end="12910" title="East Tennessee" label="East Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986638" start="12915" end="12929" title="West Tennessee" label="West Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="13181" end="13196" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="13320" end="13327" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="13371" end="13378" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086913" start="13383" end="13390" title="Central Time Zone" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143" start="13391" end="13400" title="time zone" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q302165" start="13436" end="13449" title="Hardin County, Tennessee" label="Hardin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986638" start="13539" end="13553" title="West Tennessee" label="West Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q494822" start="13563" end="13570" title="Bledsoe County, Tennessee" label="Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q489056" start="13572" end="13582" title="Cumberland County, Tennessee" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q501968" start="13588" end="13594" title="Marion County, Tennessee" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329493" start="13627" end="13641" title="East Tennessee" label="East Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q502351" start="13696" end="13713" title="Sequatchie County, Tennessee" label="Sequatchie County"/>
<link wikidata="Q494760" start="13863" end="13871" title="Fentress County, Tennessee" label="Fentress"/>
<link wikidata="Q494776" start="13876" end="13883" title="Pickett County, Tennessee" label="Pickett"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="13904" end="13909" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="13921" end="13939" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984113" start="14106" end="14118" title="Highland Rim" label="Highland Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966945" start="14123" end="14138" title="Nashville Basin" label="Nashville Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999574" start="14170" end="14191" title="Interior Low Plateaus" label="Interior Low Plateaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q603872" start="14206" end="14221" title="Interior Plains" label="Interior Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236743" start="14316" end="14331" title="dome (geology)" label="geological dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="14374" end="14383" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="14454" end="14459" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="14473" end="14477" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q188734" start="14501" end="14509" title="sinkhole" label="sinkhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="15129" end="15147" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q620627" start="15168" end="15187" title="Appalachian Plateau" label="Appalachian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="15195" end="15216" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q580889" start="15308" end="15318" title="table (landform)" label="tablelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="15392" end="15401" title="waterfall" label="waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q502386" start="15490" end="15503" title="Grundy County, Tennessee" label="Grundy County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495052" start="15616" end="15623" title="Bedford County, Tennessee" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q494810" start="15625" end="15631" title="Cannon County, Tennessee" label="Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q495072" start="15633" end="15641" title="Cheatham County, Tennessee" label="Cheatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q494818" start="15643" end="15647" title="Clay County, Tennessee" label="Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q495013" start="15649" end="15655" title="Coffee County, Tennessee" label="Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177705" start="15657" end="15665" title="Davidson County, Tennessee" label="Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q494794" start="15667" end="15673" title="DeKalb County, Tennessee" label="DeKalb"/>
<link wikidata="Q494815" start="15675" end="15682" title="Dickson County, Tennessee" label="Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q494760" start="15684" end="15692" title="Fentress County, Tennessee" label="Fentress"/>
<link wikidata="Q494998" start="15694" end="15702" title="Franklin County, Tennessee" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q502479" start="15704" end="15709" title="Giles County, Tennessee" label="Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q502386" start="15711" end="15717" title="Grundy County, Tennessee" label="Grundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q502047" start="15719" end="15726" title="Hickman County, Tennessee" label="Hickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q502368" start="15728" end="15735" title="Houston County, Tennessee" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q502397" start="15737" end="15746" title="Humphreys County, Tennessee" label="Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q490306" start="15748" end="15755" title="Jackson County, Tennessee" label="Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q505968" start="15757" end="15765" title="Lawrence County, Tennessee" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q502077" start="15767" end="15772" title="Lewis County, Tennessee" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q490322" start="15774" end="15781" title="Lincoln County, Tennessee" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q502072" start="15783" end="15788" title="Macon County, Tennessee" label="Macon"/>
<link wikidata="Q495448" start="15790" end="15798" title="Marshall County, Tennessee" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q502393" start="15800" end="15805" title="Maury County, Tennessee" label="Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q502345" start="15807" end="15817" title="Montgomery County, Tennessee" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q494716" start="15819" end="15824" title="Moore County, Tennessee" label="Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q494751" start="15826" end="15833" title="Overton County, Tennessee" label="Overton"/>
<link wikidata="Q501976" start="15835" end="15840" title="Perry County, Tennessee" label="Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q494776" start="15842" end="15849" title="Pickett County, Tennessee" label="Pickett"/>
<link wikidata="Q495045" start="15851" end="15857" title="Putnam County, Tennessee" label="Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q495043" start="15859" end="15868" title="Robertson County, Tennessee" label="Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q502348" start="15870" end="15880" title="Rutherford County, Tennessee" label="Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q502351" start="15882" end="15892" title="Sequatchie County, Tennessee" label="Sequatchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q494634" start="15894" end="15899" title="Smith County, Tennessee" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q501954" start="15901" end="15908" title="Stewart County, Tennessee" label="Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q506175" start="15910" end="15916" title="Sumner County, Tennessee" label="Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q501939" start="15918" end="15927" title="Trousdale County, Tennessee" label="Trousdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q501964" start="15929" end="15938" title="Van Buren County, Tennessee" label="Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q494774" start="15940" end="15946" title="Warren County, Tennessee" label="Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q494970" start="15948" end="15953" title="Wayne County, Tennessee" label="Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q501563" start="15955" end="15960" title="White County, Tennessee" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q501948" start="15962" end="15972" title="Williamson County, Tennessee" label="Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q501606" start="15974" end="15980" title="Wilson County, Tennessee" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q489056" start="16127" end="16144" title="Cumberland County, Tennessee" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="16336" end="16347" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="16448" end="16452" title="2010 United States census" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="16622" end="16640" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329493" start="16714" end="16728" title="East Tennessee" label="East Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967032" start="17046" end="17073" title="Nashville metropolitan area" label="13-county metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q328941" start="17167" end="17178" title="Clarksville, Tennessee" label="Clarksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q501766" start="17363" end="17375" title="Murfreesboro, Tennessee" label="Murfreesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="17559" end="17565" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q984264" start="17625" end="17633" title="Franklin, Tennessee" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q335955" start="17635" end="17649" title="Hendersonville, Tennessee" label="Hendersonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q996433" start="17651" end="17657" title="Smyrna, Tennessee" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495814" start="17659" end="17670" title="Spring Hill, Tennessee" label="Spring Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464943" start="17672" end="17680" title="Gallatin, Tennessee" label="Gallatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523476" start="17682" end="17694" title="Mount Juliet, Tennessee" label="Mount Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520670" start="17696" end="17703" title="Lebanon, Tennessee" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675279" start="17705" end="17713" title="Columbia, Tennessee" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354539" start="17715" end="17722" title="Dickson, Tennessee" label="Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q185323" start="17728" end="17739" title="Springfield, Tennessee" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456192" start="17807" end="17817" title="Cookeville, Tennessee" label="Cookeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969316" start="17866" end="17877" title="Shelbyville, Tennessee" label="Shelbyville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012255" start="18019" end="18029" title="Manchester, Tennessee" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208413" start="18031" end="18042" title="McMinnville, Tennessee" label="McMinnville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292530" start="18044" end="18053" title="Tullahoma, Tennessee" label="Tullahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012613" start="18055" end="18065" title="Winchester, Tennessee" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355638" start="18067" end="18076" title="Lewisburg, Tennessee" label="Lewisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472594" start="18082" end="18094" title="Lawrenceburg, Tennessee" label="Lawrenceburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="18481" end="18504" title="music industry" label="Big Three record labels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969100" start="18587" end="18596" title="Music Row" label="Music Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="18673" end="18686" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630431" start="19015" end="19046" title="Hospital Corporation of America" label="Hospital Corporation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154770" start="19110" end="19134" title="Community Health Systems" label="Community Health Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q28155562" start="19208" end="19227" title="Envision Healthcare" label="Envision Healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914826" start="19229" end="19252" title="Vanguard Health Systems" label="Vanguard Health Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q22021754" start="19254" end="19276" title="Ardent Health Services" label="Ardent Health Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="19528" end="19534" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="19539" end="19545" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="19717" end="19733" title="Caterpillar Inc." label="Caterpillar Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q145168" start="19782" end="19796" title="Dollar General" label="Dollar General"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109925" start="19816" end="19838" title="Tractor Supply Company" label="Tractor Supply Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q104664954" start="19843" end="19851" title="Delek US" label="Delek US"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492609" start="19870" end="19884" title="Cracker Barrel" label="Cracker Barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="19995" end="20001" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43383953" start="20011" end="20028" title="Nissan Smyrna Assembly Plant" label="an assembly plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q996433" start="20032" end="20038" title="Smyrna, Tennessee" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957230" start="20142" end="20149" title="Decherd, Tennessee" label="Decherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="20151" end="20165" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580591" start="20175" end="20192" title="Spring Hill Manufacturing" label="an assembly plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495814" start="20196" end="20207" title="Spring Hill, Tennessee" label="Spring Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q569235" start="20262" end="20280" title="Saturn Corporation" label="Saturn Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="20372" end="20389" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q179433" start="20412" end="20423" title="Bridgestone" label="Bridgestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="20821" end="20829" title="Soybeans" label="Soybeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="20834" end="20841" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208989" start="20885" end="20896" title="beef cattle" label="beef cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="20977" end="20990" title="horticulture" label="horticultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="21042" end="21047" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q494774" start="21050" end="21063" title="Warren County, Tennessee" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708738" start="21343" end="21366" title="Tennessee Walking Horse" label="Tennessee Walking Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="21592" end="21600" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="21635" end="21661" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796942" start="21781" end="21804" title="Cumberland Fossil Plant" label="Cumberland Fossil Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11971441" start="21806" end="21827" title="Gallatin Fossil Plant" label="Gallatin Fossil Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11979092" start="21837" end="21874" title="Johnsonville Combustion Turbine Plant" label="Johnsonville Combustion Turbine Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="22023" end="22060" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650555" start="22123" end="22149" title="Browns Ferry Nuclear Plant" label="Browns Ferry Nuclear Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="22474" end="22488" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q680685" start="22490" end="22527" title="Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q931449" start="22529" end="22545" title="Ryman Auditorium" label="Ryman Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528863" start="22547" end="22594" title="Gaylord Opryland Resort &amp;amp; Convention Center" label="Gaylord Opryland Resort &amp;amp; Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q56754834" start="22596" end="22614" title="Johnny Cash Museum" label="Johnny Cash Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q55453584" start="22616" end="22657" title="National Museum of African American Music" label="National Museum of African American Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504731" start="22659" end="22675" title="Frist Art Museum" label="Frist Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467467" start="22677" end="22690" title="Parthenon (Nashville)" label="The Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700171" start="22696" end="22718" title="Tennessee State Museum" label="Tennessee State Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q371068" start="22724" end="22753" title="Jack Daniel&amp;#x27;s Distillery" label="Jack Daniel&amp;#x27;s Distillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376587" start="22828" end="22841" title="The Hermitage (Nashville, Tennessee)" label="The Hermitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="22855" end="22869" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267741" start="22875" end="22897" title="Belle Meade Plantation" label="Belle Meade Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137070" start="22945" end="22986" title="President James K. Polk Home &amp;amp; Museum" label="President James K. Polk Home &amp;amp; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471081" start="23084" end="23118" title="Fort Donelson National Battlefield" label="Fort Donelson National Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004677" start="23124" end="23129" title="Dover, Tennessee" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619315" start="23135" end="23168" title="Stones River National Battlefield" label="Stones River National Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124628" start="23203" end="23229" title="American Battlefield Trust" label="American Battlefield Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491303" start="23243" end="23263" title="Franklin Battlefield" label="Franklin Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11092129" start="23269" end="23290" title="Natchez Trace Parkway" label="Natchez Trace Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="23603" end="23613" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298359" start="23615" end="23622" title="Belmont University" label="Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798619" start="23624" end="23632" title="Lipscomb University" label="Lipscomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782948" start="23638" end="23653" title="Tennessee State University" label="Tennessee State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700206" start="23684" end="23709" title="Tennessee Technological University" label="Tennessee Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456192" start="23713" end="23723" title="Cookeville, Tennessee" label="Cookeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q781153" start="23758" end="23786" title="Austin Peay State University" label="Austin Peay State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458159" start="23807" end="23830" title="Sewanee, The University of the South" label="University of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987614" start="23834" end="23841" title="Sewanee, Tennessee" label="Sewanee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143711" start="23843" end="23864" title="Cumberland University" label="Cumberland University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520670" start="23868" end="23875" title="Lebanon, Tennessee" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776185" start="23877" end="23909" title="University of Tennessee Southern" label="University of Tennessee Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410885" start="23913" end="23920" title="Pulaski, Tennessee" label="Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784748" start="23925" end="23958" title="Middle Tennessee State University" label="Middle Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="24065" end="24088" title="University of Tennessee" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="24178" end="24188" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986638" start="24279" end="24293" title="West Tennessee" label="West Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329493" start="24299" end="24313" title="East Tennessee" label="East Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594490" start="24341" end="24356" title="Grand Divisions (Tennessee)" label="Grand Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164235" start="24375" end="24403" title="Tennessee State Constitution" label="Tennessee State Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700202" start="24429" end="24448" title="Tennessee Supreme Court" label="state supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="24643" end="24652" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="24804" end="24813" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445893" start="24952" end="24965" title="Interstate 40 in Tennessee" label="Interstate 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446314" start="25085" end="25098" title="Interstate 65 in Tennessee" label="Interstate 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096621" start="25214" end="25223" title="Brentwood, Tennessee" label="Brentwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q984264" start="25225" end="25233" title="Franklin, Tennessee" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495814" start="25239" end="25250" title="Spring Hill, Tennessee" label="Spring Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q93753" start="25252" end="25265" title="Interstate 24 in Tennessee" label="Interstate 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025773" start="25412" end="25421" title="La Vergne, Tennessee" label="La Vergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q996433" start="25423" end="25429" title="Smyrna, Tennessee" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q501766" start="25435" end="25447" title="Murfreesboro, Tennessee" label="Murfreesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451266" start="25493" end="25498" title="Interstate 440 (Tennessee)" label="I-440"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455070" start="25549" end="25554" title="Interstate 840 (Tennessee)" label="I-840"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503399" start="25692" end="25707" title="Tennessee State Route 155" label="State Route 155"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25778" end="25795" title="U.S. Route 31E#Tennessee" label="Ellington Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q409476" start="25805" end="25819" title="U.S. Route 31E" label="U.S. Route 31E"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503562" start="25843" end="25849" title="Tennessee State Route 386" label="SR 386"/>
<link wikidata="Q335955" start="25934" end="25948" title="Hendersonville, Tennessee" label="Hendersonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464943" start="25953" end="25961" title="Gallatin, Tennessee" label="Gallatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503566" start="25967" end="25973" title="Tennessee State Route 396" label="SR 396"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580591" start="26027" end="26047" title="Spring Hill Manufacturing" label="General Motors plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q800459" start="26138" end="26161" title="National Highway System (United States)" label="National Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q20486941" start="26179" end="26190" title="List of U.S. Highways in Tennessee" label="U.S. Routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q409624" start="26191" end="26193" title="U.S. Route 43 in Tennessee" label="43"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073719" start="26195" end="26197" title="U.S. Route 64 in Tennessee" label="64"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818148" start="26199" end="26202" title="U.S. Route 70S" label="70S"/>
<link wikidata="Q43079344" start="26204" end="26206" title="U.S. Route 79 in Tennessee" label="79"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073716" start="26212" end="26215" title="U.S. Route 231 in Tennessee" label="231"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503207" start="26221" end="26233" title="List of state routes in Tennessee" label="State Routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503602" start="26234" end="26236" title="Tennessee State Route 55" label="55"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503366" start="26241" end="26244" title="Tennessee State Route 111" label="111"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432146" start="26274" end="26305" title="Nashville International Airport" label="Nashville International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941488" start="26391" end="26400" title="WeGo Star" label="WeGo Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="26406" end="26419" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="26501" end="26519" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q519608" start="26583" end="26602" title="classification yard" label="classification yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034873" start="26681" end="26690" title="Inland waterways of the United States" label="navigable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="26799" end="26817" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="26983" end="27010" title="Disfranchisement after Reconstruction era" label="disenfranchised most blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="27085" end="27093" title="Poll tax (United States)" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="27165" end="27181" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699990" start="27268" end="27271" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="4th"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699991" start="27273" end="27276" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 5th congressional district" label="5th"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699994" start="27278" end="27281" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="6th"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699995" start="27287" end="27290" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="7th"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700202" start="27321" end="27334" title="Tennessee Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="27371" end="27380" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q124485966" start="27562" end="27605" title="Mayoral elections in Clarksville, Tennessee" label="Mayoral elections in Clarksville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q124485871" start="27608" end="27652" title="Mayoral elections in Murfreesboro, Tennessee" label="Mayoral elections in Murfreesboro, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702410" start="27675" end="27706" title="2015 Nashville mayoral election" label="2015 Nashville mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316382" start="27709" end="27748" title="2018 Nashville mayoral special election" label="2018 Nashville mayoral special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q60523389" start="27751" end="27782" title="2019 Nashville mayoral election" label="2019 Nashville mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q113101273" start="27785" end="27816" title="2023 Nashville mayoral election" label="2023 Nashville mayoral election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646771" wikidata="Q434710" url="?curid=646771" title="Clear Channel memorandum">
<text>Following the September 11 attacks in 2001, Clear Channel Communications (now iHeartMedia), the largest owner of radio stations in the United States, circulated an internal memorandum containing a list of songs that program directors felt were &quot;lyrically questionable&quot; to play in the aftermath of the attacks.

During the time immediately after the attacks, many television and radio stations altered normal programming in response to the events, and the rumor spread that Clear Channel and its subsidiaries had established a list of songs with lyrics Clear Channel deemed &quot;questionable.&quot; The list was not an explicit demand not to play the songs listed, but rather a suggestion that they &quot;might not want to play these songs.&quot; The list was made public by the independent radio industry newsletter &quot;Hits Daily Double&quot;, which was not affiliated with iHeartMedia. &quot;Snopes.com&quot; did research on the subject and concluded that the list did exist as a suggestion for radio stations but noted that it was not an outright ban on the songs in question. The compiled list was the subject of media attention around the time of its release.

The list contains 165 suggestions, including a single suggestion for each song in Rage Against the Machine&#x27;s entire catalogue at the time (49 songs) and covers of certain songs (such as Bob Dylan&#x27;s &quot;Knockin&#x27; on Heaven&#x27;s Door&quot; and the cover by Guns N&#x27; Roses). In some cases, only certain covers were included on the list: for example, the cover of &quot;Smooth Criminal&quot; by Alien Ant Farm is on the list while the original Michael Jackson recording is not; conversely, Martha and the Vandellas&#x27; original version of &quot;Dancing in the Street&quot; and Van Halen&#x27;s cover are included, but David Bowie and Mick Jagger&#x27;s cover is not.

==Reasons for inclusions==
The Clear Channel memorandum contains songs that, in their titles or lyrics, vaguely refer to open subjects intertwined with the September 11 attacks, such as airplanes, collisions, death, conflict, violence, explosions, the month of September, Tuesday (the day of the week the attacks occurred) and New York City, as well as general concepts that could be connected to aspects of the attacks, such as the Middle East, the sky falling, and weapons. Also included under the ban were several happy and celebratory songs (including Louis Armstrong&#x27;s &quot;What a Wonderful World&quot;), as Clear Channel believed playing joyful music in the aftermath of the attacks was inappropriate.

WASH, a Clear Channel-owned station in Washington, D.C., reportedly played Kool &amp; the Gang&#x27;s &quot;Celebration&quot; while the memorandum was being circulated, &quot;which brought a polite if reproachful call from one listener, who was assured by the station the song&#x27;s broadcast was a mistake.&quot;

==List of songs==


== See also ==
*List of songs about the September 11 attacks
*List of songs banned by the BBC
*Music censorship

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
*

==External links==
*Clear Channel memorandum playlist on YouTube (up to 202 videos available)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="14" end="34" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="78" end="89" title="iHeartMedia" label="iHeartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281174" start="113" end="148" title="Radio in the United States" label="radio stations in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q660651" start="173" end="183" title="memorandum" label="memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690764" start="294" end="318" title="Aftermath of the September 11 attacks" label="aftermath of the attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q19572107" start="833" end="850" title="Hits (magazine)" label="Hits Daily Double"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287154" start="907" end="917" title="Snopes.com" label="Snopes.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="1261" end="1285" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="1337" end="1343" title="Cover version" label="covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="1370" end="1379" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q743986" start="1393" end="1428" title="Knockin&amp;#x27; on Heaven&amp;#x27;s Door" label="Knockin&amp;#x27; on Heaven&amp;#x27;s Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="1452" end="1470" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q326287" start="1567" end="1582" title="Smooth Criminal" label="Smooth Criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q857965" start="1592" end="1606" title="Alien Ant Farm" label="Alien Ant Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="1641" end="1656" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326522" start="1687" end="1711" title="Martha and the Vandellas" label="Martha and the Vandellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159366" start="1744" end="1765" title="Dancing in the Street" label="Dancing in the Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="1776" end="1785" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="1817" end="1828" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="1833" end="1844" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q123" start="2128" end="2137" title="September" label="September"/>
<link wikidata="Q127" start="2139" end="2146" title="Tuesday" label="Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2194" end="2207" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="2423" end="2438" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q944632" start="2452" end="2474" title="What a Wonderful World" label="What a Wonderful World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946745" start="2582" end="2586" title="WASH (FM)" label="WASH"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2621" end="2637" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q850290" start="2657" end="2676" title="Kool &amp;amp; the Gang" label="Kool &amp;amp; the Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q859298" start="2690" end="2701" title="Celebration (Kool &amp;amp; the Gang song)" label="Celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q608630" start="2934" end="2978" title="List of songs about the September 11 attacks" label="List of songs about the September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247682" start="2980" end="3011" title="List of songs banned by the BBC" label="List of songs banned by the BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357923" start="3013" end="3029" title="Music censorship" label="Music censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="3130" end="3137" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646775" wikidata="Q8054881" url="?curid=646775" title="Yonah">
<text>Yonah may refer to:

* Yonah (microprocessor), a code name for a processor in Intel&#x27;s Pentium M line
* &quot;The Yonah&quot; (locomotive), a steam locomotive in the Great Locomotive Chase during the American Civil War
* Yonah, Georgia
* Yonah Gerondi (died 1264), Catalan rabbi
* Yonah Martin (born 1965), Korean-Canadian senator
* Yonah Mountain, a mountain in northern Georgia, United States
* Lake Yonah, on the Georgia – South Carolina border in the United States
* the English transliteration for &quot;Jonah&quot; (יונה) in Hebrew and means &quot;dove&quot;

==See also==
* Yona
* Yuna (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8054881" start="0" end="5" title="Yonah" label="Yonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572526" start="23" end="45" title="Yonah (microprocessor)" label="Yonah (microprocessor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776715" start="108" end="142" title="The Yonah (locomotive)" label="&amp;quot;The Yonah&amp;quot; (locomotive)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16108948" start="225" end="239" title="Yonah, Georgia" label="Yonah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371903" start="242" end="255" title="Yonah Gerondi" label="Yonah Gerondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054885" start="285" end="297" title="Yonah Martin" label="Yonah Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054884" start="337" end="351" title="Yonah Mountain" label="Yonah Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478588" start="401" end="411" title="Lake Yonah" label="Lake Yonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468262" start="513" end="518" title="Jonah" label="Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642049" start="585" end="589" title="Yona" label="Yona"/>
<link wikidata="Q350510" start="592" end="613" title="Yuna (disambiguation)" label="Yuna (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646788" wikidata="Q868165" url="?curid=646788" title="Yahoo Mail">
<text>Yahoo! Mail (also written as Yahoo Mail) is an email service offered by the American company Yahoo, Inc. The service is free for personal use, with an optional monthly fee for additional features. Business email was previously available with the Yahoo! Small Business brand, before it transitioned to Verizon Small Business Essentials in early 2022. Launched on October 8, 1997, as of January 2020, Yahoo! Mail has 225 million users.

Users are able to access and manage their mailboxes using webmail interface, accessible using a standard web browser. Some accounts also supported the use of standard mail protocols (POP3 and SMTP). Since 2015, users can also connect non-Yahoo e-mail accounts to the webmail client.

New Yahoo! Mail accounts, and most of the service&#x27;s accounts, use codice_1 as the email suffix. Previously, users could choose codice_2 or codice_3 as a suffix, or one of several country-specific suffixes. Many countries were available, such as codice_4 in the United Kingdom, codice_5 in France (also used by francophones) and codice_6 in Italy. While these suffixes are discontinued for new accounts, they are preserved for existing accounts. Yahoo! Japan Mail, a separate service, offers both codice_7 and codice_8 as suffixes. Internet service providers using Yahoo! Mail offer their own suffixes for subscribers, with AT&amp;T also offering free accounts to non-subscribers.

==History==
===1997–2002===
Yahoo! made a deal with the online communications company Four11 for co-branded white pages. Marvin Gavin, who worked at Four11 as the director of international business development, said &quot;We always had a bias about being acquired by Yahoo. They were more entrepreneurial than Microsoft. We had a great cultural fit – it made a lot of sense.&quot; In the end, Yahoo! acquired Four11 for $96 million. The purpose behind acquiring Four11 was the company&#x27;s RocketMail webmail service, which launched in 1997. Yahoo! announced the acquisition on October 8, 1997, close to the time that Yahoo! Mail was launched. Yahoo! chose acquisition rather than internal platform development, because, as Healy said, &quot;Hotmail was growing at thousands and thousands users per week. We did an analysis. For us to build, it would have taken four to six months, and by then, so many users would have taken an email account. The speed of the market was critical.&quot;

The transition to Yahoo! Mail was not easy for many Rocketmail users. On March 21, 2002, Yahoo! eliminated free software client access and introduced the $29.99 per year Mail Forwarding Service. Mary Osako, a Yahoo! Spokeswoman, told CNET, &quot;For-pay services on Yahoo!, originally launched in February 1999, have experienced great acceptance from our base of active registered users, and we expect this adoption to continue to grow.&quot;

===2002–2010===

During 2002, the Yahoo! network was gradually redesigned. On July 2, 2002, the company website was changed, and it was announced that Yahoo! Mail and other services would also be redesigned. Along with this new design, new features were to be implemented, including drop-down menus in DHTML, different category tabs, and a new user-customizable color scheme. Yahoo! Network Services senior vice president Geoff Ralston stated that


On July 9, 2004, Yahoo! acquired Oddpost, a webmail service which simulated a desktop email client. Oddpost had features such as drag-and-drop support, right-click menus, RSS feeds, a preview pane, and increased speed using email caching to shorten response time. Many of the features were incorporated into an updated Yahoo! Mail service.

====Competition====
On April 1, 2004, Google announced its Gmail service with 1 GB of storage, however Gmail&#x27;s invitation-only accounts kept the other webmail services at the forefront. Most major webmail providers, including Yahoo! Mail, increased their mailbox storage in response. Yahoo! first announced 100 MB of storage for basic accounts and 2 GB of storage for premium users. However, soon Yahoo! Mail increased its free storage quota to 1 GB, before eventually allowing unlimited storage. Yahoo! Mail had free unlimited storage from March 27, 2007, until October 8, 2013.

===2011–present===
On September 17, 2010, Yahoo! showed off a new Mail program to reporters. Codenamed &quot;Minty&quot;, the 2011 release was announced on September 16, 2010. It included a new interface, enhanced performance, improved Facebook and Twitter integration, the ability to watch YouTube videos straight from email, and improved search. Public beta began on October 26, 2010. In May 2011, the new Yahoo! Mail became the default interface. As the new interface became mandatory for users, some users of Yahoo! Mail reported slow typing speeds, contradicting Yahoo&#x27;s claims of faster performance. Yahoo! offered no resolution to the problem . Users also missed the ability to paste textual email addresses into the sender box. The new version disabled the use of the &quot;secondary&quot; addresses provided in the previous version. The new interface overrode the browser&#x27;s right mouse button (making functions such as opening mails in new tab windows unavailable).

In 2013, Yahoo! redesigned the site and removed several features, such as simultaneously opening multiple emails in tabs, sorting by sender name, and dragging mails to folders. The new email interface was geared to give an improved user-experience for mobile devices, but was criticized for having an inferior desktop interface. Many users objected to the unannounced nature of the changes through an online post asking Yahoo! to bring back mail tabs with one hundred thousand voting and nearly ten thousand commenting. The redesign produced a problem that caused an unknown number of users to lose access to their accounts for several weeks.

In December 2013, Yahoo! Mail suffered a major outage where approximately one million users, one percent of the site&#x27;s total users, could not access their emails for several days. Then Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer publicly apologized to the site&#x27;s users.

China Yahoo! Mail officially announced its shutdown on April 18, 2013. Users were warned that all emails, contacts, and account settings would be inaccessible, unless users migrated to the American version of Yahoo! Mail. Individuals who made China Yahoo! Mail accounts during the Alibaba takeover were required to create new accounts under new usernames.

In January 2014, an undisclosed number of usernames and passwords were released to hackers, following a security breach that Yahoo! believed had occurred through a third-party website. Yahoo! contacted affected users and requested that passwords be changed.

In October 2015, Yahoo! updated the mail service with a &quot;more subtle&quot; redesign, as well as improved mobile features. The same release introduced the Yahoo! Account Key, a smartphone-based replacement for password logins.

In 2017, Yahoo! again redesigned the web interface with a &quot;more minimal&quot; look, and introduced the option to customize it with different color themes and layouts.

In 2020, Yahoo! added a feature to view NFL matches.

== User interface ==
As many as three web interfaces were available at any given time. The traditional &quot;Yahoo! Mail Classic&quot; preserved the availability of their original 1997 interface until July 2013 in North America. A 2005 version included a new Ajax interface, drag-and-drop, improved search, keyboard shortcuts, address auto-completion, and tabs. However, other features were removed, such as column widths and one click delete-move-to-next. In October 2010, Yahoo! released a beta version of Yahoo! Mail, which included improvements to performance, search, and Facebook integration. In May 2011, this became the default interface. Their current Webmail interface was introduced in 2017.

==Spam policy==

Yahoo! Mail is often used by spammers to provide a &quot;remove me&quot; email address. Often, these addresses are used to verify the recipient&#x27;s address, thus opening the door for more spam.

Yahoo! does not tolerate this practice and terminates accounts connected with spam-related activities without warning, causing spammers to lose access to any other Yahoo! services connected with their ID under the Terms of Service. Additionally, Yahoo! stresses that its servers are based in California and any spam-related activity which uses its servers could potentially violate that state&#x27;s anti-spam laws.

In February 2006, Yahoo! announced its decision (along with AOL) to give some organizations the option to &quot;certify&quot; mail by paying up to one cent for each outgoing message, allowing the mail in question to bypass inbound spam filters.

===Filters===
In order to prevent abuse, in 2002 Yahoo! Mail activated filters which changed certain words (that could trigger unwanted JavaScript events) and word fragments into other words. &quot;mocha&quot; was changed to &quot;espresso&quot;, &quot;expression&quot; became &quot;statement&quot;, and &quot;eval&quot; (short for &quot;evaluation&quot;) became &quot;review&quot;. This resulted in many unintended corrections, such as &quot;prevent&quot; (prevalent), &quot;revalidation&quot; (evaluation) and &quot;media review&quot; (medieval).

When asked about these changes, Yahoo! explained that the changed words were common terms used in their privacy dashboard and were blacklisted to prevent hackers from sending damaging commands via the program&#x27;s HTML function. Starting before February 7, 2006, Yahoo! Mail ended the practice, and began to add an underscore as a prefix to certain suspicious words and word fragments.

===Greylisting===

Incoming mail to Yahoo! addresses can be subjected to deferred delivery as part of Yahoo&#x27;s incoming spam controls. This can delay delivery of mail sent to Yahoo! addresses without the sender or recipients being aware of it. The deferral is typically of short duration, but may extend up to several hours. Yahoo! does not specifically document this policy in detail, although some information is available.

==Controversies==
===Shi Tao arrest===
In 2004, Yahoo&#x27;s Hong Kong office provided technical information to the Chinese authorities about the account of journalist Shi Tao, who was subsequently sentenced to ten years&#x27; imprisonment for &quot;leaking state secrets&quot;. Yahoo! was criticized by Reporters Without Borders for acting as a &quot;police informant&quot; to increase its profits. In August 2007, the United States Congress began an investigation into Yahoo&#x27;s handling of the case. Yahoo! founder Jerry Yang testified before Congress. On November 6, 2007, the congressional panel criticized Yahoo! for not giving full details to the House Foreign Affairs Committee the previous year, stating it had been &quot;at best inexcusably negligent&quot; and at worst &quot;deceptive&quot;. Representative Tom Lantos described its executives as moral &quot;pygmies&quot;. Yang stated that Yahoo! no longer controlled its Chinese operations, and was collaborating with human rights groups to formulate ethical code for technology companies.

In a February 2006 hearing, Yahoo! executives swore that they had received no information about the investigation. Several months later, it was discovered that the document provided to Yahoo! China on April 22, 2004, by the Beijing State Security Bureau stated that &quot;Your office is in possession of the following items relating to a case of suspected illegal provision of state secrets to foreign entities.&quot;

On November 13, 2007, Yahoo! settled with Shi for an undisclosed sum. Shi was released from prison in September 2013.

===Username bans===
On February 20, 2006, it was revealed that Yahoo! Mail was banning the word &quot;Allah&quot; in email usernames, both separately and as part of a user name such as codice_9. Shortly after the news of the ban, it was lifted on February 23, 2006. Along with this action, Yahoo! also made the following statement:

===Exploit===
In November 2012, an exploit for Yahoo! Mail was sold for $700 by an Egyptian hacker, allowing hijackers to hack Yahoo! Mail user accounts and redirect users to a malicious website. The attack used cross-site scripting which let hackers steal cookies. In January 2013, hacker and security researcher Shahin Ramezany pointed out another DOM-based XSS loophole that placed 400 million users at risk.

===Deletion of accounts===
In 2013, Yahoo! deleted accounts that hadn&#x27;t been logged into for more than 12 months and gave those names to other users. This included accounts that had set up email forwarding to other accounts, who didn&#x27;t notice and act upon the message to preserve their account. Spillover from this action resulted in some users losing access to accounts on other services as their email resets were no longer forwarded to them, but to the new owner of their former account.

===Phishing attack===
From 2007, Yahoo! was the email service used by New Zealand Telecom, which came under criticism in early 2013 following a spam and phishing attack that was described as the biggest to have ever hit the country. Telecom and Yahoo! automatically reset &quot;about 60,000&quot; users&#x27; passwords. In April, Telecom announced that despite the issue, it would retain Yahoo! as an email provider.

===Account theft===
On October 3, 2017, Yahoo! reported that all Yahoo! user accounts, approximately 3 billion, were affected by the previously announced August 2013 theft of accounts. This information updates the December 14, 2016, announcement that more than 1 billion user accounts were hacked in a breach that had occurred in 2013. Earlier that year in September, Yahoo! announced that an additional 500 million user accounts had been breached in 2014. The company was said to have discovered about the breach that affected hundreds of millions of accounts years before their initial announcement.

===Automated scanning of email content===
The contents of Yahoo! Mail messages are scanned for the purposes of targeted advertising, in contrast to its main competitors Gmail (which ended the practice in late 2017) and Outlook.com (which did not employ the practice).

=== Content sharing with the National Security Agency ===
In 2015, Reuters reported that Yahoo! has implemented a functionality to scan all incoming emails for specific keywords and share email content in real time with the US National Security Agency.

==Platforms==
The mobile app for Yahoo! Mail can be downloaded from the App Store for iOS, and the Google Play Store for Android. Both versions of the app perform the same function, but are tailored to the mobile device&#x27;s operating system. Some characteristics include replying to a message by opening a notification and separately archiving, deleting and starring notifications. It is available in several languages.

==See also==
* Comparison of webmail providers
* List of Yahoo!-owned sites and services

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q868165" start="0" end="11" title="Yahoo Mail" label="Yahoo! Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q868165" start="29" end="39" title="Yahoo Mail" label="Yahoo Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="47" end="52" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q29231846" start="93" end="104" title="Yahoo (2017–present)" label="Yahoo, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="301" end="308" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q327618" start="493" end="510" title="webmail" label="webmail interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="540" end="551" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268005" start="618" end="622" title="Post Office Protocol" label="POP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q160453" start="627" end="631" title="Simple Mail Transfer Protocol" label="SMTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146428" start="1169" end="1181" title="Yahoo! Japan" label="Yahoo! Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="1255" end="1280" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q108085506" start="1347" end="1355" title="AT&amp;amp;T Internet Services" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435873" start="1491" end="1497" title="Four11" label="Four11"/>
<link wikidata="Q591565" start="1897" end="1907" title="RocketMail" label="RocketMail"/>
<link wikidata="Q380153" start="3142" end="3147" title="DHTML" label="DHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077519" start="3323" end="3330" title="Oddpost" label="Oddpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q9334" start="3690" end="3695" title="Gmail" label="Gmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926048" start="5110" end="5128" title="right mouse button" label="right mouse button"/>
<link wikidata="Q14086" start="6048" end="6061" title="Marissa Mayer" label="Marissa Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q327618" start="7222" end="7236" title="Webmail" label="web interfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q134471" start="7443" end="7447" title="Ajax (programming)" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="7761" end="7769" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512320" start="7934" end="7942" title="email spam" label="spammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="8902" end="8912" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9076" end="9080" title="#EvalJavaScript" label="eval"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="9532" end="9536" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q11199" start="9633" end="9643" title="underscore" label="underscore"/>
<link wikidata="Q981524" start="10304" end="10311" title="Shi Tao (journalist)" label="Shi Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="10440" end="10465" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="10556" end="10578" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q215284" start="10657" end="10667" title="Jerry Yang (entrepreneur)" label="Jerry Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973577" start="10793" end="10824" title="House Foreign Affairs Committee" label="House Foreign Affairs Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q160717" start="10957" end="10967" title="Tom Lantos" label="Tom Lantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q97162131" start="11416" end="11445" title="Beijing State Security Bureau" label="Beijing State Security Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="11832" end="11837" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q371199" start="12275" end="12295" title="cross-site scripting" label="cross-site scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q135005" start="13131" end="13139" title="phishing" label="phishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628411" start="14110" end="14130" title="targeted advertising" label="targeted advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q9334" start="14168" end="14173" title="Gmail" label="Gmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q219136" start="14218" end="14229" title="Outlook.com" label="Outlook.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="14335" end="14342" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="14495" end="14519" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q368215" start="14594" end="14603" title="App Store (iOS)" label="App Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="14608" end="14611" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79576" start="14621" end="14632" title="Google Play" label="Google Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="14643" end="14650" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q714009" start="14961" end="14992" title="Comparison of webmail providers" label="Comparison of webmail providers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604527" start="14995" end="15034" title="List of Yahoo!-owned sites and services" label="List of Yahoo!-owned sites and services"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646789" wikidata="Q1748235" url="?curid=646789" title="Plantaginaceae">
<text>Plantaginaceae, the plantain family or veronica family, is a large, diverse family of flowering plants in the order Lamiales that includes common flowers such as snapdragon and foxglove. It is unrelated to the banana-like fruit also called &quot;plantain&quot;. In older classifications, Plantaginaceae was the only family of the order Plantaginales, but numerous phylogenetic studies, summarized by the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group, have demonstrated that this taxon should be included within Lamiales.

==Overview==
The plantain family as traditionally circumscribed consisted of only three genera: &quot;Bougueria&quot;, &quot;Littorella&quot;, and &quot;Plantago&quot;. However phylogenetic research has indicated that Plantaginaceae &quot;sensu stricto&quot; (in the strict sense) were nested within Scrophulariaceae (but forming a group that did not include the type genus of that family, &quot;Scrophularia&quot;). Although Veronicaceae (1782) is the oldest family name for this group, Plantaginaceae (1789) is a conserved name under the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN) and thus has priority over any earlier family name for a family including &quot;Plantago&quot;. Furthermore, the ICBN does not consider family names published before 1789 to be names eligible for conservation, thus ruling out Veronicaceae. The name Antirrhinaceae has been proposed for conservation over Plantaginaceae. In the meantime, the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group has accepted the name Plantaginaceae. However, Olmstead (2003) chose to use the name Veronicaceae, a later synonym. The Plantaginaceae is additionally called the veronica family in English.

A group of genera including &quot;Lindernia&quot; has now been segregated as the family Linderniaceae, which is recognized by Haston &quot;et al.&quot; 2007 (also known as LAPG II) as &quot;Post-APG II family&quot;.

Plantaginaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot; (in the broad sense) are a diverse, cosmopolitan family, occurring mostly in temperate zones. The group consists of herbs, shrubs and also a few aquatic plants with roots (such as the genus &quot;Callitriche&quot;). As the family is so diverse, its circumscription is difficult to establish.

The leaves are spiral to opposite and simple to compound. Unusual in Lamiales is the absence of vertical partitions in the heads of the glandular hairs.

The structure and form of the flowers is variable. Some genera are 4-merous (i.e., with 4 sepals and 4 petals), such as &quot;Aragoa&quot; (but this one has 5 sepals); others are 5- to 8-merous, such as &quot;Sibthorpia&quot;. The flowers of most genera are polysymmetric. The corolla is often two-lipped. In some taxa, the androecium is formed before the corolla.

The fruit is a loculicidal capsule, dehiscing through the partitions between the cells.

==Genera==
The enlarged Plantaginaceae consists of 107 genera and about 1,900 species. The largest genus is &quot;Veronica&quot;, with about 450 species. &quot;Veronica&quot; also includes the genera &quot;Hebe&quot;, &quot;Parahebe&quot; and &quot;Synthyris&quot;, formerly often treated as distinct. All genera of Plantaginaceae were formerly included in Scrophulariaceae except where otherwise stated.

Although GRIN includes &quot;Lafuentea&quot; in the tribe Antirrhineae, in the phylogenetic analysis of Fernández-Mazuecos &quot;et al.&quot; (2013) it was a sister to the Antirrhineae, as also noted by Albach (2005). For the time being it should be considered an outgroup.

===Excluded genera===
==References==

==Bibliography==
* Vargas P, JA Rosselló, R Oyama, J Güemes. 2004 Molecular evidence for naturalness of genera in the tribe Antirrhineae (Scrophulariaceae) and three independent evolutionary lineages from the New World and the Old. Plant Syst Evol 249:151–172.

==External links==
* 
* Treatment of Plantaginaceae in MOBOT</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1748235" start="0" end="14" title="Plantaginaceae" label="Plantaginaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748235" start="20" end="35" title="Plantaginaceae" label="plantain family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748235" start="39" end="54" title="Plantaginaceae" label="veronica family"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="76" end="82" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q21742" start="116" end="124" title="Lamiales" label="Lamiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q157646" start="162" end="172" title="Antirrhinum" label="snapdragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q156533" start="177" end="185" title="Digitalis" label="foxglove"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993249" start="210" end="227" title="true plantains" label="banana-like fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748235" start="336" end="349" title="Plantaginaceae" label="Plantaginales"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="404" end="430" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q21742" start="492" end="500" title="Lamiales" label="Lamiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221060" start="605" end="614" title="Bougueria" label="Bougueria"/>
<link wikidata="Q159381" start="628" end="638" title="Littorella" label="Littorella"/>
<link wikidata="Q164686" start="656" end="664" title="Plantago" label="Plantago"/>
<link wikidata="Q53473" start="803" end="819" title="Scrophulariaceae" label="Scrophulariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q53470" start="899" end="911" title="Scrophularia" label="Scrophularia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693148" start="1043" end="1087" title="International Code of Botanical Nomenclature" label="International Code of Botanical Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q164686" start="1175" end="1183" title="Plantago" label="Plantago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918981" start="1688" end="1697" title="Lindernia" label="Lindernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446323" start="1717" end="1727" title="segregate (taxonomy)" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q648186" start="1742" end="1755" title="Linderniaceae" label="Linderniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="1945" end="1964" title="cosmopolitan family" label="cosmopolitan family"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="2025" end="2029" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="2032" end="2037" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="2054" end="2067" title="aquatic plant" label="aquatic plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="2074" end="2078" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q156846" start="2105" end="2116" title="Callitriche" label="Callitriche"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2206" end="2212" title="Leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9647" start="2338" end="2343" title="gland" label="gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="2386" end="2392" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395661" start="2423" end="2431" title="merosity" label="4-merous"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="2446" end="2451" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="2459" end="2464" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="2633" end="2640" title="Corolla (flower)" label="corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="2680" end="2690" title="androecium" label="androecium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="2726" end="2731" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q147768" start="2749" end="2756" title="capsule (fruit)" label="capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704821" start="2758" end="2767" title="Dehiscence (botany)" label="dehiscing"/>
<link wikidata="Q53473" start="3168" end="3184" title="Scrophulariaceae" label="Scrophulariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590088" start="3226" end="3230" title="Germplasm Resources Information Network" label="GRIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5854410" start="3246" end="3255" title="Lafuentea" label="Lafuentea"/>
<link wikidata="Q842917" start="3481" end="3489" title="Outgroup (cladistics)" label="outgroup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646790" wikidata="Q7039182" url="?curid=646790" title="Ninth Amendment">
<text>Ninth Amendment may refer to the:
*Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution, part of the Bill of Rights
*Ninth Amendment of the Constitution of India, 1961 amendment allowing transfer of territory to Pakistan in Berubari, West Bengal following certain treaties between the countries including the Nehru-Noon Agreement relating to India-East Pakistan enclaves
*Ninth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland, extended the right to vote to certain non-citizens
*Ninth Amendment of the Constitution of South Africa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q275898" start="35" end="84" title="Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348321" start="114" end="158" title="Ninth Amendment of the Constitution of India" label="Ninth Amendment of the Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q118875908" start="221" end="242" title="Berubari, West Bengal" label="Berubari, West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q645659" start="339" end="367" title="India-Bangladesh enclaves" label="India-East Pakistan enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147018" start="369" end="415" title="Ninth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Ninth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039184" start="469" end="520" title="Ninth Amendment of the Constitution of South Africa" label="Ninth Amendment of the Constitution of South Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646796" wikidata="Q1476057" url="?curid=646796" title="Regula falsi">
<text>In mathematics, the regula falsi, method of false position, or false position method is a very old method for solving an equation with one unknown; this method, in modified form, is still in use. In simple terms, the method is the trial and error technique of using test (&quot;false&quot;) values for the variable and then adjusting the test value according to the outcome. This is sometimes also referred to as &quot;guess and check&quot;. Versions of the method predate the advent of algebra and the use of equations.

As an example, consider problem 26 in the Rhind papyrus, which asks for a solution of (written in modern notation) the equation . This is solved by false position. First, guess that to obtain, on the left, . This guess is a good choice since it produces an integer value. However, 4 is not the solution of the original equation, as it gives a value which is three times too small. To compensate, multiply (currently set to 4) by 3 and substitute again to get , verifying that the solution is .

Modern versions of the technique employ systematic ways of choosing new test values and are concerned with the questions of whether or not an approximation to a solution can be obtained, and if it can, how fast can the approximation be found.

==Two historical types==

Two basic types of false position method can be distinguished historically, &quot;simple false position&quot; and &quot;double false position&quot;.

&quot;Simple false position&quot; is aimed at solving problems involving direct proportion. Such problems can be written algebraically in the form: determine such that
:formula_1
if and are known. The method begins by using a test input value , and finding the corresponding output value by multiplication: . The correct answer is then found by proportional adjustment, .

&quot;Double false position&quot; is aimed at solving more difficult problems that can be written algebraically in the form: determine such that
:formula_2
if it is known that
:formula_3
Double false position is mathematically equivalent to linear interpolation. By using a pair of test inputs and the corresponding pair of outputs, the result of this algorithm given by,
:formula_4
would be memorized and carried out by rote. Indeed, the rule as given by Robert Recorde in his &quot;Ground of Artes&quot; (c. 1542) is:

&lt;poem&gt;
:::Gesse at this woorke as happe doth leade.
:::By chaunce to truthe you may procede.
:::And firste woorke by the question,
:::Although no truthe therein be don.
:::Suche falsehode is so good a grounde,
:::That truth by it will soone be founde.
:::: From many bate to many mo,
:::From to fewe take to fewe also.
:::With to much ioyne to fewe againe,
:::To to fewe adde to manye plaine.
:::In crossewaies multiplye contrary kinde,
:::All truthe by falsehode for to fynde. &lt;/poem&gt;

For an affine linear function,
:formula_5
double false position provides the exact solution, while for a nonlinear function it provides an approximation that can be successively improved by iteration.

==History==

The simple false position technique is found in cuneiform tablets from ancient Babylonian mathematics, and in papyri from ancient Egyptian mathematics.

Double false position arose in late antiquity as a purely arithmetical algorithm. In the ancient Chinese mathematical text called &quot;The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art&quot; (九章算術), dated from 200 BC to AD 100, most of Chapter 7 was devoted to the algorithm. There, the procedure was justified by concrete arithmetical arguments, then applied creatively to a wide variety of story problems, including one involving what we would call secant lines on a conic section. A more typical example is this &quot;joint purchase&quot; problem involving an &quot;excess and deficit&quot; condition:

Now an item is purchased jointly; everyone contributes 8 [coins], the excess is 3; everyone contributes 7, the deficit is 4. Tell: The number of people, the item price, what is each? Answer: 7 people, item price 53.
Between the 9th and 10th centuries, the Egyptian mathematician Abu Kamil wrote a now-lost treatise on the use of double false position, known as the &quot;Book of the Two Errors&quot; (&quot;Kitāb al-khaṭāʾayn&quot;). The oldest surviving writing on double false position from the Middle East is that of Qusta ibn Luqa (10th century), an Arab mathematician from Baalbek, Lebanon. He justified the technique by a formal, Euclidean-style geometric proof. Within the tradition of medieval Muslim mathematics, double false position was known as &quot;hisāb al-khaṭāʾayn&quot; (&quot;reckoning by two errors&quot;). It was used for centuries to solve practical problems such as commercial and juridical questions (estate partitions according to rules of Quranic inheritance), as well as purely recreational problems. The algorithm was often memorized with the aid of mnemonics, such as a verse attributed to Ibn al-Yasamin and balance-scale diagrams explained by al-Hassar and Ibn al-Banna, all three being mathematicians of Moroccan origin.

Leonardo of Pisa (Fibonacci) devoted Chapter 13 of his book &quot;Liber Abaci&quot; (AD 1202) to explaining and demonstrating the uses of double false position, terming the method &quot;regulis elchatayn&quot; after the &quot;al-khaṭāʾayn&quot; method that he had learned from Arab sources. In 1494, Pacioli used the term &quot;el cataym&quot; in his book &quot;Summa de arithmetica&quot;, probably taking the term from Fibonacci. Other European writers would follow Pacioli and sometimes provided a translation into Latin or the vernacular. For instance, Tartaglia translates the Latinized version of Pacioli&#x27;s term into the vernacular &quot;false positions&quot; in 1556. Pacioli&#x27;s term nearly disappeared in the 16th century European works and the technique went by various names such as &quot;Rule of False&quot;, &quot;Rule of Position&quot; and &quot;Rule of False Position&quot;. &quot;Regula Falsi&quot; appears as the Latinized version of Rule of False as early as 1690.

Several 16th century European authors felt the need to apologize for the name of the method in a science that seeks to find the truth. For instance, in 1568 Humphrey Baker says:
==Numerical analysis==

The method of false position provides an exact solution for linear functions, but more direct algebraic techniques have supplanted its use for these functions. However, in numerical analysis, double false position became a root-finding algorithm used in iterative numerical approximation techniques.

Many equations, including most of the more complicated ones, can be solved only by iterative numerical approximation. This consists of trial and error, in which various values of the unknown quantity are tried. That trial-and-error may be guided by calculating, at each step of the procedure, a new estimate for the solution. There are many ways to arrive at a calculated-estimate and &quot;regula falsi&quot; provides one of these.

Given an equation, move all of its terms to one side so that it has the form, , where is some function of the unknown variable . A value that satisfies this equation, that is, , is called a &quot;root&quot; or &quot;zero&quot; of the function and is a solution of the original equation. If is a continuous function and there exist two points and such that and are of opposite signs, then, by the intermediate value theorem, the function has a root in the interval .

There are many root-finding algorithms that can be used to obtain approximations to such a root. One of the most common is Newton&#x27;s method, but it can fail to find a root under certain circumstances and it may be computationally costly since it requires a computation of the function&#x27;s derivative. Other methods are needed and one general class of methods are the &quot;two-point bracketing methods&quot;. These methods proceed by producing a sequence of shrinking intervals , at the th step, such that contains a root of .

===Two-point bracketing methods===

These methods start with two -values, initially found by trial-and-error, at which has opposite signs. Under the continuity assumption, a root of is guaranteed to lie between these two values, that is to say, these values &quot;bracket&quot; the root. A point strictly between these two values is then selected and used to create a smaller interval that still brackets a root. If is the point selected, then the smaller interval goes from to the endpoint where has the sign opposite that of . In the improbable case that , a root has been found and the algorithm stops. Otherwise, the procedure is repeated as often as necessary to obtain an approximation to the root to any desired accuracy.

The point selected in any current interval can be thought of as an estimate of the solution. The different variations of this method involve different ways of calculating this solution estimate.

Preserving the bracketing and ensuring that the solution estimates lie in the interior of the bracketing intervals guarantees that the solution estimates will converge toward the solution, a guarantee not available with other root finding methods such as Newton&#x27;s method or the secant method.

The simplest variation, called the bisection method, calculates the solution estimate as the midpoint of the bracketing interval. That is, if at step , the current bracketing interval is , then the new solution estimate is obtained by, 
:formula_6

This ensures that is between and , thereby guaranteeing convergence toward the solution.

Since the bracketing interval&#x27;s length is halved at each step, the bisection method&#x27;s error is, on average, halved with each iteration. Hence, every 3 iterations, the method gains approximately a factor of 23, i.e. roughly a decimal place, in accuracy.

===The &quot;regula falsi&quot; (false position) method===

The convergence rate of the bisection method could possibly be improved by using a different solution estimate.

The &quot;regula falsi&quot; method calculates the new solution estimate as the -intercept of the line segment joining the endpoints of the function on the current bracketing interval. Essentially, the root is being approximated by replacing the actual function by a line segment on the bracketing interval and then using the classical double false position formula on that line segment.

More precisely, suppose that in the -th iteration the bracketing interval is . Construct the line through the points and , as illustrated. This line is a secant or chord of the graph of the function . In point-slope form, its equation is given by

:formula_7

Now choose to be the -intercept of this line, that is, the value of for which , and substitute these values to obtain

:formula_8

Solving this equation for &quot;c&quot;&quot;k&quot; gives:

:formula_9

This last symmetrical form has a computational advantage:

As a solution is approached, and will be very close together, and nearly always of the same sign. Such a subtraction can lose significant digits. Because and are always of opposite sign the “subtraction” in the numerator of the improved formula is effectively an addition (as is the subtraction in the denominator too).

At iteration number , the number is calculated as above and then, if and have the same sign, set and , otherwise set and . This process is repeated until the root is approximated sufficiently well.

The above formula is also used in the secant method, but the secant method always retains the last two computed points, and so, while it is slightly faster, it does not preserve bracketing and may not converge.

The fact that &quot;regula falsi&quot; always converges, and has versions that do well at avoiding slowdowns, makes it a good choice when speed is needed. However, its rate of convergence can drop below that of the bisection method.

==Analysis==

Since the initial end-points
 and are chosen such that and are of opposite signs, at each step, one of the end-points will get closer to a root of .
If the second derivative of is of constant sign (so there is no inflection point) in the interval,
then one endpoint (the one where also has the same sign) will remain fixed for all subsequent
iterations while the converging endpoint becomes updated. As a result,
unlike the bisection method, the width of the bracket does not tend to
zero (unless the zero is at an inflection point around which ). As a consequence, the linear approximation to , which is used to pick the false position,
does not improve as rapidly as possible.

One example of this phenomenon is the function 
:formula_10
on the initial bracket
[−1,1]. The left end, −1, is never replaced (it does not change at first and after the first three iterations, is negative on the interval) and thus the width
of the bracket never falls below 1. Hence, the right endpoint approaches 0 at
a linear rate (the number of accurate digits grows linearly, with a rate of convergence of 2/3).

For discontinuous functions, this method can only be expected to find a point where the function changes sign (for example at for or the sign function). In addition to sign changes, it is also possible for the method to converge to a point where the limit of the function is zero, even if the function is undefined (or has another value) at that point (for example at for the function given by when and by , starting with the interval [-0.5, 3.0]).
It is mathematically possible with discontinuous functions for the method to fail to converge to a zero limit or sign change, but this is not a problem in practice since it would require an infinite sequence of coincidences for both endpoints to get stuck converging to discontinuities where the sign does not change, for example at in 
:formula_11
The method of bisection avoids this hypothetical convergence problem.

==Improvements in &quot;regula falsi&quot;==
Though &quot;regula falsi&quot; always converges, usually considerably faster than bisection, there are situations that can slow its convergence – sometimes to a prohibitive degree. That problem isn&#x27;t unique to &quot;regula falsi&quot;: Other than bisection, &quot;all&quot; of the numerical equation-solving methods can have a slow-convergence or no-convergence problem under some conditions. Sometimes, Newton&#x27;s method and the secant method &quot;diverge&quot; instead of converging – and often do so under the same conditions that slow &quot;regula falsi&#x27;s&quot; convergence.

But, though &quot;regula falsi&quot; is one of the best methods, and even in its original un-improved version would often be the best choice; for example, when Newton&#x27;s isn&#x27;t used because the derivative is prohibitively time-consuming to evaluate, or when Newton&#x27;s and &quot;Successive-Substitutions&quot; have failed to converge.

&quot;Regula falsi&#x27;s&quot; failure mode is easy to detect: The same end-point is retained twice in a row. The problem is easily remedied by picking instead a modified false position, chosen to avoid slowdowns due to those relatively unusual unfavorable situations. A number of such improvements to &quot;regula falsi&quot; have been proposed; two of them, the Illinois algorithm and the Anderson–Björk algorithm, are described below.

===The Illinois algorithm===
The Illinois algorithm halves the -value of the retained end point in the next estimate computation when the new -value (that is, )) has the same sign as the previous one ()), meaning that the end point of the previous step will be retained. Hence:

:formula_12
or
:formula_13

down-weighting one of the endpoint values to force the next to occur on that side of the function. The factor used above looks arbitrary, but it guarantees superlinear convergence (asymptotically, the algorithm will perform two regular steps after any modified step, and has order of convergence 1.442). There are other ways to pick the rescaling which give even better superlinear convergence rates.

The above adjustment to &quot;regula falsi&quot; is called the Illinois algorithm by some scholars. Ford (1995) summarizes and analyzes this and other similar superlinear variants of the method of false position.

===Anderson–Björck algorithm===
Suppose that in the -th iteration the bracketing interval is and that the functional value of the new calculated estimate has the same sign as . In this case, the new bracketing interval and the left-hand endpoint has been retained.
(So far, that&#x27;s the same as ordinary Regula Falsi and the Illinois algorithm.)

But, whereas the Illinois algorithm would multiply by , Anderson–Björck algorithm multiplies it by , where has one of the two following values:

formula_14

For simple roots, Anderson–Björck performs very well in practice.

=== ITP method ===

Given formula_15, formula_16 and formula_17 where formula_18 is the golden ration formula_19, in each iteration formula_20 the ITP method calculates the point formula_21 following three steps:

# &quot;[Interpolation Step] Calculate the bisection and the regula falsi points: formula_22&quot; and formula_23 ;
# &quot;[Truncation Step] Perturb the estimator towards the center: formula_24&quot; where &quot;formula_25&quot; and &quot;formula_26&quot; ;
# &quot;[Projection Step] Project the estimator to minmax interval: formula_27 where formula_28.&quot;

The value of the function formula_29 on this point is queried, and the interval is then reduced to bracket the root by keeping the sub-interval with function values of opposite sign on each end. This three step procedure guarantees that the minmax properties of the bisection method are enjoyed by the estimate as well as the superlinear convergence of the secant method. And, is observed to outperform both bisection and interpolation based methods under smooth and non-smooth functions.

==Practical considerations==

When solving one equation, or just a few, using a computer, the bisection method is an adequate choice. Although bisection isn&#x27;t as fast as the other methods—when they&#x27;re at their best and don&#x27;t have a problem—bisection nevertheless is guaranteed to converge at a useful rate, roughly halving the error with each iteration – gaining roughly a decimal place of accuracy with every 3 iterations.

For manual calculation, by calculator, one tends to want to use faster methods, and they usually, but not always, converge faster than bisection. But a computer, even using bisection, will solve an equation, to the desired accuracy, so rapidly that there&#x27;s no need to try to save time by using a less reliable method—and every method is less reliable than bisection.

An exception would be if the computer program had to solve equations very many times during its run. Then the time saved by the faster methods could be significant.

Then, a program could start with Newton&#x27;s method, and, if Newton&#x27;s isn&#x27;t converging, switch to &quot;regula falsi&quot;, maybe in one of its improved versions, such as the Illinois or Anderson–Björck versions. Or, if even that isn&#x27;t converging as well as bisection would, switch to bisection, which always converges at a useful, if not spectacular, rate.

When the change in has become very small, and is also changing very little, then Newton&#x27;s method most likely will not run into trouble, and will converge. So, under those favorable conditions, one could switch to Newton&#x27;s method if one wanted the error to be very small and wanted very fast convergence.

==Example: Growth of a bulrush==

In chapter 7 of &quot;The Nine Chapters&quot;, a root finding problem can be translated to modern language as follows:

Excess And Deficit Problem #11:
* A bulrush grew 3 units on its first day. At the end of each day, the plant is observed to have grown by of the previous day&#x27;s growth.
* A club-rush grew 1 unit on its first day. At the end of each day, the plant has grown by 2 times as much as the previous day&#x27;s growth.
* Find the time &quot;[in fractional days]&quot; that the club-rush becomes as tall as the bulrush.
Answer: the height is 

Explanation:
* Suppose it is day 2. The club-rush is shorter than the bulrush by 1.5 units.
* Suppose it is day 3. The club-rush is taller than the bulrush by 1.75 units. ∎


To understand this, we shall model the heights of the plants on day ( = 1, 2, 3...) after a geometric series.

:formula_30Bulrush
:formula_31Club-rush

For the sake of better notations, let formula_32 Rewrite the plant height series formula_33 in terms of and invoke the sum formula.

:formula_34
:formula_35

Now, use &quot;regula falsi&quot; to find the root of formula_36

:formula_37

Set formula_38 and compute formula_39 which equals (the &quot;deficit&quot;).
Set formula_40 and compute formula_41 which equals (the &quot;excess&quot;).

Estimated root (1st iteration):

:formula_42

==Example code==

This example program, written in the C programming language, is an example of the Illinois algorithm.
To find the positive number where , the equation is transformed into a root-finding form .

#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;
#include &lt;math.h&gt;

double f(double x) {
 return cos(x) - x*x*x;
/* a,b: endpoints of an interval where we search
 e: half of upper bound for relative error
 m: maximal number of iteration
double FalsiMethod(double (*f)(double), double a, double b, double e, int m) {
 double c, fc;
 int n, side = 0;
 /* starting values at endpoints of interval */
 double fa = f(a);
 double fb = f(b);

 for (n = 0; n &lt; m; n++) {
 c = (fa * b - fb * a) / (fa - fb);
 if (fabs(b - a) &lt; e * fabs(b + a))
 break;
 fc = f(c);

 if (fc * fb &gt; 0) {
 /* fc and fb have same sign, copy c to b */
 b = c; fb = fc;
 if (side == -1)
 fa /= 2;
 side = -1;
 } else if (fa * fc &gt; 0) {
 /* fc and fa have same sign, copy c to a */
 a = c; fa = fc;
 if (side == +1)
 fb /= 2;
 side = +1;
 } else {
 /* fc * f_ very small (looks like zero) */
 break;
 }
 return c;

int main(void) {
 printf(&quot;%0.15f\n&quot;, FalsiMethod(&amp;f, 0, 1, 5E-15, 100));
 return 0;

After running this code, the final answer is approximately
0.865474033101614.

==See also==
* ITP method, a variation with guaranteed minmax and superlinear convergence
*Ridders&#x27; method, another root-finding method based on the false position method
* Brent&#x27;s method

==References==
==Further reading==
*
* (On a previously unpublished treatise on Double False Position in a medieval Arabic manuscript.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476057" start="34" end="58" title="Regula falsi" label="method of false position"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476057" start="63" end="84" title="Regula falsi" label="false position method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219080" start="231" end="246" title="trial and error" label="trial and error"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="487" end="494" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345" start="510" end="518" title="equation" label="equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213540" start="564" end="577" title="Rhind papyrus" label="Rhind papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266329" start="2051" end="2071" title="linear interpolation" label="linear interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="2162" end="2171" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q318192" start="2266" end="2280" title="Robert Recorde" label="Robert Recorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854269" start="2844" end="2859" title="linear function" label="linear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="2935" end="2944" title="nonlinear system" label="nonlinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058" start="2969" end="2982" title="approximation" label="approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321565" start="3020" end="3029" title="iterative method" label="iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="3093" end="3102" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q787931" start="3124" end="3146" title="Babylonian mathematics" label="Babylonian mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="3155" end="3161" title="papyrus" label="papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330884" start="3175" end="3195" title="Egyptian mathematics" label="Egyptian mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="3229" end="3243" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q540129" start="3295" end="3315" title="Chinese mathematics" label="Chinese mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q657057" start="3334" end="3375" title="The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art" label="The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q426301" start="3642" end="3653" title="secant line" label="secant line"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="3660" end="3673" title="conic section" label="conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="4053" end="4061" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q335103" start="4076" end="4085" title="Abu Kamil" label="Abu Kamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="4294" end="4305" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621474" start="4317" end="4331" title="Qusta ibn Luqa" label="Qusta ibn Luqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="4351" end="4355" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q178835" start="4375" end="4382" title="Baalbek" label="Baalbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="4384" end="4391" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162886" start="4433" end="4464" title="Euclidean geometry" label="Euclidean-style geometric proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="4490" end="4517" title="Mathematics in medieval Islam" label="medieval Muslim mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039818" start="4762" end="4781" title="Islamic inheritance jurisprudence" label="Quranic inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="4875" end="4884" title="mnemonics" label="mnemonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984322" start="4916" end="4930" title="Ibn al-Yasamin" label="Ibn al-Yasamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116723" start="4971" end="4980" title="al-Hassar" label="al-Hassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q293608" start="4985" end="4997" title="Ibn al-Banna" label="Ibn al-Banna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891793" start="5033" end="5041" title="Moroccan people" label="Moroccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8763" start="5069" end="5078" title="Fibonacci" label="Fibonacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044496" start="5117" end="5128" title="Liber Abaci" label="Liber Abaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="5328" end="5332" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q87620" start="5351" end="5358" title="Luca Pacioli" label="Pacioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19321855" start="5413" end="5433" title="Summa de arithmetica" label="Summa de arithmetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q201543" start="5607" end="5616" title="Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia" label="Tartaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="6416" end="6434" title="numerical analysis" label="numerical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085860" start="6467" end="6489" title="root-finding algorithm" label="root-finding algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="7274" end="7293" title="continuous function" label="continuous function"/>
<link wikidata="Q245098" start="7375" end="7401" title="intermediate value theorem" label="intermediate value theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085860" start="7461" end="7483" title="root-finding algorithm" label="root-finding algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q374195" start="7569" end="7589" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s method" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="7742" end="7752" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q374195" start="9162" end="9182" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s method" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915286" start="9190" end="9203" title="secant method" label="secant method"/>
<link wikidata="Q866300" start="9241" end="9257" title="bisection method" label="bisection method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645406" start="9299" end="9307" title="midpoint" label="midpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="10062" end="10072" title="X-intercept" label="-intercept"/>
<link wikidata="Q166154" start="10080" end="10092" title="line segment" label="line segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915286" start="10525" end="10531" title="secant method" label="secant"/>
<link wikidata="Q275447" start="10575" end="10591" title="slope" label="point-slope form"/>
<link wikidata="Q212794" start="12087" end="12103" title="inflection point" label="inflection point"/>
<link wikidata="Q866300" start="12298" end="12314" title="bisection method" label="bisection method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783502" start="12942" end="12961" title="rate of convergence" label="rate of convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q236813" start="13109" end="13122" title="sign function" label="sign function"/>
<link wikidata="Q866300" start="13774" end="13793" title="method of bisection" label="method of bisection"/>
<link wikidata="Q657057" start="19552" end="19581" title="The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art" label="&amp;quot;The Nine Chapters&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q111912248" start="19692" end="19699" title="bulrush" label="bulrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306887" start="20362" end="20378" title="geometric series" label="geometric series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20541" end="20552" title="Geometric series#Closed-form formula" label="sum formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="20916" end="20938" title="C (programming language)" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880843" start="22142" end="22152" title="ITP Method" label="ITP method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864934" start="22218" end="22238" title="Ridders&amp;#x27; method" label="Ridders&amp;#x27; method"/>
<link wikidata="Q905988" start="22305" end="22324" title="Brent&amp;#x27;s method" label="Brent&amp;#x27;s method"/>
</links>
</doc>
