<doc id="646800" wikidata="Q5329493" url="?curid=646800" title="East Tennessee">
<text>East Tennessee is one of the three Grand Divisions of Tennessee defined in state law. Geographically and socioculturally distinct, it comprises approximately the eastern third of the U.S. state of Tennessee. East Tennessee consists of 33 counties, 30 located within the Eastern Time Zone and three counties in the Central Time Zone, namely Bledsoe, Cumberland, and Marion. East Tennessee is entirely located within the Appalachian Mountains, although the landforms range from densely forested mountains to broad river valleys. The region contains the major cities of Knoxville and Chattanooga, Tennessee&#x27;s third and fourth largest cities, respectively, and the Tri-Cities, the state&#x27;s sixth largest population center.

During the American Civil War, many East Tennesseans remained loyal to the Union even as the state seceded and joined the Confederacy. Early in the war, Unionist delegates unsuccessfully attempted to split East Tennessee into a separate state that would remain as part of the Union. After the war, a number of industrial operations were established in cities in the region. The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), created by Congress during the Great Depression in the 1930s, spurred economic development and helped to modernize the region&#x27;s economy and society. The TVA would become the nation&#x27;s largest public utility provider. Today, the TVA&#x27;s administrative operations are headquartered in Knoxville, and its power operations are based in Chattanooga. Oak Ridge was the site of the world&#x27;s first successful uranium enrichment operations, which were used to construct the world&#x27;s first atomic bombs, two of which were dropped on Imperial Japan at the end of World War II. The Appalachian Regional Commission further transformed the region in the late 20th century.

East Tennessee is both geographically and culturally part of Appalachia. East Tennessee is home to the nation&#x27;s most visited national park—the Great Smoky Mountains National Park—and hundreds of smaller recreational areas. East Tennessee is often considered the birthplace of country music, stemming from the 1927 Victor recording sessions in Bristol, and throughout the 20th and 21st centuries has produced a steady stream of musicians of national and international fame.

==Geography==
Unlike the geographic designations of regions of most U.S. states, the term East Tennessee has legal as well as socioeconomic and cultural meaning. Along with Middle Tennessee and West Tennessee, it comprises one of the state&#x27;s three Grand Divisions, whose boundaries are defined by state law. With a total land area of , comprises 32.90% of the state&#x27;s land area and is the second-largest of the Grand Divisions, behind Middle Tennessee. The entirety of East Tennessee is both geographically and culturally part of Appalachia and the Appalachian Mountains and is usually considered part of the Upland South. East Tennessee borders North Carolina to the east, Virginia to the northeast, Kentucky to the north, Georgia to the south, and Alabama in the extreme southwest corner.

According to custom, the boundary between East and Middle Tennessee roughly follows the dividing line between Eastern and Central Time Zone. Exceptions to this rule are that Bledsoe, Cumberland, and Marion Counties are legally defined as part of East Tennessee, despite being within the Central Time Zone. Sequatchie County, located between Marion and Bledsoe Counties, is legally part of Middle Tennessee but is often considered part of East Tennessee. Sequatchie County has also been defined as part of East Tennessee in the past, and Marion County has been included in Middle Tennessee. Some of the northeastern counties of Middle Tennessee that supported the Union during the American Civil War, including Fentress and Pickett, are sometimes culturally considered part of East Tennessee. Fentress County in particular has been widely viewed by many as East Tennessee because it is located on the western edge of the Knoxville television market as opposed to Pickett County which is in the northeastern tip of Nashville television market.

===Topography===

East Tennessee is located within three major geological divisions of the Appalachian Mountains: the Blue Ridge Mountains on the border with North Carolina in the east; the Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians (usually called the &quot;Great Appalachian Valley&quot; or &quot;Tennessee Valley&quot;) in the center; and the Cumberland Plateau in the west, part of which is in Middle Tennessee. The southern tip of the Cumberland Mountains also extends into the region between the Cumberland Plateau and Ridge-and-Valley regions. Both the Cumberland Plateau and Cumberland Mountains are part of the larger Appalachian Plateau.

The Blue Ridge section comprises the western section of the Blue Ridge Province, the crests of which form most of the Tennessee-North Carolina border. At an average elevation of above sea level, this physiographic province contains the highest elevations in the state. The Blue Ridge region is subdivided into several subranges—the Iron Mountains, Unaka Range, and Bald Mountains in the north; the Great Smoky Mountains in the center; and the Unicoi Mountains, Little Frog Mountain, and Big Frog Mountain areas in the south. Kuwohi, at , is the state&#x27;s highest point and is located in the Great Smoky Mountains along the Tennessee-North Carolina border. Most of the Blue Ridge section is heavily forested and protected by various state and federal entities, the largest of which include the Great Smoky Mountains National Park and the Cherokee National Forest. The Appalachian Trail enters Tennessee in the Great Smoky Mountains and roughly follows the border with North Carolina most of the distance to near the Roan Mountain, where it shifts entirely into Tennessee.

The Ridge-and-Valley division is East Tennessee&#x27;s largest, lowest lying, and most populous section. It consists of a series of alternating and paralleling elongate ridges with broad river valleys in between, roughly oriented northeast-to-southwest. This section&#x27;s most notable feature, the Tennessee River, forms at the confluence of the Holston and French Broad rivers in Knoxville and flows southwestward to Chattanooga. The lowest point in East Tennessee, at an elevation of approximately , is found where the Tennessee River enters Alabama in Marion County. Other notable rivers in the upper Tennessee watershed include the Clinch, Nolichucky, Watauga, Emory, Little Tennessee, Hiwassee, Sequatchie, and Ocoee rivers. Notable &quot;ridges&quot; in the Ridge-and-Valley range, which exceed elevations much greater than most surrounding ridges and are commonly referred to as mountains, include Clinch Mountain, Bays Mountain, and Powell Mountain.

The Cumberland Plateau rises nearly above the Appalachian Valley, stretching from the Kentucky border in the north to the Georgia and Alabama borders in the south. It has an average elevation of and consists mostly of flat-topped tablelands, although the northern section is slightly more rugged. The plateau has many waterfalls and stream valleys separated by steep gorges. The &quot;Tennessee Divide&quot; runs along the western part of the plateau, separating the watersheds of the Tennessee and Cumberland rivers. Plateau counties mostly east of this divide—i.e. Cumberland, Morgan, and Scott—are grouped with East Tennessee, whereas plateau counties west of this divide, such as Fentress, Van Buren, and Grundy, are considered part of Middle Tennessee. Most of the Sequatchie Valley, a long narrow valley in the southeastern part of the Cumberland Plateau, is in East Tennessee. The part of the plateau east of the Sequatchie Valley is called Walden Ridge. One notable detached section of the plateau is Lookout Mountain, which overlooks Chattanooga. West of Chattanooga, the Tennessee River flows through the plateau in the Tennessee River Gorge.

The Cumberland Mountains begin directly north of the Sequatchie Valley and extend northward to the Cumberland Gap at the Tennessee-Kentucky-Virginia tripoint. While technically a separate physiographic region, the Cumberland Mountains are usually considered part of the Cumberland Plateau in Tennessee. The Cumberland Mountains reach elevations above in Tennessee, and their largest subrange is the Crab Orchard Mountains. The Cumberland Trail traverses the eastern escarpment of the Cumberland Plateau and Cumberland Mountains.

===Counties===

*Anderson
*Bledsoe
*Blount
*Bradley
*Campbell
*Carter
*Claiborne
*Cocke
*Cumberland
*Grainger
*Greene
*Hamblen
*Hamilton
*Hancock
*Hawkins
*Jefferson
*Johnson
*Knox
*Loudon
*Marion
*McMinn
*Meigs
*Monroe
*Morgan
*Polk
*Rhea
*Roane
*Scott
*Sevier
*Sullivan
*Unicoi
*Union
*Washington
The Official Tourism Website of Tennessee has a definition of East Tennessee slightly different from the legal definition; the website excludes Cumberland County while including Grundy and Sequatchie Counties.

==Climate==
Most of East Tennessee has a humid subtropical climate, with the exception of some of the higher elevations in the Blue Ridge and Cumberland Mountains, which are classified as a cooler mountain temperate or humid continental climate. As the highest-lying region in the state, East Tennessee averages slightly lower temperatures than the rest of the state and has the highest rate of snowfall, which averages more than annually in the highest mountains, although many of the lower elevations often receive no snow. The lowest recorded temperature in state history, at , was recorded at Mountain City on December 30, 1917. Fog is common, especially in the Ridge-and-Valley region, and often presents a significant hazard to motorists.

==Demographics==

East Tennessee is the second most populous and most densely populated of the three Grand Divisions. At the 2020 census, it had 2,470,105 inhabitants living in its 33 counties, an increase of 142,561, or 6.12%, over the 2010 figure of 2,327,544 residents. Its population was 35.74% of the state&#x27;s total, and its population density was . Prior to the 2010 census, East Tennessee was the most populous of the Grand Divisions but was surpassed by Middle Tennessee, which contains the rapidly-growing Nashville and Clarksville metropolitan areas.

Demographically, East Tennessee is one of the regions in the United States with one of the highest concentrations of people who identify as White or European American. In the 2010 census, every county in East Tennessee except for Knox and Hamilton, the two most populous counties, had a population that was greater than 90% White. In most counties in East Tennessee, persons of Hispanic or Latino origins outnumber African Americans, which is uncommon in the Southeastern United States. Large African American populations are found in Chattanooga and Knoxville, as well as considerable populations in several smaller cities.

===Cities and metropolitan areas===
The major cities of East Tennessee are Knoxville, which is near the geographic center of the region; Chattanooga, which is in southeastern Tennessee at the Georgia border; and the &quot;Tri-Cities&quot; of Bristol, Johnson City, and Kingsport, located in the extreme northeastern part of the state. Of the ten metropolitan statistical areas in Tennessee, six are in East Tennessee. Combined statistical areas include Knoxville-Morristown-Sevierville, Chattanooga–Cleveland–Dalton, and Tri-Cities.

Knoxville, with about 190,000 residents, is the state&#x27;s third largest city and contains the state&#x27;s third largest metropolitan area, with about 1 million residents. Chattanooga, with a population of more than 180,000, is the state&#x27;s fourth largest city and anchors a metropolitan area with more than 500,000 residents, of whom approximately one-third live in Georgia. The Tri-Cities, while defined by the Office of Management and Budget as the Kingsport-Bristol and Johnson City metropolitan areas, are usually considered one population center, which is the third-most populous in East Tennessee and the fifth-largest statewide.

Most of East Tennessee&#x27;s population is found in the Ridge-and Valley region, including that of its major cities. Other important cities in the Ridge and Valley region include Cleveland, Athens, Maryville, Oak Ridge, Sevierville, Morristown, and Greeneville. The region also includes the Cleveland and Morristown metropolitan areas, each of which contain more than 100,000 residents. The Blue Ridge section of the state is much more sparsely populated, its main cities being Elizabethton, Pigeon Forge, and Gatlinburg. Crossville is the largest city in the plateau region, which is also sparsely populated.

Most residents of the East Tennessee region commute by car with the lack of alternative modes of transportation such as commuter rail or regional bus systems. Residents of the metropolitan areas for Knoxville, Morristown, Chattanooga, and the Tri-Cities region have an estimated one-way commute of 23 minutes.

==Congressional districts==
East Tennessee includes all of the state&#x27;s 1st, 2nd, and 3rd congressional districts and part of the 4th district. The 1st District is concentrated around the Tri-Cities region and Upper East Tennessee. The 2nd District includes Knoxville and the mountain counties to the south. The 3rd District includes the Chattanooga area and the counties north of Knoxville (the two areas are connected by a narrow corridor in eastern Roane County). The 4th, which extends into an area southeast of Nashville, includes several of East Tennessee&#x27;s Cumberland Plateau counties.

==History==
===Native Americans===
Much of what is known about East Tennessee&#x27;s prehistoric Native Americans comes as a result of the Tennessee Valley Authority&#x27;s reservoir construction, as federal law required archaeological investigations to be conducted in areas that were to be flooded. Excavations at the Icehouse Bottom site near Vonore revealed that Native Americans were living in East Tennessee on at least a semi-annual basis as early as 7,500 B.C. The region&#x27;s significant Woodland period (1000 B.C. – 1000 A.D.) sites include Rose Island (also near Vonore) and Moccasin Bend (near Chattanooga).

During what archaeologists call the Mississippian period (c. 1000–1600 A.D.), East Tennessee&#x27;s indigenous inhabitants were living in complex agrarian societies at places such as Toqua and Hiwassee Island, and had formed a minor chiefdom known as Chiaha in the French Broad Valley. Spanish expeditions led by Hernando de Soto, Tristan de Luna, and Juan Pardo all visited East Tennessee&#x27;s Mississippian-period inhabitants during the 16th century. Some of the Native peoples who are known to have inhabited the region during this time include the Muscogee Creek, Yuchi, and Shawnee.

By the early 18th century, most Natives in Tennessee had disappeared, very likely wiped out by diseases introduced by the Spaniards, leaving the region sparsely populated. The Cherokee began migrating into what is now East Tennessee from what is now Virginia in the latter 17th century, possibly to escape expanding European settlement and diseases in the north. The Cherokee established a series of towns concentrated in the Little Tennessee and Hiwassee valleys that became known as the Overhill towns, since traders from North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia had to cross over the mountains to reach them. Early in the 18th century, the Cherokee forced the remaining members of other Native American groups out of the state.

===Pioneer period===

The first recorded Europeans to reach the area were three expeditions led by Spanish explorers: Hernando de Soto in 1540–1541, Tristan de Luna in 1559, and Juan Pardo in 1566–1567. Pardo recorded the name &quot;Tanasqui&quot; from a local Native American village, which evolved into the state&#x27;s current name. In 1673, Abraham Wood, a British fur trader, sent an expedition led by James Needham and Gabriel Arthur from Fort Henry in the Colony of Virginia into Overhill Cherokee territory in modern-day northeastern Tennessee. Needham was killed during the expedition and Arthur was taken prisoner, and remained with the Cherokees for more than a year. Longhunters from Virginia explored much of East Tennessee in the 1750s and 1760s in expeditions which lasted several months or even years.

The Cherokee alliance with Britain during the French and Indian War led to the construction of Fort Loudoun in 1756 near present-day Vonore, which was the first British settlement in what is now Tennessee. Fort Loudoun was the westernmost British outpost to that date and was designed by John William Gerard de Brahm and constructed by forces under Captain Raymond Demeré. Shortly after its completion, Demeré relinquished command of the fort to his brother, Captain Paul Demeré. Hostilities erupted between the British and the Overhill Cherokees into an armed conflict, and a siege of the fort ended with its surrender in 1760. The next morning, Paul Demeré and many his men were killed in an ambush nearby, and most of the rest of the garrison was taken prisoner. A peace expedition led by Henry Timberlake in 1761 provided later travelers with invaluable knowledge regarding the location of the Overhill towns and the customs of the Overhill Cherokee.

The end of the French and Indian War in 1763 brought a stream of explorers and traders into the region, among them additional longhunters. In an effort to mitigate conflicts with the Natives, Britain issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763 which forbade settlements west of the Appalachian Mountains. Despite this proclamation, migration across the mountains continued, and the first permanent European settlers began arriving in northeastern Tennessee in the late 1760s. In 1769 William Bean, an associate of famed explorer Daniel Boone, built what is generally acknowledged as Tennessee&#x27;s first permanent Euro-American residence in Tennessee along the Watauga River in present-day Johnson City. Shortly thereafter, James Robertson and a group of migrants from North Carolina (some historians suggest they were refugees of the Regulator wars) formed the Watauga Settlement at Sycamore Shoals in modern-day Elizabethton on lands leased from the Cherokees.

In 1772, the Wataugans established the Watauga Association, which was the first constitutional government west of the Appalachians and the germ cell of the state of Tennessee. Most of these settlers were English or of primarily English descent, but nearly 20% of them were Scotch-Irish. In 1775, the settlers reorganized themselves into the Washington District to support the cause of the American Revolutionary War, which had begun months before. The following year, the settlers petitioned the Colony of Virginia to annex the Washington District to provide protection from Native American attacks, which was denied. Later that year, they petitioned the government of North Carolina to annex the Washington District, which was granted in November 1776.

In 1775, Richard Henderson negotiated a series of treaties with the Cherokee to sell the lands of the Watauga settlements. Later that year, Daniel Boone, under Henderson&#x27;s employment, blazed a trail from Fort Chiswell in Virginia through the Cumberland Gap, which became part of the Wilderness Road, a major thoroughfare for settlers into Tennessee and Kentucky. That same year, a faction of Cherokees led by Dragging Canoe— angry over the tribe&#x27;s appeasement of European settlers— split off to form what became known as the Chickamauga faction, which was concentrated around what is now Chattanooga. The next year, the Chickamauga, aligned with British loyalists, attacked Fort Watauga. The warnings of Dragging Canoe&#x27;s cousin Nancy Ward spared many settlers&#x27; lives from the initial attacks. In spite of Dragging Canoe&#x27;s protests, the Cherokee were continuously induced to sign away most of the tribe&#x27;s lands to the U.S. government.

During the American Revolution, the Wataugans supplied 240 militiamen (led by John Sevier) to the frontier force known as the Overmountain Men, which defeated British loyalists at the Battle of Kings Mountain in 1780. Tennessee&#x27;s first attempt at statehood was the State of Franklin, formed in 1784 from three Washington District counties. Its capital was initially at Jonesborough and later Greeneville, and eventually grew to include eight counties. After several unsuccessful attempts at statehood, the State of Franklin rejoined North Carolina in 1788. North Carolina ceded the region to the federal government, which designated it as the Southwest Territory on May 26, 1790. William Blount was appointed as the territorial governor by President George Washington, and Blount and James White established Knoxville as the territory&#x27;s capital in 1791. The Southwest Territory recorded a population of 35,691 in the first United States census that year, about three-fourths of whom resided in what is now East Tennessee.

In addition to the English and Scotch-Irish settlers, there were also Welsh families who settled in East Tennessee in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. A larger group of settlers, entirely of English descent, arrived from Virginia&#x27;s Middle Peninsula. They arrived as a result of large landowners buying up land and expanding in such a way that smaller landholders had to leave the area to prosper.

===Antebellum period===
During the late 18th and early 19th centuries, a series of land cessions were negotiated with the Cherokees as settlers pushed south of the Washington District. The 1791 Treaty of Holston, negotiated by William Blount, established terms of relations between the United States and the Cherokees. The First Treaty of Tellico established the boundaries of the Treaty of Holston, and a series of treaties over the next two decades ceded small amounts of Cherokee lands to the U.S. government. In the Calhoun Treaty of 1819, the U.S. government purchased Cherokee lands between the Little Tennessee and Hiwassee Rivers. In anticipation of forced removal of the Cherokees, white settlers began moving into Cherokee lands in southeast Tennessee in the 1820s and 1830s.

East Tennessee was home to one of the nation&#x27;s first abolitionist movements, which arose in the early 19th century. Quakers, who had migrated to the region from Pennsylvania in the 1790s, formed the Manumission Society of Tennessee in 1814. Notable supporters included Presbyterian clergyman Samuel Doak, Tusculum College cofounder Hezekiah Balch, and Maryville College president Isaac Anderson. In 1820, Elihu Embree established &quot;The Emancipator&quot;— the nation&#x27;s first exclusively abolitionist newspaper— in Jonesborough. After Embree&#x27;s death, Benjamin Lundy established the &quot;Genius of Universal Emancipation&quot; in Greeneville in 1821 to continue Embree&#x27;s work. By the 1830s, however, the region&#x27;s abolitionist movement had declined in the face of fierce opposition. The geography of East Tennessee, unlike parts of Middle and West Tennessee, did not allow for large plantation complexes, and as a result, slavery remained relatively uncommon in the region.

In the 1820s, the Cherokees established a government modeled on the U.S. Constitution, and located their capitol at New Echota in northern Georgia. In response to restrictive laws passed by the Georgia legislature, the Cherokees in 1832 moved their capital to the Red Clay Council Grounds in what is now Bradley County, a short distance north of the border with Georgia. A total of eleven general councils were held at the site between 1832 and 1838, during which the Cherokees rejected multiple compromises to surrender their lands east of the Mississippi River and move west. The 1835 Treaty of New Echota which was not approved by the National Council at Red Clay, stipulated that the Cherokee relocate to Indian Territory in present-day Oklahoma, and provided a grace period until May 1838 for them to voluntarily migrate. In 1838 and 1839, U.S. troops forcibly removed nearly 17,000 Cherokees and about 2,000 Black people the Cherokees enslaved from their homes in southeastern Tennessee to Indian Territory. An estimated 4,000 died along the way. The operation was orchestrated from Fort Cass in Charleston, which was constructed on the site of the Indian agency. In the Cherokee language, the event is called &quot;Nunna daul Isunyi&quot;, meaning &quot;the Trail Where We Cried&quot;, and it is commonly known as the Trail of Tears.

The arrival of the railroad in the 1850s brought immediate economic benefits to East Tennessee, primarily to Chattanooga, which had been founded in 1839. Chattanooga quickly developed into a nexus between the mountain communities of Southern Appalachia and the cotton states of the Deep South, being referred to as the Gateway to the Deep South. In 1843, copper was discovered in the Copper Basin in the extreme southeast corner of the state, and by the 1850s, large industrial-scale mining operations were taking place, making the Copper Basin one of the most productive copper mining districts in the nation.

===Civil War===


The American Civil War sentiments of East Tennesseans were among the most complex of any region in the nation. Because of the rarity of slavery in the region, many East Tennesseans were suspicious of the aristocratic Southern planter class that dominated the Southern Democratic Party and most Southern state legislatures. For this reason, Whig support ran high in East Tennessee in the years leading up to the war, especially in Knox and surrounding counties. In 1860, slaves composed about 9% of East Tennessee&#x27;s population, compared to 25% statewide. When Tennessee voted on a referendum calling for secession in February 1861, which failed, more than 80% of East Tennesseans voted against it, including majorities in every county except Sullivan and Meigs. In June 1861, nearly 70% of East Tennesseans voted against the state&#x27;s second ordinance of secession which succeeded statewide. Along with Sullivan and Meigs, however, there were pro-secession majorities in Monroe, Rhea, Sequatchie, and Polk counties. There were also pro-secession majorities within the cities of Knoxville and Chattanooga, although these cities&#x27; respective counties voted decisively against secession.

In June 1861, the Unionist East Tennessee Convention met in Greeneville, where it drafted a petition to the Tennessee General Assembly demanding that East Tennessee be allowed to form a separate Union-aligned state split off from the rest of Tennessee, similar to West Virginia. The legislature rejected the petition, however, and Tennessee Governor Isham Harris ordered Confederate troops to occupy East Tennessee. In the fall of 1861, Unionist guerrillas burned bridges and attacked Confederate sympathizers throughout the region, leading the Confederacy to invoke martial law in parts of East Tennessee. Senator Andrew Johnson and Congressman Horace Maynard—who in spite of being from a Confederate state retained their seats in Congress—continuously pressed President Abraham Lincoln to send troops into East Tennessee, and Lincoln subsequently made the liberation of East Tennessee a top priority. &quot;Knoxville Whig&quot; editor William &quot;Parson&quot; Brownlow, who had been one of slavery&#x27;s most outspoken defenders, attacked secessionism with equal fervor and embarked on a speaking tour of the Northern states to rally support for East Tennessee. In 1862, Lincoln appointed Johnson, a War Democrat, as military governor of Tennessee.

Several crucial Civil War military campaigns took place in East Tennessee, although the region did not see any large-scale fighting until the second half of the war, unlike the rest of the state. After being defeated at the Battle of Chickamauga in northwest Georgia in September 1863, Union troops of the Army of the Cumberland under the command of William Rosecrans fled to Chattanooga. Confederate troops under Braxton Bragg attempted to besiege the Union troops into surrendering, but two months later, reinforcements from the Army of the Tennessee under the command of Ulysses S. Grant, William Tecumseh Sherman, Joseph Hooker, and George Henry Thomas arrived. Under the command of Hooker, the Union troops defeated the Confederates at the Battle of Lookout Mountain on November 24, and the following day Grant and Thomas completely ran the Confederates out of the city at the Battle of Missionary Ridge. These battles came to be known as the Chattanooga campaign and marked a major turning point in the war, allowing Sherman to launch the Atlanta campaign from the city in the spring of 1864. A few days after the Chattanooga campaign concluded, Confederate General James Longstreet launched the Knoxville campaign in an effort to take control of the city. The campaign ended in a Union victory at the Battle of Fort Sanders on November 29, which was under the command of Union General Ambrose Burnside, although Longstreet defeated Union troops under the command of James M. Shackelford at the Battle of Bean&#x27;s Station two weeks later. By the beginning of 1864, East Tennessee was largely under the control of the Union Army. Despite its Unionist leanings, however, it was the last part of the state to fall to the Union.

===Reconstruction and the Progressive Era===

After the Civil War, Northern capitalists began investing heavily in East Tennessee, which helped the region&#x27;s ravaged economy recover much faster than most of the South. Most new industry in Tennessee was constructed in East Tennessee during this time, and Chattanooga became one of the first industrialized cities in the South. Knoxville also experienced a modest manufacturing boom, and new factories were constructed in other small towns such as Kingsport, Johnson City, Cleveland, Morristown, and Maryville, making them amongst the first Southern cities to experience the results of the Industrial Revolution in the United States. Other cities in the region, such as Lenoir City, Harriman, Rockwood, Dayton, and Englewood, were founded as company towns during this period. The Burra Burra Mine—established in the 1890s in the Copper Basin—was at its height one of the nation&#x27;s copper mining operations.

In 1899, the world&#x27;s first Coca-Cola bottling plant was built in Chattanooga. In the early 1900s, railroad and sawmill innovations allowed logging firms such as the Little River Lumber Company and Babock Lumber to harvest the virgin forests of the Great Smokies and adjacent ranges. Coal mining operations were established in coal-rich areas of the Cumberland Plateau and Cumberland Mountains, namely in Scott County, northern Campbell County, and western Anderson County. In the early 1890s, Tennessee&#x27;s controversial convict lease system sparked a miners&#x27; uprising in Anderson County that became known as the Coal Creek War. While the uprising was eventually crushed, it induced the state to do away with convict leasing, making Tennessee the first southern state to end the controversial practice.

Other ambitious ventures during the period included the construction of Ocoee Dam No. 1 and Hales Bar Dam (completed in 1911 and 1913 respectively) by the forerunners of the Tennessee Electric Power Company (TEPCO). In the 1920s, Tennessee Eastman—destined to become the state&#x27;s largest employer—was established in Kingsport, and in nearby Elizabethton the German-owned Bemberg Corporation built two large rayon mills. Equally ambitious was the Aluminum Company of America&#x27;s establishment of a massive aluminum smelting operation at what is now Alcoa in 1914, which required the construction of a large plant and company town and the building of a series of dams along the Little Tennessee River to supply the plant with hydroelectric power.

In the late 19th to early 20th century, leisure resorts oriented on mineral springs flourished in the region, with the most popular being Tate Springs in Grainger County, which attracted many prestigious families of the era, including the Ford, Rockefeller, Firestone, Studebaker, and Mellon families. The region received international attention in the public execution of a circus elephant via hanging. After killing its trainer in a circus performance in Kingsport, the elephant was transported to Erwin in nearby Unicoi County and hanged in front of a crowd of roughly 2,500 residents. A picture of the undertaking was widely distributed by American pulp magazine &quot;Argosy&quot;.

In the 1920s, East Tennessee surpassed Middle Tennessee as the state&#x27;s most populous Grand Division, primarily as a result of the larger African American population in that region fleeing to Northern industrial cities as part of the Great Migration.

===Great Depression, TVA, and World War II===

Over a period of two decades, the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), created in 1933 at the height of the Great Depression, drastically altered the economic, cultural, and physical landscape of East Tennessee. TVA sought to build a series of dams across the Tennessee River watershed to control flooding, bring cheap electricity to East Tennessee, and connect Knoxville and Chattanooga to the nation&#x27;s inland waterways by creating a continuously navigable channel along the entirety of the Tennessee River. Starting with Norris Dam in 1933, the agency built 10 dams in East Tennessee (and five more across the border in North Carolina and Georgia) over a period of two decades. Melton Hill and Nickajack were added in the 1960s, and the last, Tellico Dam, was completed in 1979 after a contentious five-year legal battle with environmentalists. TVA also gained control of TEPCO&#x27;s assets after a legal struggle in the 1930s with TEPCO president Jo Conn Guild and attorney Wendell Willkie that was eventually dismissed by the U.S. Supreme Court.

TVA&#x27;s construction of hydroelectric dams in East Tennessee would receive criticism with for what some have perceived as excessive use of its authority of eminent domain and an unwillingness to compromise with landowners. All of TVA&#x27;s hydroelectric projects in East Tennessee were made possible through the use of eminent domain and required the removal of 125,000 Tennessee Valley residents. Residents who refused to sell to the TVA were often forced by court orders and lawsuits. Several dam projects inundated historic Native American sites and American Revolution-era towns. On some occasions, land that TVA had acquired through eminent domain that was expected to be inundated was not and was sold to private developers for the construction of planned communities such as Tellico Village in Loudon County.

East Tennessee&#x27;s physiographic layout and rural nature made it the ideal location for the uranium enrichment facilities of the Manhattan Project, the U.S. federal government&#x27;s top secret World War II-era initiative to build the first atomic bomb. Starting in 1942, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers built what is now the city of Oak Ridge, and the following year work began on the enrichment facilities, K-25 and Y-12. During the same period, Tennessee Eastman built the Holston Ordnance Works in Kingsport for the manufacture of an explosive known as Composition B, and the Department of Defense constructed the Volunteer Ordnance Works in Chattanooga to produce TNT. The ALCOA corporation, seeking to meet the wartime demand for aluminum (which was needed for aircraft construction), built its North Plant, which at the time of its completion was the world&#x27;s largest plant under a single roof. To meet the region&#x27;s skyrocketing demand for electricity, TVA hastened its dam construction, completing Cherokee and Douglas dams in record time and building the massive Fontana Dam just across the state line in North Carolina.

===Mid-20th century to present===
In 1955, Oak Ridge High School became the first public school in Tennessee to be integrated. This occurred one year after the U.S. Supreme Court ruled racial segregation to be unconstitutional in &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;. In 1956, judge Robert Love Taylor ordered nearby Clinton High School to be integrated, and a crisis developed when pro-segregationists threatened violence, prompting Governor Frank G. Clement to send Tennessee National Guard troops to assist with the integration process.

Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, federal investments into urbanized areas provided major cities of the East Tennessee region to establish urban renewal initiatives, often involving the demolition or redevelopment of blighted commercial areas or neighborhoods for new public buildings and freeways. These projects would often involve the controversial removal and redlining of poverty-stricken and minority households.

In 1965, Congress created the Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC) to improve economic development and job opportunities in the Appalachian region. The program resulted in the construction of new and improved highways in East Tennessee through the Appalachian Development Highway System and brought new industries to rural, impoverished counties in the region that had previously been dependent on declining sectors such as coal mining and logging. With the investment of the ARC, several cities emerged as industrial hubs of the East Tennessee region, including Cleveland, Kingsport, Knoxville, and Morristown. Beginning around this time, East Tennessee, along with the rest of the state, began to benefit from the nationwide Sun Belt phenomenon, which brought additional economic growth to the region. The region saw its most rapid growth in the 1970s. Chattanooga, however, began to decline in the 1960s and was declared by the Federal government to be the most polluted city in the country in 1969. In the mid-1980s, the city leaders launched a program called &quot;Vision 2000&quot; which worked to revitalize and reinvent the city&#x27;s economy and eventually resulted in a reversal of Chattanooga&#x27;s decline.

TVA&#x27;s construction of the Tellico Dam in Loudon County became the subject of national controversy in the 1970s when the endangered snail darter fish was reported to be affected by the project. After lawsuits by environmental groups, the debate was decided by the U.S. Supreme Court case &quot;Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill&quot; in 1978, leading to amendments of the Endangered Species Act.

In 1982, a World&#x27;s Fair was held in Knoxville. The fair was also known as the &quot;Knoxville International Energy Exposition,&quot; and its theme was &quot;Energy Turns the World.&quot; The fair attracted more than 11 million visitors during its six-month run and is the most recent world&#x27;s fair to have been held in the United States. In 1996, the whitewater slalom events of the Atlanta Summer Olympic Games were held on the Ocoee River in Polk County. These are the only Olympic sporting events to have ever been held in Tennessee.

Several high profile disasters have occurred in East Tennessee since the latter 20th century. On May 13, 1972, the deadliest motor vehicle accident in state history occurred near Bean Station on U.S. Route 11W when a tractor-trailer and a Greyhound bus collided head-on, killing 14 and injuring 15. The accident prompted the rapid construction of additional four-lane arterial highways in the East Tennessee region throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, as well as placed a focus on the completion of Interstates 40, 75, and 81, which occurred in the mid-1970s. On December 11, 1990, a 99-vehicle collision occurred in dense fog on Interstate 75 near Calhoun, killing 12 and injuring 42, and was reportedly the largest motor vehicle accident in U.S. history at the time, in terms of the number of vehicles. On December 23, 2008, the largest industrial waste spill in United States history occurred at TVA&#x27;s Kingston Fossil Plant when a dike failed, releasing more than 1.1 billion gallons of coal ash slurry into the Emory and Clinch Rivers. The cleanup cost TVA more than $1 billion and was completed in 2015.

==Music==
Appalachian music has evolved from a blend of English and Scottish ballads, Irish and Scottish fiddle tunes, African-American blues, and religious music. In 1916 and 1917, British folklorist Cecil Sharp visited Flag Pond, Sevierville, Harrogate, and other rural areas in the region where he transcribed dozens of examples of &quot;Old World&quot; ballads that had been passed down generation to generation from the region&#x27;s early English settlers. Uncle Am Stuart, Charlie Bowman, Clarence Ashley, G. B. Grayson, and Theron Hale were among the most successful early musicians from East Tennessee.

In 1927, the Victor Talking Machine Company conducted a series of recording sessions in Bristol that saw the rise of musicians such as Jimmie Rodgers and the Carter Family. Subsequent recording sessions, such as the Johnson City sessions in 1928 and the Knoxville St. James Sessions in 1930 proved lucrative, but by the late 1930s, the success of the Grand Ole Opry had lured much of the region&#x27;s talent to Nashville. In the 1940s, the Grand Ole Opry and associated music labels began using &quot;country&quot; instead of &quot;hillbilly&quot; for their genre, hoping to attract a wider audience.

Union County would prove influential to later developments in country music with musicians Roy Acuff, Chet Atkins, and Carl Smith who were born in the county assisted with the international breakthrough of the genre, and the development of the Nashville sound and rockabilly.

==In popular culture==
East Tennessee culture has been represented in several songs, television shows, and films. &quot;The Ford Show&quot;, which ran on NBC from 1956 until 1961, was hosted by Tennessee Ernie Ford from Bristol. &quot;Christy&quot;, a 1990s CBS television series, was based on village life in 1910s East Tennessee. The show, which was later developed into a television
, featured traditional mountain music. &quot;ChristyFest&quot;, held each summer, is dedicated to the novel, musical, TV series, and movies, and includes live folk music. The television film &quot;Dolly Parton&#x27;s Coat of Many Colors&quot; aired on NBC in 2015. The film was inspired by her 1971 song and album of the same name, and recounts her childhood in the mountains of East Tennessee. The film was generally praised by critics, and received the Tex Ritter Award from the Academy of Country Music.

The folk hero Daniel Boone, who helped explore East Tennessee, was honored in the soundtrack for the television series &quot;Daniel Boone&quot;, which ran from 1964 until 1970. The last of three versions of the theme song was sung by The Imperials, a Grammy-winning Christian music group. The Ballad of Davy Crockett helped to popularize the 1955 film &quot;Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier&quot;. First recorded and introduced on the television series &quot;Disneyland&quot; in 1954, it has been covered by a number of artists, most notably Tennessee Ernie Ford. The song&#x27;s lyrics say Davy Crockett was &quot;born on a mountaintop in Tennessee&quot;, but his actual birthplace was in Limestone, Tennessee, the location of Davy Crockett Birthplace State Park. In addition to his renowned frontier exploits and military service, Crockett served Tennessee as a state legislator and Congressman.

==Economy==
Throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, East Tennessee&#x27;s economy relied heavily on subsistence agriculture. Agriculture still plays a vital role in Tennessee&#x27;s economy. In the cities, however, manufacturing was the main source of prosperity and growth. In the years following the Civil War, Chattanooga became one of the first industrial cities in the South. Other cities in East Tennessee such as Knoxville, Kingsport, Cleveland, Maryville, and Morristown were among some of the first cities in Tennessee to experience the effects of the Industrial revolution in the United States, and most manufacturing facilities constructed in the state in the latter 19th century located in East Tennessee. The region&#x27;s economy remained predominantly agrarian during this time, however.

=== Business and industry ===
Major companies and businesses headquartered in East Tennessee include Pilot Flying J, the Baptist Hospital system, Regal Cinemas in Knoxville, and BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, U.S. Xpress, Covenant Transport, and Unum in Chattanooga, and Eastman Chemical in Kingsport.

A variety of goods are manufactured in East Tennessee, including chemicals, foods and drinks, automotive components, and electronics. The largest manufacturer in the region is Eastman Chemical in Kingsport, with more than 10,000 employees, and other chemical companies operate several other chemical manufacturing facilities in the region. Volkswagen operates an assembly plant in Chattanooga, and several automotive parts manufacturers, including Denso, operate plants in East Tennessee. Coca-Cola was first produced in Chattanooga in 1899, and many well-known food and drink brands originated and are made in East Tennessee, including Mayfield Dairy products, Moon Pie, Little Debbie, Mountain Dew, Bush&#x27;s Beans, and M&amp;M&#x27;s. The region has emerged in recent years as one of the top locations for the legal production of moonshine. East Tennessee is a top location where boats are manufactured, with companies such as Sea Ray, MasterCraft, and Malibu Boats, operating facilities in the region. Other important products produced in East Tennessee include consumer electronics, electrical equipment, and fabricated metal products.

Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) and Y-12 National Security Complex in Oak Ridge are two of the largest employers in East Tennessee. ORNL conducts scientific research in materials science, nuclear physics, energy, high-performance computing, systems biology, and national security, and is also the largest national laboratory in the Department of Energy (DOE) system by size, and has the third highest budget. Both ORNL and Y-12 also support many jobs through contracting firms in the area. Since the 1990s, the geographical area between Oak Ridge and Knoxville has been known as the Tennessee Technology Corridor, with more than 500 high-tech firms located in the region. With the expanded smart grid in Chattanooga, and the fastest internet in the Western Hemisphere, Chattanooga has begun to grow its technical and financial sectors with its burgeoning start-up scene.

The town of Erwin, located in the Tri-Cities area, is home to Nuclear Fuel Services, which operates a manufacturing and uranium enrichment facility converting Cold War-era weapons uranium into commercially usable reactor fuel for power plants around the United States, and is the largest supplier of uranium fuel for the United States Navy since 1960.

===Energy===

The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) has its administrative operations headquartered in Knoxville and power operations headquartered in Chattanooga, and provides nearly all of East Tennessee&#x27;s electricity. TVA operates the Sequoyah and Watts Bar nuclear plants in Soddy-Daisy and Rhea County, respectively, the Kingston and Bull Run coal-fired plants, the latter of which is near Oak Ridge, the John Sevier combined cycle natural gas-fired plant near Rogersville, the Raccoon Mountain Pumped-Storage Plant near Chattanooga, a wind-powered facility near Oak Ridge, and several hydroelectric dams in East Tennessee.

The two newest civilian nuclear power reactors in the United States are located at the Watts Bar Nuclear Plant. Unit 1 began operation in 1996 and Unit 2 started operating in 2016, making it the only new nuclear power reactor to begin operation in the United States in the 21st century. Officials at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the TVA are studying advancements in nuclear power as an energy source in a joint effort, including small modular reactors.

===Mining===
The Ridge-and-Valley region of East Tennessee is home to several of the largest deposits of zinc in the United States, including the Mossy Creek deposits in Jefferson County and the Grainger and Hancock counties&#x27; deposits, respectively.

Tennessee marble, a rare crystalline form of limestone, is found only in several deposits in the East Tennessee region in the entire world. Its strong resemblance to true marble when polished has made it a popular construction material found in several structures and monuments around the United States. The stone occurs in belts of Ordovician-period rocks known as the Holston Formation, Tennessee marble achieved such popularity in the late-19th century that Knoxville, the stone&#x27;s primary finishing and distribution center, became known as &quot;The Marble City.&quot;

===Tourism===

While the mountain springs of East Tennessee and the cooler upper elevations of its mountainous areas have long provided a retreat from the region&#x27;s summertime heat, much of East Tennessee&#x27;s tourism industry is a result of land conservation movements in the 1920s and 1930s. The Great Smoky Mountains National Park, established in 1934, led to a tourism boom in Sevier and Blount counties, effectively converting the tiny mountain hamlets of Gatlinburg and Pigeon Forge into resort towns. Great Smoky Mountains National Park is the most visited national park in the United States, receiving more than 14 million visitors annually. The park also anchors a massive tourism industry in nearby Gatlinburg, Pigeon Forge, and Sevierville, which is the third largest in the state. Attractions include Dollywood (the most visited ticketed attraction in Tennessee), Ober Gatlinburg, and Ripley&#x27;s Aquarium of the Smokies.

Other tourist attractions maintained by the National Park Service are Big South Fork National River and Recreation Area and Cumberland Gap National Historical Park, both in the Cumberland Mountains, Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park, Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail, Trail of Tears National Historic Trail, and the Manhattan Project National Historical Park. East Tennessee is home to several scenic roadways including the Foothills Parkway, the East Tennessee Crossing Byway, the Norris Freeway, Cumberland National Scenic Byway, the Tail of the Dragon, the Cherohala Skyway, and the Ocoee Scenic Byway.

The Appalachian Trail, one of the world&#x27;s most well-known hiking trails, was built in the mid-1930s and passes along the Tennessee-North Carolina border. The Cherokee National Forest was established during the same period and preserves most of the Blue Ridge Mountains in Tennessee that are not part of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. The Ocoee River in Polk County attracts thousands of whitewater rafters each year and is the most rafted river in the nation. The nearby gentler Hiwassee River is also a top attraction in East Tennessee. Reservoirs created in the aftermath of the TVA&#x27;s hydroelectric projects in the upper East Tennessee region, including Cherokee, Douglas, Fort Loudoun, and Norris provide recreational opportunities on and along the shores via water sports, boating, fishing, and &quot;second-home&quot; development.

Attractions in Chattanooga include the Tennessee Aquarium, the nation&#x27;s largest freshwater aquarium, and Rock City, and Ruby Falls on Lookout Mountain, the latter two of which are perhaps best known for their unique advertisements painted on barn roofs across the southeast. The Tennessee Aquarium coincided with the revitalization of Chattanooga&#x27;s riverfront, which helped to bolster the downtown districts. The city has become an outdoor sports mecca, being heralded as the &quot;Best Town Ever&quot; by &quot;Outside&quot; magazine.

==Transportation==
===Roads===

Interstate 75 (I-75) enters East Tennessee in Chattanooga, runs northeast to Knoxville, and then turns north, passing through the Cumberland Mountains into Kentucky. Interstate 40 (I-40) traverses the region in an east to west alignment, passing through Knoxville. I-40 and I-75 run concurrent for nearly in Knoxville and carry more than 210,000 vehicles per day at their busiest point, the highest traffic volume in Tennessee. Interstate 81 (I-81) begins about east of Knoxville, and runs northeast to Bristol. Interstate 26 (I-26), while technically an east–west route, begins in Kingsport, runs south to Johnson City, and enters North Carolina to the south, crossing the Blue Ridge Mountains. Interstate 24 (I-24) terminates in Chattanooga, and connects the region to Nashville. In Knoxville, both I-40 and I-75 each have auxiliary routes: I-140, I-640, and I-275. Several designated corridors of the Appalachian Development Highway System are located in the region, including Corridors B, F, J, K, S, and V, which provide expressway connection to Interstate Highways. Other major surface routes in East Tennessee which are part of the National Highway System (NHS) are U.S. Routes 11W, 19, 25E, 27, 64, 321, and 411.

===Air, rail, and water===
Major airports in East Tennessee include McGhee Tyson Airport (TYS) in Alcoa outside of Knoxville, Chattanooga Metropolitan Airport (CHA), and Tri-Cities Regional Airport (TRI) in Blountville. Several other general aviation airports are located in the region. Norfolk Southern Railway operates rail lines in East Tennessee, include multiple tracks that intersect in Knoxville and Chattanooga. The Tennessee River is the only navigable waterway in East Tennessee via a lock-and-canal system at through several TVA hydroelectric dams.

==Higher education==
The region&#x27;s major public universities are the Knoxville and Chattanooga campuses of the University of Tennessee and East Tennessee State University in Johnson City. Private four-year institutions include Bryan College, Carson–Newman University, King University, Lee University, Lincoln Memorial University, Maryville College, Milligan University, Johnson University, Tennessee Wesleyan University, and Tusculum University. Several public community colleges and vocational/technical schools also are located in the region, such as Northeast State Community College in Blountville, Walters State Community College in Morristown, Pellissippi State Community College near Knoxville, Chattanooga State Community College, and Cleveland State Community College. The Tennessee College of Applied Technology has several campuses across the area.

The University of Tennessee&#x27;s athletic teams, nicknamed the &quot;Volunteers&quot;, or &quot;Vols&quot;, are the region&#x27;s most popular sports teams, and constitute a multimillion-dollar industry. The university&#x27;s football team plays at Neyland Stadium, one of the nation&#x27;s largest stadiums. Neyland is flanked by the Thompson–Boling Arena, which has broken several attendance records for college men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s basketball.

==Legal structure==
According to the state constitution, no more than two of the Tennessee Supreme Court&#x27;s five justices can come from any one Grand Division. The Supreme Court rotates meeting in courthouses in each of the three divisions. The Supreme Court building for East Tennessee is in Knoxville. A similar rule applies to certain other commissions and boards as well, to prevent them from showing a geographic and population bias.

==Politics==
Politically, East Tennessee has historically been an outlier in Tennessee and the South. It is one of the few regions in the South that have consistently voted Republican since the Civil War and one of the oldest Republican regions in the United States. Indeed, several counties in the region are among the few in the country to have never voted for a Democrat in a presidential election.

The state&#x27;s 1st and 2nd congressional districts, anchored in the Tri-Cities and Knoxville respectively, are among the few ancestrally Republican regions in the South. The 1st has been held by Republicans or their predecessors without interruption since 1881, and for all but four years since 1859. The 2nd has been in the hands of Republicans or their predecessors since 1855. Until the 1950s, congressmen from the 1st and 2nd Districts were among the few truly senior Republican congressmen from the South. Historically, Democrats were more competitive in the Chattanooga-based 3rd district, but recent trends have made it almost as staunchly Republican as the 1st and 2nd districts.

East Tennessee Republican leanings are rooted in its antebellum Whig sentiments; historian O.P. Temple actually traces this sentiment back to the anti-aristocratic Covenanters of Scotland. As in much of southern Appalachia, the region&#x27;s yeoman farmers clashed with the large-scale planters and business interests that controlled the Democratic Party and dominated most southern state legislatures. East Tennesseans revered the likes of John Sevier and Davy Crockett and were drawn to the political philosophies of Henry Clay and Daniel Webster. They tended to reject the policies of the Southern Democrats, who were deemed &quot;aristocratic&quot; (Andrew Jackson&#x27;s popularity in the Chattanooga area— which he helped open to European-American settlement— created a stronger Democratic base in southeastern Tennessee, however). In the early 1840s, state Senator Andrew Johnson actually introduced a bill in the state legislature that would have created a separate state in East Tennessee.

While the Whigs disintegrated in the 1850s, East Tennesseans continued their opposition to Southern Democrats with the Opposition Party and the Constitutional Union Party, the latter capturing the state&#x27;s electoral votes in 1860. Pro-Union sentiment during the Civil War (which was reinforced by the Confederate army&#x27;s occupation of the region) evolved into support for President Abraham Lincoln. The congressmen from the 1st and 2nd districts were the only congressmen who did not resign when Tennessee seceded. The residents of those districts immediately identified with the Republicans after hostilities ceased and have supported the Republican Party ever since.

The Radical Republican post-war policies of Governor Brownlow greatly polarized the state along party lines, with East Tennesseans mostly supporting Brownlow and Middle and West Tennesseans mostly rejecting him. The Southern Democrats regained control of the state government in the early 1870s, but Republican sentiment remained solid in East Tennessee, especially in the 1st and 2nd Districts. By the 1880s, the state&#x27;s Democrats had an unwritten agreement with the state&#x27;s Republicans whereby Republicans would split presidential patronage of Republican presidencies with the Democrats so long as the Democrats allowed them continued influence in state affairs.

In 1888, Pennsylvania-born Henry Clay Evans was elected to the congressional seat for the 3rd District. Evans, who rejected compromise and the splitting of presidential patronage with the state&#x27;s Democrats, strongly supported a bill that would have turned over control of state elections to the federal government. In response, the state legislature gerrymandered the 3rd District, ensuring Evans&#x27; defeat in 1890. After 1901, more than a half-century passed without the state legislature redistricting, in spite of population shifts. In 1959, Memphis resident Charles Baker sued the legislature in hopes of forcing it to redraw the districts, culminating in the landmark U.S. Supreme Court case &quot;Baker v. Carr&quot;. In the decades after this case, the 3rd District has been redrawn several times, and a new 4th District was carved in part out of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Districts. The 2000s round of redistricting made the 3rd more Republican and the 4th more Democratic. After the 2010 elections and the redistricting before 2012, though, the Republicans in control of state government made both the 3rd and 4th Districts significantly more Republican, and both are now among the most Republican districts in the country.

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
*East Tennessee Historical Society
*&quot;Travel and Discover East Tennessee&quot; at the Convention and Visitors Bureau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5329493" start="0" end="14" title="East Tennessee" label="East Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594490" start="35" end="63" title="Grand Divisions of Tennessee" label="Grand Divisions of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="183" end="193" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="197" end="206" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="238" end="246" title="Counties of the United States" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="270" end="287" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086913" start="314" end="331" title="Central Time Zone" label="Central Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q494822" start="340" end="347" title="Bledsoe County, Tennessee" label="Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q489056" start="349" end="359" title="Cumberland County, Tennessee" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q501968" start="365" end="371" title="Marion County, Tennessee" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="419" end="440" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="567" end="576" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="581" end="592" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255586" start="666" end="676" title="Tri-Cities, Tennessee" label="Tri-Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="740" end="758" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="804" end="809" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="851" end="862" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570565" start="882" end="890" title="Southern Unionist" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329500" start="916" end="934" title="East Tennessee Convention" label="attempted to split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="1107" end="1133" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="1172" end="1188" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="1342" end="1356" title="public utility" label="public utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809" start="1498" end="1507" title="Oak Ridge, Tennessee" label="Oak Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="1558" end="1576" title="Enriched uranium" label="uranium enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="1673" end="1698" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="dropped on Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1713" end="1725" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780854" start="1731" end="1762" title="Appalachian Regional Commission" label="Appalachian Regional Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="1882" end="1892" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464004" start="1969" end="2004" title="Great Smoky Mountains National Park" label="Great Smoky Mountains National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="2102" end="2115" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969120" start="2135" end="2165" title="Bristol sessions" label="1927 Victor recording sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q917821" start="2169" end="2176" title="Bristol, Tennessee" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841610" start="2473" end="2489" title="Middle Tennessee" label="Middle Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986638" start="2494" end="2508" title="West Tennessee" label="West Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594490" start="2553" end="2568" title="Grand Divisions (Tennessee)" label="Grand Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="2840" end="2850" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="2859" end="2880" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="2919" end="2931" title="Upland South" label="Upland South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="2956" end="2970" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="2984" end="2992" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="3011" end="3019" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="3034" end="3041" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="3060" end="3067" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="3212" end="3219" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086913" start="3224" end="3241" title="Central Time Zone" label="Central Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q494822" start="3276" end="3283" title="Bledsoe County, Tennessee" label="Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q489056" start="3285" end="3295" title="Cumberland County, Tennessee" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q501968" start="3301" end="3307" title="Marion County, Tennessee" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q502351" start="3408" end="3425" title="Sequatchie County, Tennessee" label="Sequatchie County"/>
<link wikidata="Q494760" start="3812" end="3820" title="Fentress County, Tennessee" label="Fentress"/>
<link wikidata="Q494776" start="3825" end="3832" title="Pickett County, Tennessee" label="Pickett"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="4263" end="4283" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332669" start="4335" end="4364" title="Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians" label="Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816357" start="4391" end="4415" title="Great Appalachian Valley" label="Great Appalachian Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="4478" end="4496" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143699" start="4572" end="4592" title="Cumberland Mountains" label="Cumberland Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q620627" start="4759" end="4778" title="Appalachian Plateau" label="Appalachian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072756" start="5113" end="5127" title="Iron Mountains" label="Iron Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882254" start="5129" end="5140" title="Unaka Range" label="Unaka Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850343" start="5146" end="5160" title="Bald Mountains" label="Bald Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360486" start="5179" end="5200" title="Great Smoky Mountains" label="Great Smoky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884747" start="5224" end="5240" title="Unicoi Mountains" label="Unicoi Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q31677622" start="5242" end="5262" title="Little Frog Mountain" label="Little Frog Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905745" start="5268" end="5285" title="Big Frog Mountain" label="Big Frog Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q685166" start="5306" end="5312" title="Kuwohi" label="Kuwohi"/>
<link wikidata="Q464004" start="5577" end="5612" title="Great Smoky Mountains National Park" label="Great Smoky Mountains National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079114" start="5621" end="5645" title="Cherokee National Forest" label="Cherokee National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q620648" start="5651" end="5668" title="Appalachian Trail" label="Appalachian Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155945" start="5799" end="5812" title="Roan Mountain (Roan Highlands)" label="Roan Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="6156" end="6171" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333747" start="6204" end="6211" title="Holston River" label="Holston"/>
<link wikidata="Q478303" start="6216" end="6228" title="French Broad River" label="French Broad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101503" start="6494" end="6500" title="Clinch River" label="Clinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775363" start="6502" end="6512" title="Nolichucky River" label="Nolichucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544418" start="6514" end="6521" title="Watauga River" label="Watauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339067" start="6523" end="6528" title="Emory River" label="Emory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137567" start="6530" end="6546" title="Little Tennessee River" label="Little Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138706" start="6548" end="6556" title="Hiwassee River" label="Hiwassee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452436" start="6558" end="6568" title="Sequatchie River" label="Sequatchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811968" start="6574" end="6579" title="Ocoee River" label="Ocoee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133701" start="6763" end="6778" title="Clinch Mountain" label="Clinch Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874784" start="6780" end="6793" title="Bays Mountain" label="Bays Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236083" start="6799" end="6814" title="Powell Mountain" label="Powell Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q580889" start="7047" end="7057" title="table (landform)" label="tablelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q152005" start="7269" end="7294" title="Drainage divide" label="separating the watersheds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143718" start="7316" end="7326" title="Cumberland River" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q372373" start="7396" end="7402" title="Morgan County, Tennessee" label="Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q502054" start="7408" end="7413" title="Scott County, Tennessee" label="Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q494760" start="7501" end="7509" title="Fentress County, Tennessee" label="Fentress"/>
<link wikidata="Q501964" start="7511" end="7520" title="Van Buren County, Tennessee" label="Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q502386" start="7526" end="7532" title="Grundy County, Tennessee" label="Grundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452438" start="7587" end="7604" title="Sequatchie Valley" label="Sequatchie Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961477" start="7765" end="7777" title="Walden Ridge" label="Walden Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q861601" start="7826" end="7842" title="Lookout Mountain" label="Lookout Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700153" start="7947" end="7968" title="Tennessee River Gorge" label="Tennessee River Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143695" start="8070" end="8084" title="Cumberland Gap" label="Cumberland Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839758" start="8092" end="8128" title="Tri-State Peak" label="Tennessee-Kentucky-Virginia tripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180226" start="8370" end="8392" title="Crab Orchard Mountains" label="Crab Orchard Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193972" start="8398" end="8414" title="Justin P. Wilson Cumberland Trail State Park" label="Cumberland Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q490318" start="8518" end="8526" title="Anderson County, Tennessee" label="Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q494822" start="8528" end="8535" title="Bledsoe County, Tennessee" label="Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q475301" start="8537" end="8543" title="Blount County, Tennessee" label="Blount"/>
<link wikidata="Q494803" start="8545" end="8552" title="Bradley County, Tennessee" label="Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q494791" start="8554" end="8562" title="Campbell County, Tennessee" label="Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q494990" start="8564" end="8570" title="Carter County, Tennessee" label="Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q495017" start="8572" end="8581" title="Claiborne County, Tennessee" label="Claiborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q488943" start="8583" end="8588" title="Cocke County, Tennessee" label="Cocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q489056" start="8590" end="8600" title="Cumberland County, Tennessee" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q502373" start="8602" end="8610" title="Grainger County, Tennessee" label="Grainger"/>
<link wikidata="Q502428" start="8612" end="8618" title="Greene County, Tennessee" label="Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q502342" start="8620" end="8627" title="Hamblen County, Tennessee" label="Hamblen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188376" start="8629" end="8637" title="Hamilton County, Tennessee" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q495059" start="8639" end="8646" title="Hancock County, Tennessee" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q502400" start="8648" end="8655" title="Hawkins County, Tennessee" label="Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q494768" start="8657" end="8666" title="Jefferson County, Tennessee" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q495067" start="8668" end="8675" title="Johnson County, Tennessee" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q495003" start="8677" end="8681" title="Knox County, Tennessee" label="Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q501927" start="8683" end="8689" title="Loudon County, Tennessee" label="Loudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q501968" start="8691" end="8697" title="Marion County, Tennessee" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q494636" start="8699" end="8705" title="McMinn County, Tennessee" label="McMinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q502356" start="8707" end="8712" title="Meigs County, Tennessee" label="Meigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q495006" start="8714" end="8720" title="Monroe County, Tennessee" label="Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q372373" start="8722" end="8728" title="Morgan County, Tennessee" label="Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q502050" start="8730" end="8734" title="Polk County, Tennessee" label="Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q502377" start="8736" end="8740" title="Rhea County, Tennessee" label="Rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q502380" start="8742" end="8747" title="Roane County, Tennessee" label="Roane"/>
<link wikidata="Q502054" start="8749" end="8754" title="Scott County, Tennessee" label="Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q501914" start="8756" end="8762" title="Sevier County, Tennessee" label="Sevier"/>
<link wikidata="Q501918" start="8764" end="8772" title="Sullivan County, Tennessee" label="Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q501568" start="8774" end="8780" title="Unicoi County, Tennessee" label="Unicoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q501935" start="8782" end="8787" title="Union County, Tennessee" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q495037" start="8789" end="8799" title="Washington County, Tennessee" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q502386" start="8978" end="8984" title="Grundy County, Tennessee" label="Grundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q502351" start="8989" end="8999" title="Sequatchie County, Tennessee" label="Sequatchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="9052" end="9077" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="9208" end="9226" title="oceanic climate" label="mountain temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="9230" end="9255" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745942" start="9608" end="9621" title="Mountain City, Tennessee" label="Mountain City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="9882" end="9893" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="9994" end="9998" title="2010 United States census" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967032" start="10276" end="10285" title="Nashville metropolitan area" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127704" start="10290" end="10301" title="Clarksville metropolitan area" label="Clarksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="10463" end="10468" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="10472" end="10489" title="European American" label="European American"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="10701" end="10719" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q917821" start="11191" end="11198" title="Bristol, Tennessee" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q770571" start="11200" end="11212" title="Johnson City, Tennessee" label="Johnson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q241814" start="11218" end="11227" title="Kingsport, Tennessee" label="Kingsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628448" start="11295" end="11338" title="List of metropolitan areas of Tennessee" label="metropolitan statistical areas in Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985090" start="11367" end="11392" title="Combined statistical area" label="Combined statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087906" start="11436" end="11464" title="Chattanooga–Cleveland–Dalton combined statistical area" label="Chattanooga–Cleveland–Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="11903" end="11934" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413399" start="11942" end="11959" title="Kingsport–Bristol–Bristol metropolitan area" label="Kingsport-Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268228" start="11964" end="11976" title="Johnson City metropolitan area, Tennessee" label="Johnson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q962118" start="12308" end="12317" title="Cleveland, Tennessee" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292481" start="12319" end="12325" title="Athens, Tennessee" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094500" start="12327" end="12336" title="Maryville, Tennessee" label="Maryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809" start="12338" end="12347" title="Oak Ridge, Tennessee" label="Oak Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168431" start="12349" end="12360" title="Sevierville, Tennessee" label="Sevierville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330995" start="12362" end="12372" title="Morristown, Tennessee" label="Morristown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002631" start="12378" end="12389" title="Greeneville, Tennessee" label="Greeneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132035" start="12420" end="12429" title="Cleveland metropolitan area, Tennessee" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914131" start="12434" end="12444" title="Morristown metropolitan area, Tennessee" label="Morristown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389138" start="12607" end="12619" title="Elizabethton, Tennessee" label="Elizabethton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078145" start="12621" end="12633" title="Pigeon Forge, Tennessee" label="Pigeon Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008520" start="12639" end="12649" title="Gatlinburg, Tennessee" label="Gatlinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028151" start="12651" end="12661" title="Crossville, Tennessee" label="Crossville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699986" start="13127" end="13130" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699987" start="13132" end="13135" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699989" start="13141" end="13144" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699990" start="13185" end="13188" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="4th"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985642" start="13974" end="13989" title="Icehouse Bottom" label="Icehouse Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670196" start="14000" end="14006" title="Vonore, Tennessee" label="Vonore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299963" start="14153" end="14168" title="Woodland period" label="Woodland period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14207" end="14218" title="Mialoquo#Rose Island" label="Rose Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887498" start="14242" end="14255" title="Moccasin Bend" label="Moccasin Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="14313" end="14333" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q396108" start="14423" end="14441" title="agrarian societies" label="agrarian societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825216" start="14460" end="14465" title="Toqua (Tennessee)" label="Toqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q49641165" start="14470" end="14485" title="Hiwassee Island" label="Hiwassee Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095147" start="14528" end="14534" title="Chiaha" label="Chiaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="14563" end="14570" title="Kingdom of Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="14590" end="14606" title="Hernando de Soto (explorer)" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q890831" start="14608" end="14623" title="Tristán de Luna y Arellano" label="Tristan de Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639778" start="14629" end="14639" title="Juan Pardo (explorer)" label="Juan Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="14831" end="14845" title="Muscogee" label="Muscogee Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q973071" start="14847" end="14852" title="Yuchi" label="Yuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="14858" end="14865" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="15044" end="15052" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="15118" end="15126" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860515" start="15357" end="15371" title="Overhill Cherokee" label="Overhill towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="15392" end="15406" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="15408" end="15422" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="15722" end="15738" title="Hernando de Soto" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q890831" start="15753" end="15768" title="Tristán de Luna y Arellano" label="Tristan de Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639778" start="15782" end="15792" title="Juan Pardo (explorer)" label="Juan Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669227" start="15949" end="15961" title="Abraham Wood" label="Abraham Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471316" start="16049" end="16059" title="Fort Henry (Virginia)" label="Fort Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="16067" end="16085" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673898" start="16283" end="16293" title="Longhunter" label="Longhunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="16450" end="16457" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="16469" end="16490" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471547" start="16518" end="16530" title="Fort Loudoun (Tennessee)" label="Fort Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670196" start="16556" end="16562" title="Vonore, Tennessee" label="Vonore"/>
<link wikidata="Q97476" start="16711" end="16739" title="John William Gerard de Brahm" label="John William Gerard de Brahm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817778" start="16975" end="16992" title="Anglo-Cherokee War" label="an armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510013" start="17000" end="17017" title="siege of Fort Loudoun" label="siege of the fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q23138634" start="17191" end="17207" title="Timberlake Expedition" label="peace expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729199" start="17215" end="17231" title="Henry Timberlake" label="Henry Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="17590" end="17616" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005255" start="17857" end="17869" title="William Bean" label="William Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q316661" start="17902" end="17914" title="Daniel Boone" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544418" start="18036" end="18049" title="Watauga River" label="Watauga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q770571" start="18065" end="18077" title="Johnson City, Tennessee" label="Johnson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142258" start="18099" end="18114" title="James Robertson (explorer)" label="James Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444492" start="18210" end="18224" title="Regulator Movement" label="Regulator wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659602" start="18259" end="18274" title="Sycamore Shoals" label="Sycamore Shoals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389138" start="18289" end="18301" title="Elizabethton, Tennessee" label="Elizabethton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973025" start="18378" end="18397" title="Watauga Association" label="Watauga Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="18567" end="18582" title="English Americans" label="English descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="18612" end="18624" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scotch-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971844" start="18680" end="18699" title="Washington District, North Carolina" label="Washington District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988161" start="18728" end="18754" title="Southern theater of the American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326387" start="19103" end="19120" title="Richard Henderson (jurist)" label="Richard Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376246" start="19303" end="19316" title="Fort Chiswell" label="Fort Chiswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143695" start="19341" end="19355" title="Cumberland Gap" label="Cumberland Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481324" start="19382" end="19397" title="Wilderness Road" label="Wilderness Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304956" start="19508" end="19522" title="Dragging Canoe" label="Dragging Canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q472747" start="19629" end="19648" title="Chickamauga Cherokee" label="Chickamauga faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q292814" start="19837" end="19847" title="Nancy Ward" label="Nancy Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="20070" end="20089" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q888391" start="20137" end="20148" title="John Sevier" label="John Sevier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042379" start="20185" end="20201" title="Overmountain Men" label="Overmountain Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="20218" end="20235" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="British loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035455" start="20243" end="20267" title="Battle of Kings Mountain" label="Battle of Kings Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557627" start="20329" end="20346" title="State of Franklin" label="State of Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703404" start="20433" end="20445" title="Jonesborough, Tennessee" label="Jonesborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002631" start="20456" end="20467" title="Greeneville, Tennessee" label="Greeneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548588" start="20707" end="20726" title="Southwest Territory" label="Southwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q767446" start="20744" end="20758" title="William Blount" label="William Blount"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="20814" end="20831" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145411" start="20848" end="20859" title="James White (general)" label="James White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004345" start="20986" end="21012" title="1790 United States census" label="first United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841525" start="21336" end="21352" title="Middle Peninsula" label="Middle Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092241" start="21575" end="21598" title="Cherokee treaties" label="series of land cessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837099" start="21696" end="21713" title="Treaty of Holston" label="Treaty of Holston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837253" start="21825" end="21848" title="Treaty of Tellico" label="First Treaty of Tellico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="22347" end="22359" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="22410" end="22416" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="22563" end="22575" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411272" start="22586" end="22597" title="Samuel Doak" label="Samuel Doak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564294" start="22599" end="22615" title="Tusculum College" label="Tusculum College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150537" start="22626" end="22640" title="Hezekiah Balch" label="Hezekiah Balch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309890" start="22646" end="22663" title="Maryville College" label="Maryville College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360850" start="22699" end="22711" title="Elihu Embree" label="Elihu Embree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896160" start="22857" end="22871" title="Benjamin Lundy" label="Benjamin Lundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="23198" end="23218" title="plantation complexes in the Southern United States" label="plantation complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092177" start="23332" end="23375" title="Cherokee Nation (1794–1907)" label="government modeled on the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007061" start="23406" end="23416" title="New Echota" label="New Echota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303900" start="23554" end="23578" title="Red Clay State Historic Park" label="Red Clay Council Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q494803" start="23594" end="23608" title="Bradley County, Tennessee" label="Bradley County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="23835" end="23852" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049395" start="23877" end="23897" title="Treaty of New Echota" label="Treaty of New Echota"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="23999" end="24015" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="24031" end="24039" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q86661955" start="24147" end="24163" title="Cherokee removal" label="forcibly removed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470898" start="24379" end="24388" title="Fort Cass" label="Fort Cass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669830" start="24392" end="24402" title="Charleston, Tennessee" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q131613569" start="24445" end="24458" title="Indian agency" label="Indian agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="24467" end="24484" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee language"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="24615" end="24629" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q86757524" start="25016" end="25028" title="Copper Basin (Tennessee)" label="Copper Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168794" start="25099" end="25133" title="copper mining in the United States" label="industrial-scale mining operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="25266" end="25284" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="25488" end="25501" title="planter class" label="planter class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="25521" end="25546" title="Southern Democrats" label="Southern Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="25602" end="25606" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q501918" start="26008" end="26016" title="Sullivan County, Tennessee" label="Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q502356" start="26021" end="26026" title="Meigs County, Tennessee" label="Meigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570565" start="26477" end="26485" title="Southern Unionist" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329500" start="26486" end="26511" title="East Tennessee Convention" label="East Tennessee Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700086" start="26567" end="26593" title="Tennessee General Assembly" label="Tennessee General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="26723" end="26736" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130715" start="26809" end="26821" title="Isham Harris" label="Isham Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329513" start="26916" end="26930" title="East Tennessee bridge burnings" label="burned bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="27026" end="27037" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="27074" end="27088" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q132330" start="27105" end="27119" title="Horace Maynard" label="Horace Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="27231" end="27246" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976597" start="27368" end="27382" title="Brownlow&amp;#x27;s Whig" label="Knoxville Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q181727" start="27396" end="27431" title="William Gannaway Brownlow" label="William &amp;quot;Parson&amp;quot; Brownlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968411" start="27664" end="27676" title="War Democrat" label="War Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197588" start="27681" end="27698" title="military governor" label="military governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327790" start="27938" end="27959" title="Battle of Chickamauga" label="Battle of Chickamauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q689891" start="28020" end="28042" title="Army of the Cumberland" label="Army of the Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q541708" start="28064" end="28081" title="William Rosecrans" label="William Rosecrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q380562" start="28128" end="28141" title="Braxton Bragg" label="Braxton Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q689952" start="28245" end="28266" title="Army of the Tennessee" label="Army of the Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="28288" end="28304" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="28306" end="28330" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q315597" start="28332" end="28345" title="Joseph Hooker" label="Joseph Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q740330" start="28351" end="28370" title="George Henry Thomas" label="George Henry Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683571" start="28459" end="28485" title="Battle of Lookout Mountain" label="Battle of Lookout Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687368" start="28596" end="28622" title="Battle of Missionary Ridge" label="Battle of Missionary Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477050" start="28662" end="28682" title="Chattanooga campaign" label="Chattanooga campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q756118" start="28759" end="28775" title="Atlanta campaign" label="Atlanta campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q311514" start="28886" end="28902" title="James Longstreet" label="James Longstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q886856" start="28916" end="28934" title="Knoxville campaign" label="Knoxville campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672202" start="29022" end="29044" title="Battle of Fort Sanders" label="Battle of Fort Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q355444" start="29106" end="29122" title="Ambrose Burnside" label="Ambrose Burnside"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623653" start="29187" end="29207" title="James M. Shackelford" label="James M. Shackelford"/>
<link wikidata="Q962434" start="29215" end="29244" title="Battle of Bean&amp;#x27;s Station" label="Battle of Bean&amp;#x27;s Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="29340" end="29350" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="29525" end="29536" title="Capitalism" label="capitalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525708" start="30092" end="30134" title="Industrial Revolution in the United States" label="Industrial Revolution in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238814" start="30172" end="30183" title="Lenoir City, Tennessee" label="Lenoir City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376894" start="30185" end="30193" title="Harriman, Tennessee" label="Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q979056" start="30195" end="30203" title="Rockwood, Tennessee" label="Rockwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020730" start="30205" end="30211" title="Dayton, Tennessee" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q956574" start="30217" end="30226" title="Englewood, Tennessee" label="Englewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="30244" end="30256" title="company town" label="company town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000348" start="30282" end="30298" title="Burra Burra Mine (Ducktown, Tennessee)" label="Burra Burra Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="30446" end="30455" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561743" start="30943" end="30956" title="Convict leasing" label="convict lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137724" start="31040" end="31054" title="Coal Creek War" label="Coal Creek War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076591" start="31303" end="31318" title="Ocoee Dam No. 1" label="Ocoee Dam No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641491" start="31323" end="31336" title="Hales Bar Dam" label="Hales Bar Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087904" start="31405" end="31437" title="Tennessee Electric Power Company" label="Tennessee Electric Power Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q899022" start="31461" end="31478" title="Eastman Chemical Company" label="Tennessee Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389138" start="31576" end="31588" title="Elizabethton, Tennessee" label="Elizabethton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49692964" start="31606" end="31625" title="Bemberg Corporation" label="Bemberg Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q910194" start="31642" end="31647" title="rayon" label="rayon"/>
<link wikidata="Q135325" start="31681" end="31708" title="Aluminum Company of America" label="Aluminum Company of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327969" start="31786" end="31791" title="Alcoa, Tennessee" label="Alcoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713208" start="31889" end="31936" title="Tapoco" label="series of dams along the Little Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901337" start="32122" end="32134" title="Tate Springs" label="Tate Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="32223" end="32227" title="Henry Ford" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130469" start="32229" end="32240" title="Rockefeller family" label="Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985287" start="32242" end="32251" title="Harvey S. Firestone" label="Firestone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32253" end="32263" title="Studebaker#The five brothers" label="Studebaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149451" start="32269" end="32275" title="Mellon family" label="Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257254" start="32337" end="32386" title="Mary (elephant)" label="public execution of a circus elephant via hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289449" start="32484" end="32489" title="Erwin, Tennessee" label="Erwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q649812" start="32657" end="32663" title="Argosy (magazine)" label="Argosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="32910" end="32925" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="33009" end="33035" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="33080" end="33096" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632797" start="33500" end="33510" title="Norris Dam" label="Norris Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813786" start="33657" end="33668" title="Melton Hill Dam" label="Melton Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027209" start="33673" end="33682" title="Nickajack Dam" label="Nickajack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697601" start="33722" end="33733" title="Tellico Dam" label="Tellico Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546934" start="33765" end="33799" title="Snail darter controversy" label="contentious five-year legal battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204185" start="33928" end="33941" title="Jo Conn Guild" label="Jo Conn Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q698714" start="33955" end="33970" title="Wendell Willkie" label="Wendell Willkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="34008" end="34026" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808147" start="34188" end="34202" title="eminent domain in the United States" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478179" start="34815" end="34830" title="Tellico Village, Tennessee" label="Tellico Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="34945" end="34963" title="uranium enrichment" label="uranium enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="34982" end="34999" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="35005" end="35028" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="35047" end="35059" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="35094" end="35105" title="nuclear weapon" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="35129" end="35157" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q837007" start="35263" end="35267" title="K-25" label="K-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061309" start="35272" end="35276" title="Y-12 National Security Complex" label="Y-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709932" start="35330" end="35352" title="Holston Army Ammunition Plant" label="Holston Ordnance Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q898998" start="35411" end="35424" title="Composition B" label="Composition B"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="35434" end="35455" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380354" start="35472" end="35496" title="Enterprise South Industrial Park" label="Volunteer Ordnance Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="35523" end="35526" title="TNT" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431413" start="35869" end="35877" title="Cherokee Dam" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756108" start="35882" end="35889" title="Douglas Dam" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885120" start="35935" end="35946" title="Fontana Dam" label="Fontana Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073699" start="36037" end="36058" title="Oak Ridge High School (Tennessee)" label="Oak Ridge High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153125" start="36109" end="36119" title="School integration in the United States" label="integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="36179" end="36197" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="36230" end="36257" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347008" start="36280" end="36298" title="Robert Love Taylor (judge)" label="Robert Love Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134144" start="36314" end="36333" title="Clinton High School (Clinton, Tennessee)" label="Clinton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301653" start="36440" end="36456" title="Frank G. Clement" label="Frank G. Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700109" start="36465" end="36489" title="Tennessee National Guard" label="Tennessee National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="36675" end="36688" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441983" start="36736" end="36749" title="redevelopment" label="redevelopment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="36825" end="36833" title="Controlled-access highway" label="freeways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="36900" end="36909" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780854" start="36986" end="37017" title="Appalachian Regional Commission" label="Appalachian Regional Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q800055" start="37205" end="37243" title="Appalachian Development Highway System" label="Appalachian Development Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058501" start="37684" end="37692" title="Sun Belt" label="Sun Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23583587" start="38027" end="38038" title="Vision 2000 (Chattanooga)" label="Vision 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697601" start="38210" end="38221" title="Tellico Dam" label="Tellico Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q666029" start="38315" end="38327" title="snail darter" label="snail darter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700225" start="38477" end="38511" title="Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill" label="Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="38556" end="38578" title="Endangered Species Act of 1973" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311962" start="38592" end="38609" title="1982 World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q31874" start="38941" end="38958" title="canoe slalom" label="whitewater slalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="38973" end="38980" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="38981" end="39001" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811968" start="39019" end="39030" title="Ocoee River" label="Ocoee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q96362959" start="39243" end="39292" title="1972 Bean Station bus-truck collision" label="deadliest motor vehicle accident in state history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475621" start="39307" end="39319" title="Bean Station, Tennessee" label="Bean Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400982" start="39323" end="39337" title="U.S. Route 11W" label="U.S. Route 11W"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936841" start="39345" end="39360" title="Semi-trailer truck" label="tractor-trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="39367" end="39380" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305019" start="39381" end="39397" title="Head-on collision" label="collided head-on"/>
<link wikidata="Q105095593" start="39713" end="39733" title="1990 Interstate 75 fog disaster" label="99-vehicle collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447266" start="39759" end="39772" title="Interstate 75 in Tennessee" label="Interstate 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908794" start="39778" end="39785" title="Calhoun, Tennessee" label="Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413525" start="39960" end="40015" title="Kingston Fossil Plant coal fly ash slurry spill" label="largest industrial waste spill in United States history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465266" start="40039" end="40060" title="Kingston Fossil Plant" label="Kingston Fossil Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="40068" end="40072" title="levee" label="dike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137808" start="40124" end="40132" title="fly ash" label="coal ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339067" start="40149" end="40154" title="Emory River" label="Emory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101503" start="40159" end="40171" title="Clinch River" label="Clinch River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780884" start="40254" end="40271" title="Appalachian music" label="Appalachian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889019" start="40445" end="40456" title="Cecil Sharp" label="Cecil Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456634" start="40465" end="40474" title="Flag Pond, Tennessee" label="Flag Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168431" start="40476" end="40487" title="Sevierville, Tennessee" label="Sevierville"/>
<link wikidata="Q374287" start="40489" end="40498" title="Harrogate, Tennessee" label="Harrogate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882692" start="40707" end="40722" title="Uncle Am Stuart" label="Uncle Am Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084562" start="40724" end="40738" title="Charlie Bowman" label="Charlie Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095358" start="40740" end="40755" title="Clarence Ashley" label="Clarence Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484229" start="40757" end="40770" title="G. B. Grayson" label="G. B. Grayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452259" start="40776" end="40787" title="Theron Hale" label="Theron Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="40870" end="40900" title="Victor Talking Machine Company" label="Victor Talking Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969120" start="40913" end="40941" title="Bristol sessions" label="series of recording sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q917821" start="40945" end="40952" title="Bristol, Tennessee" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q366358" start="40992" end="41006" title="Jimmie Rodgers (country singer)" label="Jimmie Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412029" start="41015" end="41028" title="Carter Family" label="Carter Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268230" start="41073" end="41094" title="Johnson City sessions" label="Johnson City sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="41208" end="41222" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="41359" end="41366" title="Country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q501935" start="41460" end="41472" title="Union County, Tennessee" label="Union County"/>
<link wikidata="Q455773" start="41551" end="41560" title="Roy Acuff" label="Roy Acuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q72096" start="41562" end="41573" title="Chet Atkins" label="Chet Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040657" start="41579" end="41589" title="Carl Smith (musician)" label="Carl Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751782" start="41704" end="41719" title="Nashville sound" label="Nashville sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="41724" end="41734" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734759" start="41857" end="41870" title="The Ford Show" label="The Ford Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="41891" end="41894" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q963827" start="41931" end="41951" title="Tennessee Ernie Ford" label="Tennessee Ernie Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q917821" start="41957" end="41964" title="Bristol, Tennessee" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q524994" start="41966" end="41985" title="Christy (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Christy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="41995" end="41998" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113620" start="42225" end="42230" title="Christy (novel)" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21539874" start="42320" end="42359" title="Dolly Parton&amp;#x27;s Coat of Many Colors" label="Dolly Parton&amp;#x27;s Coat of Many Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981124" start="42422" end="42426" title="Coat of Many Colors (song)" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q868099" start="42431" end="42436" title="Coat of Many Colors" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q337316" start="42604" end="42628" title="Academy of Country Music" label="Academy of Country Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q316661" start="42645" end="42657" title="Daniel Boone" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42750" end="42774" title="Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)#Soundtrack" label="&amp;quot;Daniel Boone&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741553" start="42865" end="42878" title="The Imperials" label="The Imperials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452410" start="42897" end="42912" title="Christian music" label="Christian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206359" start="42920" end="42947" title="The Ballad of Davy Crockett" label="The Ballad of Davy Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093219" start="42989" end="43029" title="Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier" label="Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247718" start="43098" end="43108" title="Walt Disney anthology television series" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q963827" start="43181" end="43201" title="Tennessee Ernie Ford" label="Tennessee Ernie Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q311070" start="43230" end="43243" title="Davy Crockett" label="Davy Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549308" start="43329" end="43349" title="Limestone, Tennessee" label="Limestone, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242187" start="43367" end="43402" title="Davy Crockett Birthplace State Park" label="Davy Crockett Birthplace State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="43644" end="43667" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525708" start="44105" end="44147" title="Industrial revolution in the United States" label="Industrial revolution in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434601" start="44449" end="44463" title="Pilot Flying J" label="Pilot Flying J"/>
<link wikidata="Q835638" start="44494" end="44507" title="Regal Cinemas" label="Regal Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928749" start="44526" end="44559" title="BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee" label="BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179012" start="44574" end="44592" title="Covenant Transport" label="Covenant Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q143435" start="44598" end="44602" title="Unum" label="Unum"/>
<link wikidata="Q899022" start="44831" end="44847" title="Eastman Chemical" label="Eastman Chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="44995" end="45005" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460483" start="45018" end="45032" title="Volkswagen Chattanooga Assembly Plant" label="assembly plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q176508" start="45103" end="45108" title="Denso" label="Denso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="45144" end="45153" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797168" start="45292" end="45306" title="Mayfield Dairy" label="Mayfield Dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14554958" start="45317" end="45325" title="Moon Pie" label="Moon Pie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45327" end="45340" title="McKee Foods#Little Debbie" label="Little Debbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q896" start="45342" end="45354" title="Mountain Dew" label="Mountain Dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q208997" start="45356" end="45373" title="Bush&amp;#x27;s Beans" label="Bush&amp;#x27;s Beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q739550" start="45379" end="45393" title="M&amp;amp;M&amp;#x27;s" label="M&amp;amp;M&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q917046" start="45490" end="45499" title="moonshine" label="moonshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476662" start="45587" end="45594" title="Sea Ray" label="Sea Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907883" start="45596" end="45607" title="MasterCraft" label="MasterCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743395" start="45613" end="45625" title="Malibu Boats" label="Malibu Boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="45723" end="45743" title="consumer electronics" label="consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q714439" start="45799" end="45828" title="Oak Ridge National Laboratory" label="Oak Ridge National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061309" start="45840" end="45870" title="Y-12 National Security Complex" label="Y-12 National Security Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="45973" end="45990" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="45992" end="46007" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="46017" end="46043" title="supercomputer" label="high-performance computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q815297" start="46045" end="46060" title="systems biology" label="systems biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978379" start="46066" end="46083" title="National security of the United States" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624320" start="46109" end="46128" title="United States Department of Energy national laboratories" label="national laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="46136" end="46156" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289449" start="46688" end="46693" title="Erwin, Tennessee" label="Erwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004129" start="46738" end="46759" title="Nuclear Fuel Services" label="Nuclear Fuel Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="46796" end="46814" title="uranium enrichment" label="uranium enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="46835" end="46843" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="46997" end="47015" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="47047" end="47073" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639556" start="47271" end="47279" title="Sequoyah Nuclear Plant" label="Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739496" start="47284" end="47293" title="Watts Bar Nuclear Plant" label="Watts Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287278" start="47312" end="47323" title="Soddy-Daisy, Tennessee" label="Soddy-Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q502377" start="47328" end="47339" title="Rhea County, Tennessee" label="Rhea County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465266" start="47359" end="47367" title="Kingston Fossil Plant" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q11962572" start="47372" end="47380" title="Bull Run Fossil Plant" label="Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q900729" start="47455" end="47469" title="combined cycle power plant" label="combined cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389131" start="47499" end="47510" title="Rogersville, Tennessee" label="Rogersville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125134" start="47516" end="47553" title="Raccoon Mountain Pumped-Storage Plant" label="Raccoon Mountain Pumped-Storage Plant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47574" end="47610" title="Wind power in Tennessee#Buffalo Mountain" label="wind-powered facility near Oak Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152976" start="47624" end="47637" title="hydroelectric power in the United States" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="47687" end="47709" title="Nuclear reactor" label="nuclear power reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543123" start="48097" end="48118" title="small modular reactor" label="small modular reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="48227" end="48231" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q494768" start="48292" end="48308" title="Jefferson County, Tennessee" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502373" start="48317" end="48325" title="Grainger County, Tennessee" label="Grainger"/>
<link wikidata="Q495059" start="48330" end="48337" title="Hancock County, Tennessee" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700258" start="48378" end="48394" title="Tennessee marble" label="Tennessee marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="48423" end="48432" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="48711" end="48721" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884464" start="48748" end="48765" title="Holston Formation" label="Holston Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="48839" end="48848" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q464004" start="49260" end="49295" title="Great Smoky Mountains National Park" label="Great Smoky Mountains National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008520" start="49423" end="49433" title="Gatlinburg, Tennessee" label="Gatlinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078145" start="49438" end="49450" title="Pigeon Forge, Tennessee" label="Pigeon Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168431" start="49701" end="49712" title="Sevierville, Tennessee" label="Sevierville"/>
<link wikidata="Q530744" start="49775" end="49784" title="Dollywood" label="Dollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074722" start="49838" end="49853" title="Ober Gatlinburg" label="Ober Gatlinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="49943" end="49964" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906394" start="49969" end="50018" title="Big South Fork National River and Recreation Area" label="Big South Fork National River and Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193892" start="50023" end="50062" title="Cumberland Gap National Historical Park" label="Cumberland Gap National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096187" start="50098" end="50148" title="Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park" label="Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678745" start="50150" end="50194" title="Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail" label="Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50196" end="50234" title="Trail of Tears#Landmarks and commemorations" label="Trail of Tears National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q22023160" start="50244" end="50286" title="Manhattan Project National Historical Park" label="Manhattan Project National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466509" start="50352" end="50369" title="Foothills Parkway" label="Foothills Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q97585753" start="50375" end="50404" title="East Tennessee Crossing Byway" label="East Tennessee Crossing Byway"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811449" start="50410" end="50424" title="U.S. Route 441 in Tennessee" label="Norris Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985414" start="50426" end="50458" title="Tennessee State Route 63" label="Cumberland National Scenic Byway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818126" start="50464" end="50482" title="U.S. Route 129 in Tennessee" label="Tail of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962760" start="50488" end="50504" title="Cherohala Skyway" label="Cherohala Skyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076594" start="50514" end="50532" title="Ocoee Scenic Byway" label="Ocoee Scenic Byway"/>
<link wikidata="Q620648" start="50539" end="50556" title="Appalachian Trail" label="Appalachian Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811968" start="50888" end="50899" title="Ocoee River" label="Ocoee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q178970" start="51211" end="51219" title="Cherokee Lake" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301712" start="51221" end="51228" title="Douglas Lake" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471549" start="51230" end="51242" title="Fort Loudoun Lake" label="Fort Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155107" start="51248" end="51254" title="Norris Lake (Tennessee)" label="Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371789" start="51354" end="51389" title="Holiday cottage" label="&amp;quot;second-home&amp;quot; development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700014" start="51431" end="51449" title="Tennessee Aquarium" label="Tennessee Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354320" start="51502" end="51511" title="Rock City (roadside attraction)" label="Rock City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376312" start="51517" end="51527" title="Ruby Falls" label="Ruby Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112941" start="51908" end="51927" title="Outside (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Outside&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447266" start="51971" end="51984" title="Interstate 75 in Tennessee" label="Interstate 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445893" start="52137" end="52150" title="Interstate 40 in Tennessee" label="Interstate 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="52254" end="52264" title="concurrency (road)" label="concurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932823" start="52317" end="52333" title="annual average daily traffic" label="vehicles per day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447622" start="52399" end="52412" title="Interstate 81 in Tennessee" label="Interstate 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073715" start="52483" end="52496" title="U.S. Route 23 in Tennessee" label="Interstate 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q93753" start="52667" end="52680" title="Interstate 24 in Tennessee" label="Interstate 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161581" start="52814" end="52819" title="Pellissippi Parkway" label="I-140"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453658" start="52821" end="52826" title="Interstate 640" label="I-640"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450304" start="52832" end="52837" title="Interstate 275 (Tennessee)" label="I-275"/>
<link wikidata="Q800055" start="52875" end="52913" title="Appalachian Development Highway System" label="Appalachian Development Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="52997" end="53007" title="Limited-access road" label="expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q800459" start="53110" end="53133" title="National Highway System (United States)" label="National Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q20486941" start="53144" end="53155" title="List of U.S. Highways in Tennessee" label="U.S. Routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400982" start="53156" end="53159" title="U.S. Route 11W" label="11W"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818114" start="53161" end="53163" title="U.S. Route 19 in Tennessee" label="19"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817419" start="53165" end="53168" title="U.S. Route 25E" label="25E"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073717" start="53170" end="53172" title="U.S. Route 27 in Tennessee" label="27"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073719" start="53174" end="53176" title="U.S. Route 64 in Tennessee" label="64"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296949" start="53178" end="53181" title="U.S. Route 321" label="321"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816624" start="53187" end="53190" title="U.S. Route 411" label="411"/>
<link wikidata="Q651495" start="53261" end="53281" title="McGhee Tyson Airport" label="McGhee Tyson Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327969" start="53291" end="53296" title="Alcoa, Tennessee" label="Alcoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708272" start="53319" end="53351" title="Chattanooga Metropolitan Airport" label="Chattanooga Metropolitan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329887" start="53363" end="53390" title="Tri-Cities Regional Airport" label="Tri-Cities Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165777" start="53400" end="53411" title="Blountville, Tennessee" label="Blountville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="53427" end="53443" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="53480" end="53504" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034873" start="53645" end="53663" title="Inland waterways of the United States" label="navigable waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="53827" end="53836" title="University of Tennessee" label="Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781384" start="53841" end="53852" title="University of Tennessee at Chattanooga" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495917" start="53869" end="53892" title="University of Tennessee system" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q634669" start="53897" end="53928" title="East Tennessee State University" label="East Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980029" start="53985" end="53998" title="Bryan College" label="Bryan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445010" start="54000" end="54024" title="Carson–Newman University" label="Carson–Newman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412129" start="54026" end="54041" title="King University" label="King University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515384" start="54043" end="54057" title="Lee University" label="Lee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710034" start="54059" end="54086" title="Lincoln Memorial University" label="Lincoln Memorial University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309890" start="54088" end="54105" title="Maryville College" label="Maryville College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859616" start="54107" end="54126" title="Milligan University" label="Milligan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060891" start="54128" end="54146" title="Johnson University" label="Johnson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700242" start="54148" end="54177" title="Tennessee Wesleyan University" label="Tennessee Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564294" start="54183" end="54202" title="Tusculum University" label="Tusculum University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057982" start="54311" end="54344" title="Northeast State Community College" label="Northeast State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17033012" start="54361" end="54392" title="Walters State Community College" label="Walters State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161582" start="54408" end="54443" title="Pellissippi State Community College" label="Pellissippi State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087893" start="54460" end="54495" title="Chattanooga State Community College" label="Chattanooga State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132245" start="54501" end="54534" title="Cleveland State Community College" label="Cleveland State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059491" start="54540" end="54579" title="Tennessee College of Applied Technology" label="Tennessee College of Applied Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134647" start="54690" end="54700" title="Tennessee Volunteers" label="Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="54847" end="54855" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984022" start="54870" end="54885" title="Neyland Stadium" label="Neyland Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525746" start="54956" end="54977" title="Thompson–Boling Arena" label="Thompson–Boling Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164235" start="55113" end="55131" title="Tennessee State Constitution" label="state constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700202" start="55157" end="55180" title="Tennessee Supreme Court" label="Tennessee Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="55693" end="55703" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="55714" end="55723" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="55885" end="55893" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699986" start="55940" end="55943" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699987" start="55948" end="55951" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699989" start="56507" end="56519" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="3rd district"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="56678" end="56682" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="56778" end="56789" title="Covenanters" label="Covenanters"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="56856" end="56862" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="57133" end="57143" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="57148" end="57162" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="57206" end="57224" title="Southern Democrats" label="Southern Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098629" start="57733" end="57749" title="Opposition Party (Southern U.S.)" label="Opposition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128268" start="57758" end="57784" title="Constitutional Union Party (United States)" label="Constitutional Union Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="58296" end="58314" title="Radical Republican" label="Radical Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562567" start="58995" end="59011" title="Henry Clay Evans" label="Henry Clay Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="59323" end="59336" title="gerrymandering" label="gerrymandered"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="59649" end="59667" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849238" start="59679" end="59692" title="Baker v. Carr" label="Baker v. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699990" start="59791" end="59803" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="4th District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646807" wikidata="Q3050566" url="?curid=646807" title="ESB Group">
<text>The Electricity Supply Board (ESB; ) is a state owned (95%; the rest are owned by employees) electricity company based in Ireland with operations worldwide. While historically a monopoly, the ESB now operates as a commercial semi-state concern in a &quot;liberalised&quot; and competitive market. It is a statutory corporation whose members are appointed by the Government of Ireland.

==Business areas==
The ESB is composed of several distinct, separate and legally demarcated companies. By business area, the principal companies are:

&quot;ESB Networks Limited&quot; manages construction and maintenance of the electricity transmission system. (The transmission system operator is an independent state company, EirGrid).

&quot;ESB Generation and Wholesale Markets (ESB GWM)&quot; operates a portfolio of power stations across the country, along with holdings in wind and other renewables.

&quot;Electric Ireland&quot; is a regulated supply company, one of fourteen companies (as of 10 October 2021) operating in the domestic market. Since 4 April 2011 the Commission for Energy Regulation no longer sets the company&#x27;s prices; the trade-off for this was that the division was required to change its name from ESB to Electric Ireland, to &quot;remove confusion&quot; between the ESB&#x27;s role as operator of the electricity network and a supplier in that market. The previous name, ESB Independent Energy, was dropped in January 2012.

&quot;ESB International Limited&quot; is responsible for the company&#x27;s unregulated activities, principally providing electrical engineering consultancy services around the world. It has holdings in many areas, such as power-generation joint ventures, renewables development, and computing consultancy.

&quot;Northern Ireland Electricity (NIE)&quot; is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the electricity network in Northern Ireland, and has been part of the ESB since they purchased it from Viridian in December 2010. However, the ESB does not own the former supply business of NIE, which was retained by Viridian.

==History==
The ESB was established by the fledgling Irish Free State government under the &quot;Electricity (Supply) Act, 1927&quot; to manage Ireland&#x27;s electricity supply after the successful &quot;Shannon Scheme&quot; at Ardnacrusha. The scheme was Ireland&#x27;s first large-scale electricity plant – and at the time, it provided 80% of the total energy demands of Ireland. To give an idea of the growth in demand, the output of Ardnacrusha is now approximately two per cent of national peak demand for power.

By 1937, plans were being finalised for the construction of several more hydro-electric plants. The plans called for stations at Poulaphouca, Golden Falls, Leixlip (all in Leinster), Clady, Cliff and Cathaleen&#x27;s Fall (between Belleek and Ballyshannon in County Donegal), Carrigadrohid and Inniscarra (in County Cork). All these new plants were completed by 1949, and together harnessed approximately 75% of Ireland&#x27;s inland water power potential. Many of these plants are still in operation; however, as could be expected with continuing growth in demand, their combined capacity falls far short of Ireland&#x27;s modern needs.

With Ireland&#x27;s towns and cities benefiting from electricity, the new government pushed the idea of &quot;Rural Electrification&quot;. Between 1946 and 1979, the ESB connected in excess of 420,000 customers in rural Ireland. The Rural Electrification Scheme has been described as &quot;the Quiet Revolution&quot; because of the major socio-economic change it brought about. The process was greatly helped in 1955 by the Electricity Supply Amendment Act, 1955.

In 1947, the ESB, needing ever more generation capacity, built the &quot;North Wall&quot; station on a 7.5-acre (30,000 m2) site in Dublin&#x27;s industrial port area on the north side of the River Liffey on the site of an old oil refinery. The original station consisted of one 12.5 MW steam turbine that was originally purchased for a power station at Portarlington but instead used at &quot;North Wall&quot;. Other power stations built around this time included the peat fired stations at Portarlington, County Laois, and Allenwood in County Kildare.

Because of the risks of becoming dependent on imported fuel sources and the potential for harvesting and utilising indigenous peat, the ESB – in partnership with &quot;Bord na Móna&quot; – established those stations and ESB also built Lanesboro power station in 1958. Located in County Longford, the plant burns peat, cut by &quot;Bord na Móna&quot; in the bogs of the Irish midlands. In 1965 the Shannonbridge station was commissioned. It is located in County Offaly. The two stations have been replaced by new peat-fired stations near the same locations, and peat is also used to power the independent Edenderry Power plant, in County Offaly.

As in most countries, energy consumption is low at night and high during the day. Aware of the substantial waste of night-time capacity, the ESB commissioned the Turlough Hill pumped storage hydro-electric station in 1968. This station, located in County Wicklow, pumps water uphill at night with the excess energy created by other stations, and releases it downhill during the day to turn turbines. The plant can generate up to 292 MW of power – but output is limited in terms of hours because of the storage capacity of the reservoir.

The 1970s brought about a continued increase in Ireland&#x27;s industrialisation and with it, a greater demand for energy. This new demand was to be met by the construction of the country&#x27;s two largest power stations – Poolbeg in 1971 and Moneypoint in 1979. The latter, in County Clare, remains Ireland&#x27;s only coal-burning plant and can produce 915 MW – just shy of the 1015 MW capacity of Poolbeg. In 2002 and 2003, new independent stations were constructed – Huntstown Power (north Dublin) and Dublin Bay Power (Ringsend, Dublin).

In 1991, the ESB established the &quot;ESB Archive&quot; to store historical documents relating to the company and its impact on Irish life.

On 8 September 2003, two of the last remaining places in Ireland unconnected to the national grid – Inishturbot and Inishturk islands (off the coast of Galway)- were finally connected to the mains supply. Some islands are still powered by small diesel-run power stations.

60 wind farms are currently connected to the power system (July 2006) and have the capacity to generate 590 MW of power, depending on wind conditions. These wind farms are mainly owned by independent companies and landowners.

On 16 March 2005, the ESB announced that it was to sell its ShopElectric (&quot;ESB Retail&quot;) chain of shops, with the exception of the Dublin Fleet Street and Cork Academy Street outlets, to Bank of Scotland (Ireland), converting them into main street banks. Existing staff were offered positions as bank tellers.

On 27 March 2008, the ESB announced a €22bn capital investment programme in renewable energy technology, with the aim to halve its carbon emissions within 12 years and achieve carbon net-zero by 2035.

==EirGrid==

On 1 July 2006, a new state owned company, EirGrid plc, separate from all parties in the Irish electricity sector, took over responsibility for the operation of the Irish national grid. It has its own separate board and it reports to the CER and its main shareholder, the Irish government. It was established as the operator of the Irish transmission system with ownership remaining with ESB Networks. On 12 March 2007, the Irish Government Policy on Energy stated that ownership of the transmission system would be vested in EirGrid from end 2008. EirGrid is responsible for balancing electricity consumption and generation and for the development of the power transmission system. Eirgrid, in conjunction with System Operator Northern Ireland, operates the all-island wholesale electricity market.

==Facilities==

Tarbert and Great Island were sold to Endesa in 2008 under the asset-divestment strategy agreed with the CER. This aims to lessen ESB GWM&#x27;s market dominant position.

The ESB also has significant holdings in wind generation, principally through its wholly owned subsidiary, Hibernian Wind Power.

==Former facilities==
==Standards==

The &quot;Shannon Scheme&quot; was the start of the ESB&#x27;s heavy reliance on German and Swedish electro-technology. Siemens, AEG and ASEA (Now ABB) equipment was used throughout the Irish generation and distribution system. The Irish system standardised on the 220 volt 50 Hz (now 230 volt) single phase and 380 volt (now 400 volt) three-phase supply systems which had been developed by Siemens and AEG in Germany. Residential installations followed a mixture of British (BS) and German (VDE) &amp; (DIN) standards.

Siemens standard Diazed and the more modern Neozed fuses remain the standard type of fuse used in domestic and industrial installations and modern circuit breakers comply with German DIN standards.

British core colours red (live), black (neutral) and green (earth/ground) were used. These were later updated to brown (live), blue (neutral) and green-and-yellow (earth/ground) as per CENELEC and European standards.

Three-phase core colours also comply with EU standards: brown (L1), black (L2), grey (L3), blue (neutral), green &amp; yellow (earth/ground)

British wiring accessories have generally been used in residential and light commercial installations e.g. junction boxes, light switches, wires and cables etc. However, in recent years European standard wiring accessories are beginning to replace some of these.

In industrial installations, Irish standards have always tended to follow German (DIN) and (VDE) norms.

===Earthing/grounding system===

* TN-C-S is preferred. This is referred to in Ireland as a &quot;neutralised&quot; supply. Most homes and businesses are connected to such a system. Where this system is used, all the metal pipework must be bonded i.e. connected to the system&#x27;s earth/ground creating an equipotential zone. In such an installation earth straps and yellow and green earth wires can be seen connected to pipework under sinks, in heating systems etc.
* TT system is used where TN-C-S earthing is not possible due to the design of the local distribution network, or the geology. This system is referred to as &#x27;unneutralised&#x27; or &#x27;not neutralised&#x27;.

Where a TT network connection is used, the entire supply must be protected by an RCD

Converting a TT supply to a TN-C supply &quot;neutralisation&quot; may only be carried out by an ESB engineer with the approval of ESB Networks. Under no circumstances should a homeowner, or an electrical contractor make any connection between the Earth/Ground and Neutral. To do so inappropriately could expose people to a risk of serious shock or electrocution.

===Plugs and socket outlets===

German Schuko socket outlets were once widely used alongside the British standard BS546 round pin plugs (both 3-pin and 2-pin varieties). However, both of these systems were replaced by BS 1363, standardised as Irish Standard IS 401 (Plug) and IS411 (Socket outlet). This standard eliminated incompatibilities between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland and was chosen as it was completely incompatible with both the old Schuko or BS 546 installations and encouraged people to rewire their homes to comply with the new standard. It removed the possibility of connecting Class I (requiring an earth connection) appliances, to socket outlets that are either unearthed (ungrounded) or with incompatible earthing contacts – e.g. 2-pin side-earthed Schuko plug will not make earth contact with a 3-hole, 5-amp BS 546 socket. Until UK and Irish voltages were standardised at 230 volts in the 1990s, it was common for such plugs to be pre-fitted on appliances destined for the Irish market, although they were prohibited on appliances destined for the United Kingdom market. Both countries now require the pre-fitting of BS 1363 plugs on domestic appliances.

It is now extremely rare to find a non-BS 1363 plug in use.

The 5-amp version of BS 546 is sometimes used for lamps controlled by a central switch or dimmer. They may also be used for other specialist purposes. It is, therefore, not advisable to connect an appliance to such a socket outlet and tourists should not use adaptors to connect to them if they are present in hotel bedrooms. They are exclusively for lighting or specialist purposes.

Industrial, heavy commercial and stage/studio installations use European standard IS EN 60309:1999 / IEC 60309 plugs and sockets. These are also used for stage and studio lighting, in recent preference to BS 546 15-amp fittings.

===Wiring===
The distribution board system used in Irish homes also differs substantially from those used in the UK and elsewhere. All distribution boards (fuse boxes) are required to have a &#x27;main fuse&#x27; or &#x27;main breaker&#x27; rated at the maximum permissible load for that installation. Typically, this is a 63 A fuse (Compared with 80 or 100 amps typically found in the UK) and a switch, or a Minized fuse isolator which accepts a Neozed fuse.

The distribution boards have been using DIN rail modular mounting systems for several decades. Even older fuse systems may be mounted on DIN rails.

30 mA RCD protection is required for all socket outlets since 1981, however it may also be present on older installations.

Homes are typically wired as follows:
*Lighting : 10 amp radials
*Socket outlets: 16 amp or 20 amp radials (RCD required) 
*Fixed appliances : 16 amp or 20 amp radials (RCD may be required)
*Water heater : 20 amp radial (RCD required)
*Cookers : 32–45 amp radial (RCD not required, but may be fitted optionally)
*Hob : 32–45 amp radial (RCD not required, but may be fitted optionally)
*Showers: 32 – 45 amp radial (RCD protected)
*Outdoor sockets : 16 or 20 amp radials (RCD required)

===Lighting===

Bayonet mount bulbs are used in most standard fittings and have been the dominant standard in most installations since the introduction of electric lighting in Ireland. Various styles of bayonet cap and mounts are used for a variety of sizes and types of bulbs, including spots and halogens.

Edison screw fittings are not as common, but may be found on some imported lighting equipment, particularly from southern Europe.

Low voltage halogen bulbs use bipin fittings.

Standards are controlled by the ElectroTechnical Council of Ireland (ETCI) and the National Standards Authority of Ireland.

==Employees==
The ESB is one of the largest companies in Ireland and employs around 7,000 people. It is 5% owned by its workers – this ownership is known as &quot;ESB ESOP (Employee Share Ownership Plan) Trustee Limited&quot;. The company is heavily unionised with the IWU (Independent Workers Union) being the largest Network Technician union in the company, and the Energy Services Union devoted to representing more senior staff at the organisation. The last major strike was in 1991, though strike action has been threatened as recently as February 2005 and often at times of industrial dispute. National surveys show, in line with other similar semi-state sector workers, that wages are above the national average – one recent survey showed that the average salary costs are twice the national average. It should, however, be remembered that workers of the company may be &quot;on call&quot; after hours, weekends and at holidays because of the unpredictability of emergencies.

==See also==
* Rolling blackout The &quot;zone rota&quot; system used during labour strikes
* Green eMotion project
* William F. Roe

==References==
===Print===
*R. O&#x27;Connor, J.A. Crutchfield, B.J. Whelan. &quot;Socio-Economic Impact of the Construction of the Esb Power-Station at Moneypoint, Co. Clare&quot; (Economic and Social Research Institute, 1981) 
*Tim Hastings. &quot;Semi-States in Crisis: The Challenge for Industrial Relations in the ESB and Other Major Semi-State Companies&quot; (Oak Tree Press, 1994) 
*Michael Shiel &quot;The Quiet Revolution – The Electrification of Rural Ireland&quot; (O&#x27;Brien Press) 

==External links==
* ESB International
* ESB Independent Energy
* Eirgrid</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3050566" start="4" end="28" title="ESB Group" label="Electricity Supply Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050566" start="30" end="33" title="ESB Group" label="ESB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823722" start="73" end="91" title="Employee stock ownership" label="owned by employees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326624" start="93" end="112" title="electricity company" label="electricity company"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="122" end="129" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="362" end="383" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q112046" start="652" end="680" title="transmission system operator" label="transmission system operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310503" start="714" end="721" title="EirGrid" label="EirGrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17074751" start="900" end="916" title="Electric Ireland" label="Electric Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152645" start="1061" end="1093" title="Commission for Energy Regulation" label="Commission for Energy Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058492" start="1760" end="1788" title="Northern Ireland Electricity" label="Northern Ireland Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1880" end="1896" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934801" start="1956" end="1964" title="Viridian Group" label="Viridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="2134" end="2150" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q179683" start="2286" end="2300" title="Shannon hydroelectric scheme" label="Shannon Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752171" start="2310" end="2321" title="Ardnacrusha" label="Ardnacrusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775762" start="2730" end="2741" title="Poulaphouca" label="Poulaphouca"/>
<link wikidata="Q52530502" start="2743" end="2755" title="Golden Falls hydroelectric power station" label="Golden Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q987797" start="2757" end="2764" title="Leixlip" label="Leixlip"/>
<link wikidata="Q159736" start="2773" end="2781" title="Leinster" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2784" end="2789" title="Clady, County Donegal" label="Clady"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251794" start="2801" end="2822" title="Cathaleen&amp;#x27;s Fall hydroelectric power station" label="Cathaleen&amp;#x27;s Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894846" start="2832" end="2839" title="Belleek, County Fermanagh" label="Belleek"/>
<link wikidata="Q805462" start="2844" end="2856" title="Ballyshannon" label="Ballyshannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="2860" end="2874" title="County Donegal" label="County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775802" start="2877" end="2890" title="Carrigadrohid" label="Carrigadrohid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035822" start="2895" end="2905" title="Inniscarra" label="Inniscarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="2910" end="2921" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="3837" end="3850" title="Dublin" label="Dublin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q208009" start="3897" end="3909" title="River Liffey" label="River Liffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989246" start="4059" end="4072" title="Portarlington, County Laois" label="Portarlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989246" start="4197" end="4210" title="Portarlington, County Laois" label="Portarlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q55299" start="4212" end="4224" title="County Laois" label="County Laois"/>
<link wikidata="Q173332" start="4243" end="4257" title="County Kildare" label="County Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q893380" start="4428" end="4440" title="Bord na Móna" label="Bord na Móna"/>
<link wikidata="Q186220" start="4539" end="4554" title="County Longford" label="County Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="4572" end="4576" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973783" start="4657" end="4670" title="Shannonbridge" label="Shannonbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542326" start="5068" end="5081" title="Turlough Hill" label="Turlough Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q182591" start="5154" end="5168" title="County Wicklow" label="County Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228597" start="5668" end="5675" title="Poolbeg Generating Station" label="Poolbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899351" start="5688" end="5698" title="Moneypoint" label="Moneypoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q181862" start="5723" end="5735" title="County Clare" label="County Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090989" start="5969" end="5977" title="Ringsend" label="Ringsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q25543948" start="6118" end="6128" title="Culture of Ireland" label="Irish life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6231" end="6242" title="Inishturbot" label="Inishturbot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6247" end="6256" title="Inishturk (County Galway)" label="Inishturk"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="6283" end="6289" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q113997769" start="6778" end="6790" title="Fleet Street, Dublin" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642108" start="6827" end="6853" title="Bank of Scotland (Ireland)" label="Bank of Scotland (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="7027" end="7043" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="7082" end="7098" title="carbon emissions" label="carbon emissions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7878" end="7910" title="System Operator Northern Ireland" label="System Operator Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275336" start="8021" end="8027" title="Endesa (Spain)" label="Endesa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8262" end="8282" title="Hibernian Wind Power" label="Hibernian Wind Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="8414" end="8421" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="8442" end="8449" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q158276" start="8451" end="8454" title="AEG (German company)" label="AEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q52665" start="8459" end="8463" title="ASEA" label="ASEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q52825" start="8469" end="8472" title="ABB" label="ABB"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="8591" end="8595" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="8599" end="8601" title="Hertz" label="Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="8638" end="8642" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970166" start="8860" end="8866" title="Diazed" label="Diazed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970166" start="8887" end="8893" title="Neozed" label="Neozed"/>
<link wikidata="Q182221" start="8894" end="8899" title="Fuse (electrical)" label="fuses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9806" end="9812" title="Earthing system#Types of TN networks" label="TN-C-S"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10242" end="10244" title="Earthing system#TT network" label="TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q337716" start="10537" end="10540" title="Residual-current device" label="RCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123613" start="10946" end="10952" title="Schuko" label="Schuko"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740126" start="11125" end="11132" title="BS 1363" label="BS 1363"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123613" start="11369" end="11375" title="Schuko" label="Schuko"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740126" start="11379" end="11385" title="BS 546" label="BS 546"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123613" start="11692" end="11698" title="Schuko" label="Schuko"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740126" start="11753" end="11759" title="BS 546" label="BS 546"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653425" start="12648" end="12657" title="IEC 60309" label="IEC 60309"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13186" end="13193" title="Minized" label="Minized"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970166" start="13224" end="13230" title="Neozed" label="Neozed"/>
<link wikidata="Q570110" start="13278" end="13286" title="DIN rail" label="DIN rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q570110" start="13375" end="13383" title="DIN rail" label="DIN rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q337716" start="13393" end="13396" title="residual-current device" label="RCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q10499968" start="14013" end="14026" title="Bayonet mount" label="Bayonet mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764334" start="14306" end="14318" title="Edison screw" label="Edison screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619226" start="14467" end="14472" title="bipin" label="bipin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28196149" start="14977" end="14998" title="Energy Services Union" label="Energy Services Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438438" start="15608" end="15624" title="Rolling blackout" label="Rolling blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q388463" start="15687" end="15708" title="Green eMotion project" label="Green eMotion project"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008865" start="15711" end="15725" title="William F. Roe" label="William F. Roe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646813" wikidata="Q2748122" url="?curid=646813" title="Miami River (Florida)">
<text>The Miami River is a river in the U.S. state of Florida that drains out of the Everglades and runs through the city of Miami, including Downtown. The long river flows from the terminus of the Miami Canal at Miami International Airport to Biscayne Bay. It was originally a natural river inhabited at its mouth by the Tequesta Native Americans, but it was dredged and is now polluted throughout its route through Miami-Dade County. The mouth of the river is home to the Port of Miami and many other businesses whose pressure to maintain it has helped to improve the river&#x27;s condition.

==Etymology==
Although it is widely believed that the name is derived from a Native American word that means &quot;sweet water,&quot; the earliest mention of the name comes from Hernando de Escalante Fontaneda, a captive of Native Americans in southern Florida for 17 years, when he referred to what is now Lake Okeechobee as the &quot;Lake of Mayaimi, which is called Mayaimi because it is very large&quot;. The Mayaimi people were named after the lake around which they lived. Spanish records include the cacique of &quot;Maimi&quot; in a group of 280 Florida Native Americans that arrived in Cuba in 1710. Reports on a Spanish Mission to the Biscayne Bay area in 1743 mention &quot;Maymies&quot; or &quot;Maimíes&quot; living nearby. The river has also been known as the Garband River, Rio Ratones, Fresh Water River, Sweetwater River, and Lemon River. It has been known as the Miami River since the Second Seminole War of 1835–42.

==Natural river==

In its original natural state, the river started at rapids formed by water from the Everglades flowing over a rocky ledge four miles (6.4 km) from its mouth. Frederick H. Gerdes of the United States Coast Survey reported in 1849 that &quot;[f]rom the upper falls to near its entrance into Key Biscayne Bay… water in the Glades was above low tide.&quot; The rapids were removed when the Miami Canal was dredged in an attempt to drain the wetland.

The river divided into a North Fork and a South Fork about three miles (4.8 km) above its mouth. Each fork extended only one mile (1.6 km) to rapids marking the edge of the Everglades. The North Fork had a greater flow and higher drop over its rapids. One- and one-half miles (2.4 km) above the mouth of the river there was a tributary on the north side, called Wagner Creek, which was about two miles (3.2 km) long. The Miami River was also fed by several springs, including some in the bed of the river. The river&#x27;s flow was variable and in times of drought the river did not flow.

==History==

The earliest known inhabitants of the area around the Miami River were the Tequestas. Their major town at the time of first European contact was on the north bank of the river near the mouth. Before the intensive development of Miami in the 20th century, mounds built by the Tequesta were located along the river. Spanish missions were briefly established beside the river in 1567–70 and in 1743, but the area was abandoned when Spain turned Florida over to Britain in 1765.

The area around the Miami River attracted settlers throughout the 19th century with the major exception of the years of the Seminole Wars, but those years had little effect on the river. The United States Army attempted to dig a channel through the sandbar at the mouth of the river in 1856, but stopped when it was decided that Fort Dallas would not be made permanent.

===Dredging and pollution===

Modification of the river began in earnest with the arrival of the Florida East Coast Railway in Miami in 1896. There was much dredging and filling along the river. The rapids at the head of the South Fork were removed in 1908. From 1909 to 1912, the Miami Canal was dug, bypassing the rapids at the head of the North Fork. The canal was dammed off from the river for most of the construction period. When the canal was opened to the river in March 1912, large amounts of Everglades muck and finely ground stone from the dredging were washed down the river, silting it. As a result, the lower river had to be dredged three times in two years.

Dredging of the river and of the canals connecting to the river continued into the 1930s. Deepening the Miami River (and other streams and canals draining into Biscayne Bay), as well as the drainage of the Everglades, which was a major purpose of the dredging, led to saltwater intrusion in the area, ultimately forcing the abandonment of drinking water wells on several occasions. By the 1940s, dams were being installed on the canals leading into the Miami River to prevent salt water from traveling inland.

The Miami River also became polluted. In 1897, Miami&#x27;s first sewer line started emptying directly into the river. By the 1950s, 29 sewers were dumping untreated sewage into the river. Miami-Dade County constructed a sewage treatment plant on Virginia Key in the 1950s and connected sewer lines to it, routing the raw sewage away from the river.

=== Artifact discoveries ===
At a site next to the river, archeologists in 2023 discovered numerous artifacts, &quot;dating back to the dawn of human civilization 7,000 years ago.&quot; The discoveries included prehistoric tools and preserved animals and plants. Development of a residential property was put on hold during legal proceedings to determine if the site would be preserved as a protected archeological site.

==Commercial use==
The Miami River is likely the shortest working river in the United States. The Center for Urban &amp; Environmental Solutions reported in 2008: &quot;Waterborne commerce through the Miami River port doubled between an annual level of about 250,000 short tons in the early 1970s to about 500,000 in the early years of the new century. Foreign trade accounts for most of the commerce through the Miami River Port. Exports dominate the Port&#x27;s commerce, accounting for over 75 percent of the total. In the 1970s, exports had averaged 56 percent of the total. Most of the Miami River&#x27;s foreign trade is with the nearby countries of the Caribbean, especially the Dominican Republic, Haiti and the Bahamas. This reflects the suitability of the Miami River for shallow draft vessels which serve the many shallow draft ports in the Caribbean.&quot;

The Miami River has long been home to many small cargo terminals where smaller ships (up to about in length) call to load cargo, most of which is destined for ports in the Bahamas and various Caribbean nations. It is also an area where all manner of contraband—illegal drugs, undocumented immigrants—have been discharged into the United States. Because of continuing efforts by the United States Coast Guard, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), DEA and other agencies, the illicit trade has been minimized in recent years.

Although the part of the river from Northwest 36th Street to its mouth is still polluted, this has been mitigated considerably by rigid enforcement of both international and U.S. laws regarding discharge of oil and sewage by ships, as well as of laws addressing industrial dumping. The muddy bottom, however, is still reported to contain undesirable substances in significant quantities.

In years past, many vessels docked in the river at the ends of their last voyages were abandoned and sank alongside the docks, creating eyesores and hazards for navigation. Those derelicts have been removed.

Invoking the authority of Port State Control, the U.S. Coast Guard strongly enforces the numerous international and national regulations regarding safety equipment, construction, maintenance and manning of ships entering all U.S. ports, including the Miami River, and virtually eliminating the many dangerously substandard vessels that had sailed from the U.S. in previous years.

In recent years, realizing they had common interests, various business entities along the river formed the Miami River Marine Group. The group works closely with local law enforcement agencies, the U.S. Coast Guard, ICE, and others to maintain clear channels of communication and cooperation. It now acts much as one port with numerous port facilities and support entities such as agents, surveyors, consultants, naval architects and engineers, and ship and machinery repair businesses.

Many of the ships sailing from the Miami River carry cargo to ports in Haiti including Port-au-Prince, Miragoâne, Cap-Haïtien, Port-de-Paix, Saint-Marc, Gonaïves, and Jacmel. Their cargo typically consist of dry foodstuffs such as beans and rice, canned goods, clothing, household goods and appliances, and used cars, trucks, and buses.

In times past, some of the cargo terminals on the river were areas of lawlessness. Law enforcement and regulatory agencies have eliminated most of that sort of activity. When the International Ship and Port Security Code and the U.S. Maritime Transportation Act of 2002 came into force (and in the prior runup) on July 1, 2004, most opportunities for crime were eliminated.

==Redevelopment==
Some of the terminals and other business related to cargo shipping on the &quot;lower end&quot; of the river near downtown Miami have been eliminated or moved farther upstream because of illicit shipping activities. The &quot;lower end&quot; of the river has been the subject of much renovation and building of high rise offices, hotels, and living structures.

A number of residential and mixed-use projects have been constructed along the Miami River. They include Latitude on the River, Mint at Riverfront, Neo Vertika, River Oaks Marina and Tower, and Terrazas Miami.

Starting in the 2000s, two urban greenway projects known as the Miami Riverwalk and Miami River Greenway were started.

==Gallery==
==See also==
*History of Miami

==Notes==
==References==
*
*

==External links==
*Miami-Dade History
*U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Dredging Page
*Miami River Commission
*Water Quality Report 
*City of Miami&#x27;s Miami River Development Plan </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2748122" start="4" end="15" title="Miami River (Florida)" label="Miami River"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="48" end="55" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q597281" start="79" end="89" title="Everglades" label="Everglades"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="119" end="124" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215877" start="136" end="144" title="Greater Downtown Miami" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827279" start="192" end="203" title="Miami Canal" label="Miami Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="207" end="234" title="Miami International Airport" label="Miami International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q954659" start="238" end="250" title="Biscayne Bay" label="Biscayne Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501199" start="316" end="324" title="Tequesta" label="Tequesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="354" end="361" title="dredging" label="dredged"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="411" end="428" title="Miami-Dade County, Florida" label="Miami-Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q75646" start="468" end="481" title="Port of Miami" label="Port of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="666" end="681" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196510" start="767" end="798" title="Hernando de Escalante Fontaneda" label="Hernando de Escalante Fontaneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q202905" start="896" end="911" title="Lake Okeechobee" label="Lake Okeechobee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513818" start="1002" end="1009" title="Mayaimi" label="Mayaimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="1096" end="1103" title="cacique" label="cacique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976715" start="1492" end="1511" title="Second Seminole War" label="Second Seminole War"/>
<link wikidata="Q103439667" start="1729" end="1755" title="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey" label="United States Coast Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="1946" end="1953" title="Dredging" label="dredged"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="1981" end="1988" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55395167" start="2353" end="2365" title="Wagner Creek (Florida)" label="Wagner Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501199" start="2669" end="2677" title="Tequesta" label="Tequesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="3052" end="3059" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q900693" start="3194" end="3207" title="Seminole Wars" label="Seminole Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="3261" end="3279" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077836" start="3399" end="3410" title="Fort Dallas" label="Fort Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q442450" start="3538" end="3564" title="Florida East Coast Railway" label="Florida East Coast Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571727" start="3954" end="3958" title="Muck (soil)" label="muck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002254" start="4383" end="4402" title="saltwater intrusion" label="saltwater intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030402" start="4873" end="4885" title="Virginia Key" label="Virginia Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="5378" end="5396" title="Archaeological site" label="archeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="6441" end="6448" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="6651" end="6676" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="6678" end="6712" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="6720" end="6723" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="DEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881760" start="6903" end="6912" title="Mitigation" label="mitigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="8337" end="8342" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q34261" start="8353" end="8367" title="Port-au-Prince" label="Port-au-Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017073" start="8369" end="8378" title="Miragoâne" label="Miragoâne"/>
<link wikidata="Q216835" start="8380" end="8391" title="Cap-Haïtien" label="Cap-Haïtien"/>
<link wikidata="Q951602" start="8393" end="8405" title="Port-de-Paix" label="Port-de-Paix"/>
<link wikidata="Q132189" start="8407" end="8417" title="Saint-Marc" label="Saint-Marc"/>
<link wikidata="Q852550" start="8419" end="8427" title="Gonaïves" label="Gonaïves"/>
<link wikidata="Q923362" start="8433" end="8439" title="Jacmel" label="Jacmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q249565" start="9603" end="9611" title="greenway (landscape)" label="greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827392" start="9634" end="9649" title="Miami Riverwalk" label="Miami Riverwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981946" start="9654" end="9674" title="Miami River Greenway" label="Miami River Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111444" start="9716" end="9732" title="History of Miami" label="History of Miami"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646814" wikidata="Q823946" url="?curid=646814" title="Northwest Region (Cameroon)">
<text>The Northwest Region, or North-West Region () is a region with special status in Cameroon. Its capital is Bamenda. The Northwest Region was part of the Southern Cameroons, found in the western highlands of Cameroon. It is bordered to the southwest by the Southwest Region, to the south by the West Region, to the east by the Adamawa Region, and to the north by Nigeria. Various Ambazonian nationalist and separatist factions regard the region as being distinct as a polity from Cameroon.

In 1919, the Northwest Region became solely administered by the United Kingdom. In 1961, the region joined the Cameroon. Ambazonian separatists regard both the North-West and South-West regions as being constituent components of their envisaged breakaway state.

==History==
The origins of the region are linked to the settlement of the Tikar people who joined the Bamoun Kingdom, in the 1700s. In 1884, the region was colonized by Germany under the regime of the protectorate until 1916 when it became a condominium administered jointly by the United Kingdom and the France. In 1919, the administration of the North West region, as part of Southern Cameroons became solely British. In 1961, the region joined Cameroon as part of the federated state of West Cameroon, under the 1961 British Cameroons referendum.

At the end of 2017, an Ambazonian separatist movement in the two English-speaking regions of North West and South West began a wave of violence affecting soldiers, police, business leaders and workers. Separatist activists are trying in particular to prevent children from returning to school. Between 2016 and 2019, sepretists reportedly ransacked, destroyed or burned down more than 174 schools.

==Administration==

The Northwest Region (known before 2008 as the Northwest Province) is the third most populated province in Cameroon. It has one major metropolitan city, Bamenda, with several other smaller towns such as Wum, Kumbo, Mbengwi, Ndop, Nkambé, Batibo, Bambui, Bafut and Oshie. The province saw an increase in its population from approximately 1.2 million in 1987 to 1.8 million in 2010. The population density of 99.12 people per square kilometer is higher than the national average of 22.6. The provincial urban growth rate is 7.95%, higher than the national average of 5.6%, while the rural growth rate, at 1.16%, is equal to the national rate. In 2001, according to the Statistical Provincial Services of the North-West Province, the population of the province is young, with over 62% of its residents being less than 20 years old. Therefore, the dependency rate in the province is high, particularly in the rural areas.

Like other regions in Cameroon, the Northwest Region is made up of administrative divisions. The province was created in 1972 with five divisions or departments: Bui, Donga-Mantung, Menchum, Mezam, and Momo. Today, it has seven divisions, the additions being Boyo, which was carved out of the Menchum division, and Ngo-Ketunjia or Ngoketunjia, split off from the Mezam division. Each division is further subdivided, with thirty-one total subdivisions in the Northwest Province. The basic unit of local government is the council, and there are thirty-two councils in the region.

=== Politics ===
The Northwest is a stronghold of the Social Democratic Front (SDF) which is one of the main opposition parties of Cameroon. Some Northwesterners feel completely marginalized by the government. There is also a secessionist movement, the SCNC (Southern Cameroons National Council) whose goal is to secede from Cameroon and form a republic consisting of the English-speaking regions. Much of the SCNC&#x27;s influence exists in the Northwest. In 2008, the President of the Republic of Cameroon, Paul Biya, signed decrees abolishing &quot;Provinces&quot; and replacing them with &quot;Regions&quot;. The Northwest Province subsequently became the Northwest Region.

===Special status===
As part of the Major National Dialogue, the region was given a &quot;special status&quot; in December 2019, granting additional rights and responsibilities in relation to economic, health, social, educational, sports and cultural development. Under the special status the region has a bicameral Regional Assembly, made up of a 20-member House of Chiefs composed of traditional leaders and a 70-member House of Divisional Representatives nominated by municipal councils. The Regional Assembly appoints a Regional Executive Council. Additional powers over health and education were also granted to municipalities.

====Regional Executive Council====
The Regional Executive Council is led by the President of the Regional Assembly and includes a vice president, three commissioners, two secretaries and a questor.
==Population==

The Northwest Region has many ethnic groups, including immigrants from other regions and countries. Nigeria is well represented, as it borders the region to both the north and the northwest. The native population comprises a variety of ethnic and linguistic groups. The main ethnic groups are of Tikar origin: Tikari, Widikum, Fulani, and Moghamo. The most widely spoken languages in the province include Mungaka, Limbum, Yamba, spoken by the Yamba people also of the Donga Mantung Division; Bafmen, Oku, Lamnso, Ngemba, Pidgin English, Balikumbat, Papiakum, Moghamo, and Nkom. During the colonial period, administrative boundaries were created which cut across ethnic groups and cultures. As a result, parts of some ethnic groups now lie in different divisions and provinces, which is believed to have led to several land conflicts.

In the provinces, the social organization recognizes a chief as its head, also called the &quot;Fon&quot;. The Fons, who in their tribal area may be more influential than the official administrative authorities, are considered the living representative of the tribal ancestors.

==Natural attractions==

The Northwest region has unique attractions, including the second highest mountain in West Africa, Mount Oku. It is home to birds such as the Bannerman&#x27;s turaco, which is unique to this region. There are also many crater lakes such as Lake Oku, Lake Awing, and Lake Nyos. The largest remaining mountain forest in the Northwest Region is the Kilum-Ijim Forest. Menchum Falls, and Abbi Falls in the Mbengwi Division, are also located here.

==References==
* &quot;Background Note: Cameroon&quot;. 2010. Government of Cameroon. Accessed 11 March 2013.

==External links==
*Northwest Regional Assembly
*Northwest Regional Assembly on Facebook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q823946" start="4" end="20" title="Northwest Region (Cameroon)" label="Northwest Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q823946" start="25" end="42" title="Northwest Region (Cameroon)" label="North-West Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q869042" start="51" end="57" title="Regions of Cameroon" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="63" end="77" title="Autonomous region" label="special status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="81" end="89" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q528432" start="106" end="113" title="Bamenda" label="Bamenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542471" start="152" end="170" title="Southern Cameroons" label="Southern Cameroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q607499" start="255" end="271" title="Southwest Region (Cameroon)" label="Southwest Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q165784" start="293" end="304" title="West Region (Cameroon)" label="West Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q351514" start="325" end="339" title="Adamawa Region" label="Adamawa Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="361" end="368" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842000" start="378" end="387" title="Ambazonia" label="Ambazonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="466" end="472" title="polity" label="polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="553" end="567" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="600" end="608" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842000" start="610" end="619" title="Ambazonia" label="Ambazonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q241843" start="826" end="831" title="Tikar people" label="Tikar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629505" start="854" end="868" title="Kingdom of Bamum" label="Bamoun Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="921" end="928" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="953" end="965" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q734818" start="994" end="1005" title="Condominium (international law)" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1034" end="1048" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1057" end="1063" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542471" start="1130" end="1148" title="Southern Cameroons" label="Southern Cameroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="1199" end="1207" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23502675" start="1242" end="1255" title="West Cameroon" label="West Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969594" start="1267" end="1300" title="1961 British Cameroons referendum" label="1961 British Cameroons referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842000" start="1326" end="1347" title="Ambazonia" label="Ambazonian separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q607499" start="1411" end="1421" title="Southwest Region (Cameroon)" label="South West"/>
<link wikidata="Q528432" start="1875" end="1882" title="Bamenda" label="Bamenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034978" start="1925" end="1928" title="Wum" label="Wum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533580" start="1930" end="1935" title="Kumbo" label="Kumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989172" start="1937" end="1944" title="Mbengwi" label="Mbengwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450615" start="1946" end="1950" title="Ndop, Cameroon" label="Ndop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445980" start="1952" end="1958" title="Nkambé" label="Nkambé"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869256" start="1960" end="1966" title="Batibo" label="Batibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853454" start="1968" end="1974" title="Bambui" label="Bambui"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896247" start="1986" end="1991" title="Oshie, Cameroon" label="Oshie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306813" start="2790" end="2801" title="Departments of Cameroon" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q702284" start="2803" end="2806" title="Bui (Cameroon department)" label="Bui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442736" start="2808" end="2821" title="Donga-Mantung" label="Donga-Mantung"/>
<link wikidata="Q685677" start="2823" end="2830" title="Menchum" label="Menchum"/>
<link wikidata="Q966674" start="2832" end="2837" title="Mezam" label="Mezam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538015" start="2843" end="2847" title="Momo (department)" label="Momo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442750" start="2900" end="2904" title="Boyo (department)" label="Boyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445374" start="2956" end="2968" title="Ngo-Ketunjia" label="Ngo-Ketunjia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470113" start="3274" end="3297" title="Social Democratic Front (Cameroon)" label="Social Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330877" start="3479" end="3514" title="Southern Cameroons National Council" label="Southern Cameroons National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q57272" start="3729" end="3738" title="Paul Biya" label="Paul Biya"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783309" start="3935" end="3958" title="Major National Dialogue" label="Major National Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q36483" start="5057" end="5063" title="Tikar language" label="Tikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110579" start="5065" end="5072" title="Widikum people" label="Widikum"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="5074" end="5080" title="Fulani" label="Fulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869256" start="5086" end="5093" title="Batibo" label="Moghamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36068" start="5152" end="5159" title="Mungaka" label="Mungaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35801" start="5161" end="5167" title="Limbum" label="Limbum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017729" start="5247" end="5250" title="Oku, Cameroon" label="Oku"/>
<link wikidata="Q35788" start="5252" end="5258" title="Lamnso" label="Lamnso"/>
<link wikidata="Q35541" start="5268" end="5282" title="Cameroonian Pidgin English" label="Pidgin English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850904" start="5284" end="5294" title="Balikumbat" label="Balikumbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36054" start="5306" end="5313" title="Meta&amp;#x27; language" label="Moghamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656595" start="5319" end="5323" title="Kom language (Cameroon)" label="Nkom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="5972" end="5983" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322001" start="5985" end="5994" title="Mount Oku" label="Mount Oku"/>
<link wikidata="Q304026" start="6028" end="6051" title="Bannerman&amp;#x27;s turaco" label="Bannerman&amp;#x27;s turaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115550" start="6126" end="6134" title="Lake Oku" label="Lake Oku"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6136" end="6146" title="Lake Awing" label="Lake Awing"/>
<link wikidata="Q332628" start="6152" end="6161" title="Lake Nyos" label="Lake Nyos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408259" start="6232" end="6249" title="Kilum-Ijim Forest" label="Kilum-Ijim Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782685" start="6251" end="6264" title="Menchum Falls" label="Menchum Falls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6270" end="6280" title="Abbi Falls" label="Abbi Falls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6288" end="6304" title="Mbengwi Division" label="Mbengwi Division"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646817" wikidata="Q131472" url="?curid=646817" title="Agrobacterium tumefaciens">
<text>Agrobacterium tumefaciens (also known as &quot;Rhizobium radiobacter&quot;) is the causal agent of crown gall disease (the formation of tumours) in over 140 species of eudicots. It is a rod-shaped, Gram-negative soil bacterium. Symptoms are caused by the insertion of a small segment of DNA (known as T-DNA, for &#x27;transfer DNA&#x27;, not to be confused with tRNA that transfers amino acids during protein synthesis), from a plasmid into the plant cell, which is incorporated at a semi-random location into the plant genome. Plant genomes can be engineered by use of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; for the delivery of sequences hosted in T-DNA binary vectors.

&quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot; is an Alphaproteobacterium of the family Rhizobiaceae, which includes the nitrogen-fixing legume symbionts. Unlike the nitrogen-fixing symbionts, tumor-producing &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; species are pathogenic and do not benefit the plant. The wide variety of plants affected by &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; makes it of great concern to the agriculture industry.

Economically, &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; is a serious pathogen of walnuts, grape vines, stone fruits, nut trees, sugar beets, horse radish, and rhubarb, and the persistent nature of the tumors or galls caused by the disease make it particularly harmful for perennial crops.

&quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot; grows optimally at . The doubling time can range from 2.5–4h depending on the media, culture format, and level of aeration. At temperatures above , &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; begins to experience heat shock which is likely to result in errors in cell division.

==Conjugation==

To be virulent, the bacterium contains a tumour-inducing plasmid (Ti plasmid or pTi) 200 kbp long, which contains the T-DNA and all the genes necessary to transfer it to the plant cell. Many strains of &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; do not contain a pTi.

Since the Ti plasmid is essential to cause disease, prepenetration events in the rhizosphere occur to promote bacterial conjugation - exchange of plasmids amongst bacteria. In the presence of opines, &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; produces a diffusible conjugation signal called &quot;N&quot;-(3-oxo-octanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (3OC8HSL) or the &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; autoinducer. This activates the transcription factor TraR, positively regulating the transcription of genes required for conjugation.

== Infection methods ==
&quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot; infects the plant through its Ti plasmid. The Ti plasmid integrates a segment of its DNA, known as T-DNA, into the chromosomal DNA of its host plant cells. &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; has flagella that allow it to swim through the soil towards photoassimilates that accumulate in the rhizosphere around roots. Some strains may chemotactically move towards chemical exudates from plants, such as acetosyringone and sugars, which indicate the presence of a wound in the plant through which the bacteria may enter. Phenolic compounds are recognised by the VirA protein, a transmembrane protein encoded in the virA gene on the Ti plasmid. Sugars are recognised by the chvE protein, a chromosomal gene-encoded protein located in the periplasmic space.

At least 25 &quot;vir&quot; genes on the Ti plasmid are necessary for tumor induction. In addition to their perception role, &quot;virA&quot; and &quot;chvE&quot; induce other &quot;vir&quot; genes. The VirA protein has autokinase activity: it phosphorylates itself on a histidine residue. Then the VirA protein phosphorylates the VirG protein on its aspartate residue. The virG protein is a cytoplasmic protein produced from the &quot;virG&quot; Ti plasmid gene. It is a transcription factor, inducing the transcription of the &quot;vir&quot; operons. The ChvE protein regulates the second mechanism of the &quot;vir&quot; genes&#x27; activation. It increases VirA protein sensitivity to phenolic compounds.

Attachment is a two-step process. Following an initial weak and reversible attachment, the bacteria synthesize cellulose fibrils that anchor them to the wounded plant cell to which they were attracted. Four main genes are involved in this process: &quot;chvA&quot;, &quot;chvB&quot;, &quot;pscA&quot;, and &quot;att&quot;. The products of the first three genes apparently are involved in the actual synthesis of the cellulose fibrils. These fibrils also anchor the bacteria to each other, helping to form a microcolony.

VirC, the most important virulent protein, is a necessary step in the recombination of illegitimate recolonization. It selects the section of the DNA in the host plant that will be replaced and it cuts into this strand of DNA.

After production of cellulose fibrils, a calcium-dependent outer membrane protein called rhicadhesin is produced, which also aids in sticking the bacteria to the cell wall. Homologues of this protein can be found in other rhizobia. Currently, there are several reports on standardisation of protocol for the &quot;Agrobacterium&quot;-mediated transformation. The effect of different parameters such as infection time, acetosyringone, DTT, and cysteine have been studied in soybean (&quot;Glycine max&quot;).

Possible plant compounds that initiate &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; to infect plant cells:
* Acetosyringone and other phenolic compounds
* alpha-Hydroxyacetosyringone
* Catechol
* Ferulic acid
* Gallic acid
* p-Hydroxybenzoic acid
* Protocatechuic acid
* Pyrogallic acid
* Resorcylic acid
* Sinapinic acid
* Syringic acid
* Vanillin

===Formation of the T-pilus===

To transfer T-DNA into a plant cell, &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; uses a type IV secretion mechanism, involving the production of a T-pilus. When acetosyringone and other substances are detected, a signal transduction event activates the expression of 11 genes within the VirB operon which are responsible for the formation of the T-pilus.

The pro-pilin is formed first. This is a polypeptide of 121 amino acids which requires processing by the removal of 47 residues to form a T-pilus subunit. The subunit was thought to be circularized by the formation of a peptide bond between the two ends of the polypeptide. However, high-resolution structure of the T-pilus revealed no cyclization of the pilin, with the overall organization of the pilin subunits being highly similar to those of other conjugative pili, such as F-pilus.

Products of the other VirB genes are used to transfer the subunits across the plasma membrane. Yeast two-hybrid studies provide evidence that VirB6, VirB7, VirB8, VirB9 and VirB10 may all encode components of the transporter. An ATPase for the active transport of the subunits would also be required.

===Transfer of T-DNA into the plant cell===
The T-DNA must be cut out of the circular plasmid. This is typically done by the Vir genes within the helper plasmid. A VirD1/D2 complex nicks the DNA at the left and right border sequences. The VirD2 protein is covalently attached to the 5&#x27; end. VirD2 contains a motif that leads to the nucleoprotein complex being targeted to the type IV secretion system (T4SS). The structure of the T-pilus showed that the central channel of the pilus is too narrow to allow the transfer of the folded VirD2, suggesting that VirD2 must be partially unfolded during the conjugation process.

In the cytoplasm of the recipient cell, the T-DNA complex becomes coated with VirE2 proteins, which are exported through the T4SS independently from the T-DNA complex.
Nuclear localization signals, or NLSs, located on the VirE2 and VirD2, are recognised by the importin alpha protein, which then associates with importin beta and the nuclear pore complex to transfer the T-DNA into the nucleus. VIP1 also appears to be an important protein in the process, possibly acting as an adapter to bring the VirE2 to the importin. Once inside the nucleus, VIP2 may target the T-DNA to areas of chromatin that are being actively transcribed, so that the T-DNA can integrate into the host genome.

== Genes in the T-DNA ==

=== Hormones ===
To cause gall formation, the T-DNA encodes genes for the production of auxin or indole-3-acetic acid via the IAM pathway. This biosynthetic pathway is not used in many plants for the production of auxin, so it means the plant has no molecular means of regulating it and auxin will be produced constitutively. Genes for the production of cytokinins are also expressed. This stimulates cell proliferation and gall formation.

=== Opines ===
The T-DNA contains genes for encoding enzymes that cause the plant to create specialized amino acid derivatives which the bacteria can metabolize, called opines. Opines are a class of chemicals that serve as a source of nitrogen for &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot;, but not for most other organisms. The specific type of opine produced by &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; C58 infected plants is nopaline.

Two nopaline type Ti plasmids, pTi-SAKURA and pTiC58, were fully sequenced. &quot;A. fabrum&quot; C58, the first fully sequenced pathovar, was first isolated from a cherry tree crown gall. The genome was simultaneously sequenced by Goodner &quot;et al.&quot; and Wood &quot;et al.&quot; in 2001. The genome of &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; C58 consists of a circular chromosome, two plasmids, and a linear chromosome. The presence of a covalently bonded circular chromosome is common to Bacteria, with few exceptions. However, the presence of both a single circular chromosome and single linear chromosome is unique to a group in this genus. The two plasmids are pTiC58, responsible for the processes involved in virulence, and pAtC58, once dubbed the &quot;cryptic&quot; plasmid.

The pAtC58 plasmid has been shown to be involved in the metabolism of opines and to conjugate with other bacteria in the absence of the pTiC58 plasmid. If the Ti plasmid is removed, the tumor growth that is the means of classifying this species of bacteria does not occur.

== Biotechnological uses ==

The Asilomar Conference in 1975 established widespread agreement that recombinant techniques were insufficiently understood and needed to be tightly controlled. The DNA transmission capabilities of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; have been vastly explored in biotechnology as a means of inserting foreign genes into plants. Shortly after the Asilomar Conference, Marc Van Montagu and Jeff Schell discovered the gene transfer mechanism between &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; and plants, which resulted in the development of methods to alter the bacterium into an efficient delivery system for genetic engineering in plants. The plasmid T-DNA that is transferred to the plant is an ideal vehicle for genetic engineering. This is done by cloning a desired gene sequence into T-DNA binary vectors that will be used to deliver a sequence of interest into eukaryotic cells. This process has been performed using the firefly luciferase gene to produce glowing plants. This luminescence has been a useful device in the study of plant chloroplast function and as a reporter gene. It is also possible to transform &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; by dipping flowers into a broth of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot;: the seed produced will be transgenic. Under laboratory conditions, T-DNA has also been transferred to human cells, demonstrating the diversity of insertion application.

The mechanism by which &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; inserts materials into the host cell is by a type IV secretion system which is very similar to mechanisms used by pathogens to insert materials (usually proteins) into human cells by type III secretion. It also employs a type of signaling conserved in many Gram-negative bacteria called quorum sensing. This makes &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; an important topic of medical research, as well.

== Natural genetic transformation ==

Natural genetic transformation in bacteria is a sexual process involving the transfer of DNA from one cell to another through the intervening medium, and the integration of the donor sequence into the recipient genome by homologous recombination. &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; can undergo natural transformation in soil without any specific physical or chemical treatment.

== Disease cycle ==

&quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot; overwinters in infested soils. &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; species live predominantly saprophytic lifestyles, so its common even for plant-parasitic species of this genus to survive in the soil for lengthy periods of time, even without host plant presence. When there is a host plant present, however, the bacteria enter the plant tissue via recent wounds or natural openings of roots or stems near the ground. These wounds may be caused by cultural practices, grafting, insects, etc. Once the bacteria have entered the plant, they occur intercellularly and stimulate surrounding tissue to proliferate due to cell transformation. &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; performs this control by inserting the plasmid T-DNA into the plant&#x27;s genome. See above for more details about the process of plasmid DNA insertion into the host genome. Excess growth of the plant tissue leads to gall formation on the stem and roots. These tumors exert significant pressure on the surrounding plant tissue, which causes this tissue to become crushed and/or distorted. The crushed vessels lead to reduced water flow in the xylem. Young tumors are soft and therefore vulnerable to secondary invasion by insects and saprophytic microorganisms. This secondary invasion causes the breakdown of the peripheral cell layers as well as tumor discoloration due to decay. Breakdown of the soft tissue leads to release of the &quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot; into the soil allowing it to restart the disease process with a new host plant.

== Disease management ==
Crown gall disease caused by &quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot; can be controlled by using various methods. The best way to control this disease is to take preventative measures, such as sterilizing pruning tools so as to avoid infecting new plants. Performing mandatory inspections of nursery stock and rejecting infected plants as well as not planting susceptible plants in infected fields are also valuable practices. Avoiding wounding the crowns/roots of the plants during cultivation is important for preventing disease. In horticultural techniques in which multiple plants are joined to grow as one, such as budding and grafting these techniques lead to plant wounds. Wounds are the primary location of bacterial entry into the host plant. Therefore, it is advisable to perform these techniques during times of the year when &quot;Agrobacteria&quot; are not active. Control of root-chewing insects is also helpful to reduce levels of infection, since these insects cause wounds (aka bacterial entryways) in the plant roots. It is recommended that infected plant material be burned rather than placed in a compost pile due to the bacteria&#x27;s ability to live in the soil for many years.

Biological control methods are also utilized in managing this disease. During the 1970s and 1980s, a common practice for treating germinated seeds, seedlings, and rootstock was to soak them in a suspension of K84. K84 is a strain of &quot;Rhizobium rhizogenes&quot; (formerly classified under &quot;A. radiobacter&quot;, but later reclassified) which is a species related to &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; but is not pathogenic. K84 produces a bacteriocin (agrocin 84) which is an antibiotic specific against related bacteria, including &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot;. This method, which was successful at controlling the disease on a commercial scale, had the risk of K84 transferring its resistance gene to the pathogenic &quot;Agrobacteria&quot;. Thus, in the 1990s, a deletion mutant strain based on K84, known as K1026, was created. This strain is just as successful in controlling crown gall as K84 without the caveat of resistance gene transfer.

== Environment ==

Host, environment, and pathogen are extremely important concepts in regards to plant pathology. &quot;Agrobacteria&quot; have the widest host range of any plant pathogen, so the main factor to take into consideration in the case of crown gall is environment. There are various conditions and factors that make for a conducive environment for &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; when infecting its various hosts. The bacterium can&#x27;t penetrate the host plant without an entry point such as a wound. Factors leading to wounds in plants include cultural practices, grafting, freezing injury, growth cracks, soil insects, and other animals in the environment causing damage to the plant. Consequently, in exceptionally harsh winters, it is common to have an increased incidence of crown gall due to the weather-related damage. Along with this, there are methods of mediating infection of the host plant. For example, nematodes can act as a vector to introduce &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; into plant roots. More specifically, the root parasitic nematodes damage the plant cell, creating a wound for the bacteria to enter through. Finally, temperature is a factor when considering &quot;A. tumefaciens&quot; infection. The optimal temperature for crown gall formation due to this bacterium is because of the thermosensitivity of T-DNA transfer. Tumor formation is significantly reduced at higher temperature conditions.

== See also ==
* &quot;suhB&quot;

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* 
* 
== External links ==
* &quot;Agrobacterium fabrum&quot; C58 Genome Page — as sequenced by Cereon Genomics/University of Richmond</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131472" start="99" end="117" title="Agrobacterium tumefaciens" label="crown gall disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="136" end="142" title="tumour" label="tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="168" end="175" title="eudicot" label="eudicot"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="198" end="211" title="Gram-negative" label="Gram-negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="217" end="226" title="bacterium" label="bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="287" end="290" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q74081" start="301" end="306" title="Transfer DNA" label="T-DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="520" end="526" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700446" start="576" end="589" title="Agrobacterium" label="Agrobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667796" start="636" end="656" title="Transfer DNA binary system" label="T-DNA binary vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q306579" start="703" end="723" title="Alphaproteobacterium" label="Alphaproteobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462359" start="738" end="750" title="Rhizobiaceae" label="Rhizobiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="771" end="786" title="nitrogen fixation" label="nitrogen-fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="787" end="793" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="794" end="803" title="symbionts" label="symbionts"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="897" end="905" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="1125" end="1132" title="walnuts" label="walnuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191019" start="1134" end="1144" title="grape vine" label="grape vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712" start="1147" end="1158" title="stone fruit" label="stone fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009" start="1161" end="1164" title="Nut (fruit)" label="nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="1172" end="1183" title="sugar beets" label="sugar beets"/>
<link wikidata="Q26545" start="1185" end="1197" title="horse radish" label="horse radish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535" start="1203" end="1210" title="rhubarb" label="rhubarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460232" start="1657" end="1665" title="virulent" label="virulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q179545" start="1692" end="1715" title="Ti plasmid" label="tumour-inducing plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1740" end="1743" title="Base pair#Length measurements" label="kbp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="1787" end="1791" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124578" start="1984" end="1995" title="rhizosphere (ecology)" label="rhizosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q273193" start="2013" end="2034" title="bacterial conjugation" label="bacterial conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q411700" start="2095" end="2101" title="opines" label="opines"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="2305" end="2325" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="2358" end="2371" title="Transcription (genetics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="2657" end="2665" title="flagella" label="flagella"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="2700" end="2704" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187711" start="2713" end="2728" title="photoassimilate" label="photoassimilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q855769" start="2784" end="2791" title="Strain (biology)" label="strains"/>
<link wikidata="Q658145" start="2796" end="2811" title="chemotaxis" label="chemotactically"/>
<link wikidata="Q906309" start="2864" end="2878" title="acetosyringone" label="acetosyringone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933528" start="3022" end="3034" title="VirA protein" label="VirA protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q421851" start="3441" end="3447" title="kinase" label="kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q242736" start="3461" end="3475" title="phosphorylation" label="phosphorylates"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="3689" end="3709" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q139677" start="3761" end="3767" title="operon" label="operon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="4038" end="4047" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q14860849" start="4048" end="4054" title="fibril" label="fibril"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4434" end="4445" title="microcolony" label="microcolony"/>
<link wikidata="Q60097" start="4717" end="4734" title="Calcium in biology" label="calcium-dependent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="4750" end="4757" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="4849" end="4858" title="Homology (biology)" label="Homologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="4984" end="5033" title="genetic transformation of plants" label="&amp;quot;Agrobacterium&amp;quot;-mediated transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q906309" start="5275" end="5289" title="Acetosyringone" label="Acetosyringone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5327" end="5348" title="Hydroxyacetosyringone" label="Hydroxyacetosyringone"/>
<link wikidata="Q282440" start="5351" end="5359" title="Catechol" label="Catechol"/>
<link wikidata="Q417362" start="5362" end="5374" title="Ferulic acid" label="Ferulic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q375837" start="5377" end="5388" title="Gallic acid" label="Gallic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q229970" start="5391" end="5412" title="4-Hydroxybenzoic acid" label="p-Hydroxybenzoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q418599" start="5415" end="5434" title="Protocatechuic acid" label="Protocatechuic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q388692" start="5437" end="5452" title="Pyrogallic acid" label="Pyrogallic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315761" start="5455" end="5470" title="Resorcylic acid" label="Resorcylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q417527" start="5473" end="5487" title="Sinapinic acid" label="Sinapinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q408428" start="5490" end="5503" title="Syringic acid" label="Syringic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q33495" start="5506" end="5514" title="Vanillin" label="Vanillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056194" start="5573" end="5583" title="plant cell" label="plant cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q934786" start="5680" end="5685" title="pilus" label="pilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="5744" end="5763" title="signal transduction" label="signal transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q139677" start="5823" end="5829" title="operon" label="operon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="5928" end="5939" title="polypeptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q33293" start="6107" end="6119" title="peptide bond" label="peptide bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="6454" end="6469" title="plasma membrane" label="plasma membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337844" start="6471" end="6487" title="Yeast two-hybrid" label="Yeast two-hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="6564" end="6570" title="Code" label="encode"/>
<link wikidata="Q300033" start="6605" end="6611" title="ATPase" label="ATPase"/>
<link wikidata="Q304618" start="6620" end="6636" title="active transport" label="active transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q901612" start="6991" end="6996" title="Sequence motif" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q910966" start="7473" end="7500" title="Nuclear localization signal" label="Nuclear localization signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30679" start="7639" end="7659" title="nuclear pore complex" label="nuclear pore complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="7691" end="7698" title="Cell nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180951" start="7890" end="7899" title="chromatin" label="chromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q224107" start="8044" end="8048" title="gall" label="gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q190022" start="8106" end="8111" title="auxin" label="auxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422032" start="8372" end="8381" title="cytokinin" label="cytokinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="8512" end="8519" title="enzymes" label="enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="8563" end="8573" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="8609" end="8619" title="metabolize" label="metabolize"/>
<link wikidata="Q411700" start="8628" end="8634" title="opines" label="opines"/>
<link wikidata="Q411700" start="8636" end="8642" title="Opines" label="Opines"/>
<link wikidata="Q27102284" start="8858" end="8866" title="nopaline" label="nopaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q179545" start="8887" end="8897" title="Ti plasmid" label="Ti plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972414" start="8998" end="9006" title="pathovar" label="pathovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="9249" end="9256" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="9272" end="9282" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460232" start="9579" end="9588" title="virulence" label="virulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q861711" start="9955" end="9974" title="Asilomar Conference on Recombinant DNA" label="Asilomar Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="10204" end="10217" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q972958" start="10308" end="10324" title="Marc Van Montagu" label="Marc Van Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q462051" start="10329" end="10340" title="Jeff Schell" label="Jeff Schell"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="10532" end="10551" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667796" start="10712" end="10732" title="Transfer DNA binary system" label="T-DNA binary vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q95385166" start="10858" end="10868" title="luciferase" label="luciferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q184240" start="10906" end="10918" title="luminescence" label="luminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q911828" start="10996" end="11009" title="reporter gene" label="reporter gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="11050" end="11070" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q430117" start="11165" end="11175" title="transgenic" label="transgenic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11403" end="11427" title="Secretion#In gram-negative bacteria" label="type IV secretion system"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="11472" end="11481" title="pathogens" label="pathogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="11511" end="11519" title="proteins" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q905754" start="11645" end="11659" title="quorum sensing" label="quorum sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="11786" end="11816" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="Natural genetic transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="11820" end="11828" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="12007" end="12031" title="homologous recombination" label="homologous recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q26280580" start="15188" end="15208" title="Rhizobium rhizogenes" label="Rhizobium rhizogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q656732" start="15713" end="15728" title="Deletion (genetics)" label="deletion mutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635168" start="17345" end="17349" title="suhB" label="suhB"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646828" wikidata="Q7242096" url="?curid=646828" title="Presumption of constitutionality">
<text>In constitutional law, the presumption of constitutionality is the legal principle that the judiciary should presume statutes enacted by the legislature to be constitutional, unless the law is clearly unconstitutional or a fundamental right is implicated.

==United States==
In its strongest form—advocated most notably by James Bradley Thayer—the presumption of constitutionality gives Congress, rather than the courts, the primary responsibility for interpreting the Constitution. This view is in tension with the view of judicial review articulated in &quot;Marbury v. Madison&quot;, however. Thus, a less strong form of the presumption, repeatedly articulated by the Supreme Court of the United States, has become the dominant approach in American law: &quot;[r]espect for a coordinate branch of Government forbids striking down an Act of Congress except upon a clear showing of unconstitutionality.&quot; Constitutional law scholars Gillian E. Metzger and Trevor Morrison summarize this principle as follows: &quot;although the Court&#x27;s determination of constitutional invalidity always trumps the contrary judgment of a coordinate branch, the Court should not lightly arrive at such a determination.&quot;

The presumption of constitutionality is linked to the doctrine of constitutional avoidance (the doctrine that courts will not make rulings on constitutional issues if the case can be resolved on a non-constitutional basis) and the rule that courts will not interpret an ambiguous statute to be unconstitutional in the absence of clear unconstitutionality.

The Supreme Court has held that statutes implicating certain fundamental individual rights are not subject to the general presumption, and are evaluated instead through heightened levels of scrutiny. By contrast, economic legislation is subject to the presumption of constitutionality.

In Federalist 78, Alexander Hamilton wrote that courts should be able strike down a statute as unconstitutional only if there is an &quot;irreconcilable variance&quot; between the statute and the constitution. Otherwise, a statute should be upheld. Likewise, at the 1787 Philadelphia Convention, Virginia delegate George Mason said that judges &quot;could declare an unconstitutional law void. But with regard to every law, however unjust, oppressive or pernicious, which did not come plainly under this description, they would be under the necessity as Judges to give it a free course.&quot;

Professor Randy Barnett from Georgetown Law argues that such a presumption is itself unconstitutional and suggests that government should be forced to prove that laws that violate liberty are necessary, replacing the presumption of constitutionality with what he calls the &quot;presumption of liberty.&quot;

==Outside the United States==
The presumption of constitutionality is part of the constitutional law of a number of nations outside the U.S., including the Republic of Ireland and Singapore.

==See also==
*Presumption of regularity
*Burden of persuasion
*List of legal doctrines
*Rational basis review

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11206" start="3" end="21" title="constitutional law" label="constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242096" start="27" end="59" title="Presumption of constitutionality" label="presumption of constitutionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="92" end="101" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="117" end="124" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="159" end="173" title="constitutional" label="constitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="223" end="240" title="fundamental right" label="fundamental right"/>
<link wikidata="Q15502772" start="323" end="343" title="James Bradley Thayer" label="James Bradley Thayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303028" start="524" end="539" title="Judicial review in the United States" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q538242" start="561" end="579" title="Marbury v. Madison" label="Marbury v. Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="671" end="705" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451826" start="779" end="810" title="Separation of powers in the United States" label="coordinate branch of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q476068" start="836" end="851" title="Act of Congress" label="Act of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562224" start="938" end="956" title="Gillian E. Metzger" label="Gillian E. Metzger"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949523" start="961" end="976" title="Trevor Morrison" label="Trevor Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164317" start="1283" end="1307" title="constitutional avoidance" label="constitutional avoidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q779439" start="1474" end="1504" title="Statutory interpretation" label="interpret an ambiguous statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661649" start="1647" end="1664" title="individual rights" label="individual rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623621" start="1743" end="1772" title="Strict scrutiny" label="heightened levels of scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440656" start="1864" end="1877" title="Federalist 78" label="Federalist 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="1879" end="1897" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="2132" end="2155" title="Philadelphia Convention" label="Philadelphia Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="2175" end="2187" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q986354" start="2465" end="2478" title="Randy Barnett" label="Randy Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="2921" end="2940" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="2945" end="2954" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242098" start="2971" end="2996" title="Presumption of regularity" label="Presumption of regularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="2998" end="3018" title="Burden of persuasion" label="Burden of persuasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192543" start="3020" end="3043" title="List of legal doctrines" label="List of legal doctrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295753" start="3045" end="3066" title="Rational basis review" label="Rational basis review"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646835" wikidata="Q21070971" url="?curid=646835" title="Procedural due process">
<text>Procedural due process is a legal doctrine in the United States that requires government officials to follow fair procedures before depriving a person of life, liberty, or property. When the government seeks to deprive a person of one of those interests, procedural due process requires at least for the government to afford the person notice, an opportunity to be heard, and a decision made by a neutral decisionmaker. Procedural due process is required by the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution.

The article &quot;Some Kind of Hearing&quot; written by Judge Henry Friendly created a list of basic due process rights &quot;that remains highly influential, as to both content and relative priority.&quot; The rights, which apply equally to civil due process and criminal due process, are the following: 
# An unbiased tribunal.
# Notice of the proposed action and the grounds asserted for it.
# The opportunity to present reasons for the proposed action not to be taken.
# The right to present evidence, including the right to call witnesses.
# The right to know the opposing evidence.
# The right to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
# A decision based only on the evidence presented.
# Opportunity to be represented by counsel.
# A requirement that the tribunal prepare a record of the evidence presented.
# A requirement that the tribunal prepare written findings of fact and the reasons for its decision.

Not all the above rights are guaranteed in every instance when the government seeks to deprive a person life, liberty, or property. At minimum, a person is due only notice, an opportunity to be heard, and a decision by a neutral decisionmaker. Courts use various tests to determine whether a person should also be guaranteed any of the other above procedural rights.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21070971" start="0" end="22" title="Procedural due process" label="Procedural due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192543" start="28" end="42" title="legal doctrine" label="legal doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="50" end="63" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="154" end="158" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="160" end="167" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="172" end="180" title="property" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="462" end="480" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="489" end="494" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="499" end="509" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="528" end="554" title="US Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721635" start="619" end="633" title="Henry Friendly" label="Henry Friendly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646838" wikidata="Q899022" url="?curid=646838" title="Eastman Chemical Company">
<text>Eastman Chemical Company is an American company primarily involved in the chemical industry. Once a subsidiary of Kodak, today it is an independent global specialty materials company that produces a broad range of advanced materials, chemicals and fibers for everyday purposes. Founded in 1920 and based in Kingsport, Tennessee, the company operates 36 manufacturing sites worldwide and employs approximately 14,000 people.

Eastman was spun off from parent Eastman Kodak in 1994. In 2023 it had sales revenue of approximately $9.21 billion.

==Business segments==
Eastman manufactures and markets chemicals, fibers, and plastics. It provides coatings, adhesives and specialty plastics products, is a major supplier of cellulose acetate fibers, and produces copolyesters for packaging.

The company&#x27;s products and operations are managed and reported in four operating segments: Additives &amp; Functional Products, Advanced Materials, Chemical Intermediates, and Fibers.

;Additives &amp; Functional Products
In this segment, Eastman manufactures chemicals and adhesive resins for products in the coatings and tires industries in transportation, building and construction, durable goods, health and wellness, and consumables markets. The development of cyanoacrylates (&quot;super-glues&quot;, or instant adhesives) is attributed to Harry Coover, an employee of Eastman. The adhesives were patented in 1956.

;Advanced Materials
In this segment, Eastman produces and markets specialty copolyesters, cellulose esters, interlayers, and aftermarket window film products for use in transportation, consumables, building and construction, durable goods, health and wellness, and electronics.

;Chemical Intermediates
The Chemical Intermediates segment leverages large scale and vertical integration from the acetyl, olefins, and alkylamine streams and proprietary manufacturing technology for specialty fluids to manufacture diversified products that are sold externally for use in markets such as industrial chemicals and processing; building and construction; health and wellness; energy, fuels, and water; consumables; agriculture, as well as used internally by other Eastman segments.

;Fibers
In the Fibers segment, Eastman manufactures and sells Estron acetate tow and Estrobond triacetin plasticizers for use primarily in the manufacture of cigarette filters; Estron natural and Chromspun solution-dyed acetate yarns for use in apparel, home furnishings and industrial fabrics; and cellulose acetate flake and acetyl raw materials for other acetate fiber producers.

==History==

===Early years===

An effect of World War I was a scarcity in raw materials such as photographic paper, optical glass, gelatin and many chemicals, including methanol, acetic acid and acetone. After the war ended, George Eastman, founder of Eastman Kodak, began working to develop an independent supply of chemicals for his photographic processes. His search for suitable quantities of methanol and acetone led him to the southern United States.

In 1920, George Eastman founded Tennessee Eastman with two major platforms: organic chemicals and acetyls. Products such as calcium acetate, sodium acetate, acetic acid, and acetic anhydride became the basis for the company’s platforms.

During World War II, RDX, a powerful explosive, was manufactured for the U.S. government at Holston Ordnance Works at Tennessee Eastman sites. At the peak of production near the end of the war, the ordnance plant was producing a million and a half pounds of explosives each day. Tennessee Eastman was responsible for managing the Y-12 National Security Complex at Oak Ridge, Tennessee which produced enriched uranium for the Manhattan Project, from 1943 to May 1947.

In 1960, there was an explosion at Eastman&#x27;s Kingsport plant. It occurred in the Aniline production. Some 16 people were killed and many more were injured.

===Since the 1980s===
In 1983, Eastman opened the first commercial coal gasification facility in the United States at its Kingsport plant site to produce chemicals from syngas rather than petroleum. The &quot;Chemicals from Coal Facility&quot; at the Kingsport plant was recognized in 1995 as a National Historic Chemical Landmark by the American Chemical Society.

In 1994, Eastman was spun off from Eastman Kodak and became an independent corporation. In early 2005, Eastman broke ground on the first world-scale manufacturing facility using IntegRex, a technology that reduces the number of intermediate process steps in producing PET resin. This technology is now owned by DAK Americas.

Since 2000, Eastman, and its many subsidiaries have paid more than $82 million in EPA fines.

In July 2012, Eastman completed its acquisition of Solutia Inc., a manufacturer of performance materials and specialty chemicals, for $4.8 billion.

In December 2014, Eastman Chemical Company completed its acquisition of Taminco Corporation for $2.8 billion.

===October 2017 explosion===
On the morning of October 4, 2017, an explosion occurred at Eastman&#x27;s Kingsport Plant around the coal gasification building. In April 2018, the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation determined the cause to be a valve blockage due to slurry or debris intrusion.

=== Circular economy ===
In 2019, Eastman began commercial-scale chemical recycling for a broad set of waste plastics that would otherwise be placed in a landfill or incinerated. Eastman Advanced Circular Recycling technologies complement mechanical recycling by processing a wide spectrum of waste plastics that traditional recycling methods cannot, including polyesters, polypropylene, polyethylene, and polystyrene. These waste plastics are derived from a variety of sources, including single-use plastics, textiles, and cuttings from discarded carpet.

Eastman&#x27;s recycling technologies - carbon renewal technology and polyester renewal technology - provide a true circular solution of infinite recycling for materials, allowing them to be reused repeatedly. Eastman began commercial operation of carbon renewal technology in October 2019 at the company&#x27;s largest manufacturing facility in Kingsport, Tennessee. In 2020, Eastman will use carbon renewal technology to recycle millions of pounds of polyester carpet that would otherwise have been placed in a landfill.

In January 2021, Eastman announced plans to build a methanolysis plant that will convert polyester waste into durable products. The company expects to spend approximately $250 million to build the facility. When completed by the end of 2022, the methanolysis plant will use over 100,000 metric tons of plastic waste that cannot be recycled by current mechanical methods to produce premium, high-quality specialty plastics made with recycled content.

In January 2022, Eastman announced it would invest up to $1 billion in a material-to-material molecular recycling facility in France that would use Eastman&#x27;s polyester renewal technology to recycle up to 160,000 tons annually of plastic waste. The plant is expected to be operational by 2025.

==Mexican pine sourcing controversy==
An April 2017 article in &quot;The Daily Beast&quot; reported that Eastman Chemical&#x27;s plant in Uruapan, Michoacán bought pine &quot;rosin&quot; (refined, solidified &quot;resin&quot;) from a supplier that was known to be controlled by the Knights Templar criminal cartel, even after being notified of the supplier&#x27;s criminal links. The supplier (Unored) was using the cartel to extort the raw pine resin gatherers to accept sub-market prices, with a portion of the reduction passed on to Eastman in lower prices.

==Manufacturing sites==
 Eastman Chemical Company operates 36 manufacturing sites in 12 countries:

;United States
* Alvin, Texas
* Anniston, Alabama
* Axton, Virginia
* Chestertown, Maryland
* Columbia, South Carolina
* Fieldale, Virginia
* Kingsport, Tennessee
* Linden, New Jersey
* Longview, Texas
* Martinsville, Virginia
* Pace, Florida
* Springfield, Massachusetts
* St. Gabriel, Louisiana
* Sun Prairie, Wisconsin
* Texas City, Texas
* Watertown, New York

;Latin America
* Mauá, Brazil
* Santo Toribio, Mexico
;Europe
* Antwerp, Belgium
* Ghent, Belgium
* Kohtla-Järve, Estonia
* Oulu, Finland
* Dresden, Germany
* Leuna, Germany
* Marl, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany
* Ávila, Spain
* Newport, United Kingdom

;Asia Pacific
* Dalian, China
* Nanjing, China
* Suzhou, China
* Wuhan, China
* Zibo City, China
* Ulsan, Korea
* Kuantan, Malaysia
* Hefei, China
* Shenzhen, China
==Corporate responsibility==
Eastman has been a member of Responsible Care, a voluntary initiative developed autonomously by the chemical industry to improve health, safety, and environmental performance, for more than 25 years. In 2013, Eastman was named Responsible Care Company of the Year in the large company category by the American Chemistry Council (ACC). Eastman was awarded the 2009 Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Award presented by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The award recognizes technologies that incorporate the principles of green chemistry into chemical design, manufacture, and use.

In 2013, the EPA designated a 3-km radius circle around the Eastman facility in Kingsport, TN as non-attainment for the 2010 1-hour sulfur dioxide (SO2) primary National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS). The State of Tennessee continues to monitor ambient sulfur dioxide levels within the non-attainment area.

Through 2015, Eastman improved energy intensity by approximately 8% compared to a 2008 baseline. The company established a goal to improve energy intensity 20% by 2020. In 2014 and early 2016, Eastman converted two boilers at its Kingsport, Tennessee, site from coal to natural gas combustion. Three additional boilers will be converted by 2018 for a total of five. The Kingsport boiler conversion project is the most significant air pollution control project in the history of Eastman and will diversify the Kingsport facility’s energy mix from 90% coal to 50% coal and 50% natural gas. Eastman also converted a coal-fired boiler at its Indian Orchard facility in Springfield, Massachusetts, to natural gas in 2015.

As of 2019, Eastman has been recognized by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as an ENERGY STAR Partner of the Year eight consecutive years. Eastman has also been recognized three consecutive years by Glassdoor as an Employees’ Choice Best Place to Work and by Ethisphere Institute as a World’s Most Ethical Company.

==References==
==External links==
*Environmental Release Report
*Company Annual Report
*Tennessee Eastman Company/Eastman Chemical Company in &quot;The Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q899022" start="0" end="24" title="Eastman Chemical Company" label="Eastman Chemical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="114" end="119" title="Kodak" label="Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q241814" start="307" end="327" title="Kingsport, Tennessee" label="Kingsport, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="458" end="471" title="Eastman Kodak" label="Eastman Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570182" start="643" end="650" title="coating" label="coating"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="653" end="661" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="677" end="684" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124686" start="719" end="736" title="cellulose acetate" label="cellulose acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104023" start="758" end="769" title="copolyester" label="copolyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681365" start="1218" end="1229" title="consumables" label="consumables"/>
<link wikidata="Q427161" start="1258" end="1271" title="cyanoacrylate" label="cyanoacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104023" start="1490" end="1501" title="copolyester" label="copolyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="1504" end="1519" title="cellulose ester" label="cellulose ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q83253" start="2285" end="2294" title="triacetin" label="triacetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q910212" start="2295" end="2306" title="plasticizer" label="plasticizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="2410" end="2417" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2619" end="2630" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="2754" end="2765" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="2770" end="2777" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189147" start="2800" end="2814" title="George Eastman" label="George Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="2827" end="2840" title="Eastman Kodak" label="Eastman Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="2972" end="2980" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q481808" start="3131" end="3137" title="acetyl" label="acetyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q409251" start="3157" end="3172" title="calcium acetate" label="calcium acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q339940" start="3174" end="3188" title="sodium acetate" label="sodium acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="3190" end="3201" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q407775" start="3207" end="3223" title="acetic anhydride" label="acetic anhydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3278" end="3290" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q190020" start="3292" end="3295" title="RDX" label="RDX"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="3308" end="3317" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709932" start="3363" end="3385" title="Holston Ordnance Works" label="Holston Ordnance Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061309" start="3601" end="3631" title="Y-12 National Security Complex" label="Y-12 National Security Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809" start="3635" end="3655" title="Oak Ridge, Tennessee" label="Oak Ridge, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="3696" end="3713" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q909968" start="3968" end="3985" title="coal gasification" label="coal gasification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273339" start="4070" end="4076" title="syngas" label="syngas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336888" start="4196" end="4231" title="National Historic Chemical Landmarks" label="National Historic Chemical Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="4239" end="4264" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="4675" end="4678" title="EPA" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558969" start="4738" end="4745" title="Solutia" label="Solutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308139" start="7158" end="7173" title="The Daily Beast" label="The Daily Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q399270" start="7227" end="7245" title="Uruapan, Michoacán" label="Uruapan, Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422424" start="7371" end="7402" title="Knights Templar Cartel" label="Knights Templar criminal cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q449033" start="7768" end="7780" title="Alvin, Texas" label="Alvin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79474" start="7783" end="7800" title="Anniston, Alabama" label="Anniston, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830694" start="7803" end="7818" title="Axton, Virginia" label="Axton, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q755851" start="7821" end="7842" title="Chestertown, Maryland" label="Chestertown, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38453" start="7845" end="7869" title="Columbia, South Carolina" label="Columbia, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374369" start="7872" end="7890" title="Fieldale, Virginia" label="Fieldale, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q241814" start="7893" end="7913" title="Kingsport, Tennessee" label="Kingsport, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004712" start="7916" end="7934" title="Linden, New Jersey" label="Linden, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q852645" start="7937" end="7952" title="Longview, Texas" label="Longview, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q502240" start="7955" end="7977" title="Martinsville, Virginia" label="Martinsville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042845" start="7980" end="7993" title="Pace, Florida" label="Pace, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="7996" end="8022" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919487" start="8025" end="8047" title="St. Gabriel, Louisiana" label="St. Gabriel, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569489" start="8050" end="8072" title="Sun Prairie, Wisconsin" label="Sun Prairie, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q912475" start="8075" end="8092" title="Texas City, Texas" label="Texas City, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378026" start="8095" end="8114" title="Watertown, New York" label="Watertown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q331300" start="8133" end="8137" title="Mauá" label="Mauá"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="8139" end="8145" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="8163" end="8169" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="8180" end="8187" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="8189" end="8196" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="8199" end="8204" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="8206" end="8213" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q201391" start="8216" end="8228" title="Kohtla-Järve" label="Kohtla-Järve"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="8230" end="8237" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47048" start="8240" end="8244" title="Oulu" label="Oulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="8246" end="8253" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="8256" end="8263" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8265" end="8272" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q505191" start="8275" end="8280" title="Leuna" label="Leuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813" start="8292" end="8320" title="Marl, North Rhine-Westphalia" label="Marl, North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8322" end="8329" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15688" start="8332" end="8337" title="Ávila" label="Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="8339" end="8344" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q101254" start="8347" end="8354" title="Newport, Wales" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8356" end="8370" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="8388" end="8394" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8396" end="8401" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="8404" end="8411" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8413" end="8418" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="8421" end="8427" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8429" end="8434" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="8437" end="8442" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8444" end="8449" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q198370" start="8452" end="8461" title="Zibo City" label="Zibo City"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8463" end="8468" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q41278" start="8471" end="8476" title="Ulsan" label="Ulsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="8478" end="8483" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q817578" start="8486" end="8493" title="Kuantan" label="Kuantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="8495" end="8503" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185684" start="8506" end="8511" title="Hefei" label="Hefei"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8513" end="8518" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="8521" end="8529" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8531" end="8536" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145910" start="8595" end="8611" title="Responsible Care" label="Responsible Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743356" start="8867" end="8893" title="American Chemistry Council" label="American Chemistry Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341351" start="9512" end="9528" title="energy intensity" label="energy intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837348" start="10472" end="10492" title="Ethisphere Institute" label="Ethisphere Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700076" start="10681" end="10726" title="Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture" label="Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646842" wikidata="Q2700446" url="?curid=646842" title="Agrobacterium">
<text>Agrobacterium is a genus of Gram-negative bacteria established by H. J. Conn that uses horizontal gene transfer to cause tumors in plants. &quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot; is the most commonly studied species in this genus. &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; is well known for its ability to transfer DNA between itself and plants, and for this reason it has become an important tool for genetic engineering.

==Nomenclatural history==
Leading up to the 1990s, the genus &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; was used as a wastebasket taxon. With the advent of 16S sequencing, many &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; species (especially the marine species) were reassigned to genera such as &quot;Ahrensia&quot;, &quot;Pseudorhodobacter&quot;, &quot;Ruegeria&quot;, and &quot;Stappia&quot;. The remaining &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; species were assigned to three biovars: biovar 1 (&quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot;), biovar 2 (&quot;Agrobacterium rhizogenes&quot;), and biovar 3 (&quot;Agrobacterium vitis&quot;). In the early 2000s, &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; was synonymized with the genus &quot;Rhizobium&quot;. This move proved to be controversial. The debate was finally resolved when the genus &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; was reinstated after it was demonstrated that it was phylogenetically distinct from &quot;Rhizobium&quot; and that &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; species were unified by a unique synapomorphy: the presence of the protelomerase gene, &quot;telA&quot;, which causes all members of the genus to have a linear chromid. By this time, however, the three &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; biovars had become defunct; biovar 1 remained with &quot;Agrobacterium&quot;, biovar 2 was renamed &quot;Rhizobium rhizogenes&quot;, and biovar 3 was renamed &quot;Allorhizobium vitis&quot;.

==Plant pathogen==

&quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot; causes crown-gall disease in plants. The disease is characterised by a tumour-like growth or gall on the infected plant, often at the junction between the root and the shoot. Tumors are incited by the conjugative transfer of a DNA segment (T-DNA) from the bacterial tumour-inducing (Ti) plasmid. The closely related species, &quot;Agrobacterium rhizogenes&quot;, induces root tumors, and carries the distinct Ri (root-inducing) plasmid. Although the taxonomy of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; is currently under revision it can be generalised that 3 biovars exist within the genus, &quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot;, &quot;Agrobacterium rhizogenes&quot;, and &quot;Agrobacterium vitis&quot;. Strains within &quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot; and &quot;Agrobacterium rhizogenes&quot; are known to be able to harbour either a Ti or Ri-plasmid, whilst strains of &quot;Agrobacterium vitis&quot;, generally restricted to grapevines, can harbour a Ti-plasmid. Non-&quot;Agrobacterium&quot; strains have been isolated from environmental samples which harbour a Ri-plasmid whilst laboratory studies have shown that non-&quot;Agrobacterium&quot; strains can also harbour a Ti-plasmid. Some environmental strains of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; possess neither a Ti nor Ri-plasmid. These strains are avirulent.

The plasmid T-DNA is integrated semi-randomly into the genome of the host cell, and the tumor morphology genes on the T-DNA are expressed, causing the formation of a gall. The T-DNA carries genes for the biosynthetic enzymes for the production of unusual amino acids, typically octopine or nopaline. It also carries genes for the biosynthesis of the plant hormones, auxin and cytokinins, and for the biosynthesis of opines, providing a carbon and nitrogen source for the bacteria that most other micro-organisms can&#x27;t use, giving &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; a selective advantage. By altering the hormone balance in the plant cell, the division of those cells cannot be controlled by the plant, and tumors form. The ratio of auxin to cytokinin produced by the tumor genes determines the morphology of the tumor (root-like, disorganized or shoot-like).

==In humans==
Although generally seen as an infection in plants, &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; can be responsible for opportunistic infections in humans with weakened immune systems, but has not been shown to be a primary pathogen in otherwise healthy individuals. One of the earliest associations of human disease caused by &quot;Agrobacterium radiobacter&quot; was reported by Dr. J. R. Cain in Scotland (1988). A later study suggested that &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; attaches to and genetically transforms several types of human cells by integrating its T-DNA into the human cell genome. The study was conducted using cultured human tissue and did not draw any conclusions regarding related biological activity in nature.

==Uses in biotechnology==

The ability of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; to transfer genes to plants and fungi is used in biotechnology, in particular, genetic engineering for plant improvement. Genomes of plants and fungi can be engineered by use of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; for the delivery of sequences hosted in T-DNA binary vectors. A modified Ti or Ri plasmid can be used. The plasmid is &#x27;disarmed&#x27; by deletion of the tumor inducing genes; the only essential parts of the T-DNA are its two small (25 base pair) border repeats, at least one of which is needed for plant transformation. The genes to be introduced into the plant are cloned into a plant binary vector that contains the T-DNA region of the disarmed plasmid, together with a selectable marker (such as antibiotic resistance) to enable selection for plants that have been successfully transformed. Plants are grown on media containing antibiotic following transformation, and those that do not have the T-DNA integrated into their genome will die. An alternative method is agroinfiltration.
Transformation with &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; can be achieved in multiple ways. Protoplasts or alternatively leaf-discs can be incubated with the &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; and whole plants regenerated using plant tissue culture. In agroinfiltration the &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; may be injected directly into the leaf tissue of a plant. This method transforms only cells in immediate contact with the bacteria, and results in transient expression of plasmid DNA.

Agroinfiltration is commonly used to transform tobacco (&quot;Nicotiana&quot;). A common transformation protocol for &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; is the floral dip method: An inflorescence is dipped in a suspension of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot;, and the bacterium transforms the germline cells that make the female gametes. The seeds can then be screened for antibiotic resistance (or another marker of interest). Plants that have not integrated the plasmid DNA will die when exposed to the antibiotic.

&quot;Agrobacterium&quot; is listed as being the vector of genetic material that was transferred to these USA GMOs:
* Soybean
* Cotton
* Maize
* Sugar Beet
* Alfalfa
* Wheat
* Rapeseed Oil (Canola)
* Creeping bentgrass (for animal feed)
* Rice (Golden Rice)

The transformation of fungi using &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; is used primarily for research purposes, and follows similar approaches as for plant transformation. The Ti plasmid system is modified to include DNA elements to select for transformed fungal strains, after co-incubation of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; strains carrying these plasmids with fungal species.

==Genomics==
The &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; genome consists of three parts: a circular chromosome, a linear chromosome/chromid, and (in some species) a Ti plasmid.

The sequencing of the genomes of several species of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; has permitted the study of the evolutionary history of these organisms and has provided information on the genes and systems involved in pathogenesis, biological control and symbiosis. One important finding is the possibility that chromosomes are evolving from plasmids in many of these bacteria. Another discovery is that the diverse chromosomal structures in this group appear to be capable of supporting both symbiotic and pathogenic lifestyles. The availability of the genome sequences of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; species will continue to increase, resulting in substantial insights into the function and evolutionary history of this group of plant-associated microbes.

==History==
Marc Van Montagu and Jozef Schell at the University of Ghent (Belgium) discovered the gene transfer mechanism between &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; and plants, which resulted in the development of methods to alter &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; into an efficient delivery system for gene engineering in plants. A team of researchers led by Mary-Dell Chilton were the first to demonstrate that the virulence genes could be removed without adversely affecting the ability of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; to insert its own DNA into the plant genome (1983).

== See also ==
* Agroinfiltration
* Marc Van Montagu
* &quot;Rhizobium rhizogenes&quot; (formerly &quot;Agrobacterium rhizogenes&quot;)

== References ==
== Further reading ==
**
== External links ==
* Current taxonomy of &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; species, and new &quot;Rhizobium&quot; names
* Agrobacteria is used as gene ferry - Plant transformation with &quot;Agrobacterium&quot;]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="19" end="24" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="28" end="41" title="Gram-negative" label="Gram-negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="42" end="50" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q21508943" start="66" end="76" title="Harold J. Conn" label="H. J. Conn"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="87" end="111" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="121" end="127" title="tumors" label="tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q131472" start="145" end="170" title="Agrobacterium tumefaciens" label="Agrobacterium tumefaciens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="206" end="213" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="297" end="300" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="384" end="403" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q962530" start="507" end="524" title="wastebasket taxon" label="wastebasket taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209205" start="545" end="559" title="16S ribosomal RNA" label="16S sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696325" start="672" end="680" title="Ahrensia" label="Ahrensia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7255493" start="694" end="711" title="Pseudorhodobacter" label="Pseudorhodobacter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377803" start="725" end="733" title="Ruegeria" label="Ruegeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600496" start="751" end="758" title="Stappia" label="Stappia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131472" start="862" end="887" title="Agrobacterium tumefaciens" label="Agrobacterium tumefaciens"/>
<link wikidata="Q830142" start="1076" end="1085" title="Rhizobium" label="Rhizobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="1257" end="1282" title="monophyly" label="phylogenetically distinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="1378" end="1390" title="synapomorphy" label="synapomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181620" start="1505" end="1512" title="chromid" label="chromid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26280580" start="1678" end="1698" title="Rhizobium rhizogenes" label="Rhizobium rhizogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831134" start="1737" end="1756" title="Allorhizobium vitis" label="Allorhizobium vitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131472" start="1791" end="1816" title="Agrobacterium tumefaciens" label="Agrobacterium tumefaciens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="1894" end="1900" title="tumour" label="tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q224107" start="1916" end="1920" title="gall" label="gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q273193" start="2024" end="2035" title="bacterial conjugation" label="conjugative"/>
<link wikidata="Q74081" start="2063" end="2068" title="T-DNA" label="T-DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="2110" end="2117" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="2658" end="2665" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="3180" end="3186" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="3380" end="3390" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013941" start="3403" end="3411" title="octopine" label="octopine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27102284" start="3415" end="3423" title="nopaline" label="nopaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q192949" start="3475" end="3489" title="plant hormones" label="plant hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q190022" start="3491" end="3496" title="auxin" label="auxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422032" start="3501" end="3511" title="cytokinins" label="cytokinins"/>
<link wikidata="Q411700" start="3541" end="3547" title="opines" label="opines"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="3688" end="3707" title="Selection (biology)" label="selective advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q835718" start="4095" end="4118" title="opportunistic infection" label="opportunistic infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="4144" end="4157" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="4782" end="4786" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="4791" end="4796" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="4819" end="4832" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="4849" end="4868" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q788558" start="4873" end="4890" title="plant improvement" label="plant improvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667796" start="5014" end="5034" title="Transfer DNA binary system" label="T-DNA binary vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="5426" end="5433" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="5478" end="5499" title="antimicrobial resistance" label="antibiotic resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827241" start="5748" end="5764" title="agroinfiltration" label="agroinfiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="5766" end="5780" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="Transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126500" start="5846" end="5856" title="Protoplast" label="Protoplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549003" start="5973" end="5993" title="plant tissue culture" label="plant tissue culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827241" start="5998" end="6014" title="agroinfiltration" label="agroinfiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q851829" start="6292" end="6301" title="Nicotiana" label="Nicotiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="6353" end="6364" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="6400" end="6413" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139164" start="6503" end="6511" title="germline" label="germline"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="6539" end="6546" title="gametes" label="gametes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="6552" end="6556" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="6846" end="6853" title="Soybean" label="Soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="6856" end="6862" title="Cotton" label="Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="6865" end="6870" title="Maize" label="Maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="6873" end="6883" title="Sugar Beet" label="Sugar Beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q156106" start="6886" end="6893" title="Alfalfa" label="Alfalfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="6896" end="6901" title="Wheat" label="Wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q697248" start="6918" end="6924" title="Canola" label="Canola"/>
<link wikidata="Q163963" start="6928" end="6946" title="Creeping bentgrass" label="Creeping bentgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q839505" start="6973" end="6984" title="Golden Rice" label="Golden Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="6991" end="7005" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667796" start="7152" end="7169" title="Transfer DNA binary system" label="Ti plasmid system"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="7437" end="7447" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181620" start="7469" end="7476" title="chromid" label="chromid"/>
<link wikidata="Q179545" start="7502" end="7512" title="Ti plasmid" label="Ti plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="7537" end="7543" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="7700" end="7704" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="7767" end="7776" title="symbiosis" label="symbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="7824" end="7834" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="7854" end="7861" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q972958" start="8281" end="8297" title="Marc Van Montagu" label="Marc Van Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q462051" start="8302" end="8314" title="Jozef Schell" label="Jozef Schell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137665" start="8322" end="8341" title="University of Ghent" label="University of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="8343" end="8350" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778717" start="8612" end="8629" title="Mary-Dell Chilton" label="Mary-Dell Chilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827241" start="8841" end="8857" title="Agroinfiltration" label="Agroinfiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q972958" start="8860" end="8876" title="Marc Van Montagu" label="Marc Van Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q26280580" start="8885" end="8905" title="Rhizobium rhizogenes" label="Rhizobium rhizogenes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646845" wikidata="Q5127110" url="?curid=646845" title="Clark's Teaberry">
<text>Clark&#x27;s Teaberry is a brand of chewing gum. The D. L. Clark Company of Pittsburgh&#x27;s north side purchased the patent for it from Charles Burke, who experimented with various flavors of chewing gum in the basement of 533 McClintock Ave, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Clark&#x27;s Teaberry Gum is a trademarked brand owned and registered by a family operated confectionary company Iconic Candy, LLC of  New Jersey that specializes in the return of authentic original retro candy, snack and chewing gum brands and products.

The gum dates to 1900 but the popularity of Teaberry peaked in the 1960s. It was additionally popularized when Pelican Films (292 Madison Avenue, New York, New York) produced a series of commercials using music from Herb Alpert and the Tijuana Brass. Clark liked &quot;The Mexican Shuffle&quot; from the &quot;South of the Border&quot; album, and commissioned Alpert to rerecord it as &quot;The Teaberry Shuffle&quot;.

This nostalgic and traditional gum has a delightful wintergreen like flavor that is unique to teaberry gum. Its proprietary and distinct flavor has been exclusive to Clark’s Teaberry Gum for over 100 years. The gum is a traditional stick gum pink in color, individually wrapped in foil with a paper sleeve in a pink Clark’s logo paper. 

==See also==
*Teaberry ice cream

== References ==
== External links ==
* 1960s Teaberry Gum commercial on YouTube, complete with an English Queen&#x27;s Guard undertaking the Teaberry Shuffle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5127110" start="0" end="21" title="Clark&amp;#x27;s Teaberry" label="Clark&amp;#x27;s Teaberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q130878" start="36" end="47" title="chewing gum" label="chewing gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203705" start="53" end="72" title="D. L. Clark Company" label="D. L. Clark Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="76" end="86" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q344822" start="743" end="754" title="Herb Alpert" label="Herb Alpert"/>
<link wikidata="Q344822" start="763" end="776" title="Tijuana Brass" label="Tijuana Brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569060" start="837" end="856" title="South of the Border (Herb Alpert&amp;#x27;s Tijuana Brass album)" label="South of the Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q12151852" start="952" end="961" title="Nostalgia" label="nostalgic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130493246" start="1299" end="1317" title="Teaberry ice cream" label="Teaberry ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179989" start="1426" end="1444" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Guard" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Guard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646855" wikidata="Q450641" url="?curid=646855" title="XLS">
<text>XLS or xls may refer to:
* Microsoft Excel file format, a spreadsheet file format
* Cadillac XLS, a prototype Cadillac concept car
* Exelis Inc. (NYSE symbol), a global aerospace, defense, information and services company
* Lusitanian language (ISO 639-3 code), an Indo-European Paleohispanic language
* Midwest Questar XLS, an American ultralight aircraft design
* Saint-Louis Airport (IATA airport code), near Saint-Louis, Senegal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11272" start="27" end="54" title="Microsoft Excel file format" label="Microsoft Excel file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025245" start="84" end="96" title="Cadillac XLS" label="Cadillac XLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15302718" start="133" end="144" title="Exelis Inc." label="Exelis Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q35960" start="224" end="243" title="Lusitanian language" label="Lusitanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983873" start="304" end="323" title="Midwest Questar XLS" label="Midwest Questar XLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q765414" start="366" end="385" title="Saint-Louis Airport" label="Saint-Louis Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646868" wikidata="Q4761845" url="?curid=646868" title="Ang Mo Kio">
<text>Ang Mo Kio () is a planning area and residential town situated in the North-East Region of Singapore. Located approximately north of the Downtown Core district, Ang Mo Kio is the 4th most populated planning area in the North-East region and ranks 11th in terms of population in the country overall. The planning area is located at the south-western corner of the North-East region, bordered by the planning areas of Yishun to the north, Sengkang to the north-east, Serangoon to the east, Bishan to the south and the Central Water Catchment to the west.

Prior to urbanization, the area, much like other rural districts in Singapore at the time, was largely undeveloped, being mainly used for agricultural purposes, with uninhabited plots of land usually covered in dense secondary forest or swamps. Ang Mo Kio was subsequently redeveloped by the Housing and Development Board (HDB) in 1973 as their seventh satellite town and the first to be built in metric dimensions, being fully completed by 1980. The first three town councils in the country were established in Ang Mo Kio in 1986, as part of a pilot project to better serve residents of HDB new towns. The concept eventually became adopted under the Town Council Act of 1988 which today, remains as the second-level of administration in Singapore.

Ang Mo Kio today, much like its neighbouring towns, is largely urbanized. However, parks are still prevalent in the town as part of the country&#x27;s green initiative. Parks include Ang Mo Kio Town Garden East and Ang Mo Kio Town Garden West. Although not technically located within Ang Mo Kio itself, the Bishan-Ang Mo Kio Park in the adjacent town of Bishan was designed to serve residents of both towns. The park itself straddles along the Ang Mo Kio–Bishan boundary, making it easily accessible from Ang Mo Kio.

==Etymology==
The origin of the name is contested. Old survey maps relate the area as &quot;Amokiah&quot; or the &quot;Mukim (region) of Ang Mo Kio&quot;. The name was formerly written with the characters &quot;ang moh&quot;, literally &quot;red hair&quot;, and one possibility is that the name comes from red-haired tropical fruit rambutan, known as &quot;ang moh dan&quot; in Hokkien. However, &quot;ang moh&quot; can also be used figuratively to mean &quot;Western&quot; or &quot;Caucasian person&quot;. &quot;Kio&quot; in turn could be written either &quot;bridge&quot;, in which case the name would mean &quot;Caucasian&#x27;s bridge&quot;, or &quot;eggplant&quot;, in which case &quot;Western eggplant&quot; refers to the tomato, which is not native to the region. There are no reports of tomatoes being grown in Ang Mo Kio, so the bridge theory is more likely; nevertheless, there are several commemorative tomato sculptures around Ang Mo Kio.

Even assuming &quot;kio&quot; refers to a bridge, the identity of the bridge remains unclear. One theory states that Ang Mo Kio had two bridges of significance: an old wooden bridge (&quot;pang kio&quot; in Hokkien) over the Sungei Tongkang river, and a newer concrete bridge on Cheng San Road over a tributary of the Kallang River. Since concrete in Hokkien is &quot;ang mo huay&quot; &quot;Western ash&quot;, the bridge and consequently the area around it became known as &quot;ang mo kio&quot;, short for &quot;concrete bridge&quot;. Alternatively, the name could refer to a bridge reputedly constructed under the supervision of British engineer John Turnbull Thomson at what is today the intersection of Upper Thomson Road and Ang Mo Kio Ave 1. The area of Ang Mo Kio has also been historically referred to as Kou Teu Kio, meaning &quot;nine bridges&quot;.

In the 1970s, the area&#x27;s Chinese name was changed to , meaning &quot;Bridge of Expansiveness and Prosperity&quot;.

==Geography==

===Location===
Ang Mo Kio Planning Area, as defined by the Urban Redevelopment Authority, sits within the North-East region of Singapore, and has a total area of about . Yishun bounds Ang Mo Kio to the north, Sengkang to the northeast, Serangoon to the east, Bishan to the south and Central Water Catchment to the west.

The main component of the planning area is Ang Mo Kio New Town. The town itself has seven neighbourhoods, with Neighbourhood 1 to the west, cycling in an anti-clockwise direction to Neighbourhood 6 to the north, and ending with Neighbourhood 7 for the town centre. The town centre is located in the heart of Ang Mo Kio and is sandwiched by two town gardens set on natural hillocks.

===Subzones===
Ang Mo Kio Planning Area is officially divided into 12 subzones for urban planning and statistical purposes.
==History==

===Background and early history===
The present-day Ang Mo Kio area remained largely uninhabited throughout the 19th century. Settlers were attracted to the area only around the start of the 20th century, as a result of the rubber boom. In the old maps of Singapore, much of the area was labelled as the Ang Mo Kio Forest Reserve with many plantation estates.

In 1934, &quot;The Straits Times&quot; stated that the mukim of Ang Mo Kio referred to the area between Thomson Road and Yio Chu Kang Road, and consisted of rubber plantations. In August 1938, a then-unnamed village along Thomson Road was named Ang Mo Kio Village by the Singapore Rural Board.

===Development of Ang Mo Kio New Town===

Initially, Ang Mo Kio was designated as an industrial area housing motor workshops which had to be relocated due to the Urban Renewal Programme, but the plans were then modified to include areas for homes and communal amenities. Plans for the new town were announced by the then-Minister for Law and National Development E.W. Barker in August 1973. The new town was planned to have a total of 45,000 flats, and be demarcated by Upper Thomson and Yio Chu Kang Roads, located adjacent to the Serangoon Gardens estate. To make way for the new town, of land at Teck Ghee village was cleared, with the residents affected rehoused at the Sin Ming road estate.

The HDB referred to the new town as a &quot;new generation&quot; town, and stated that its design was intended to facilitate gracious living, with flats with larger floor areas and buildings constructed further apart from one another. In addition, the town was slated to have industrial areas, shopping amenities, schools, and a garden. Ang Mo Kio was also planned as the focal point of Singapore&#x27;s motor repair industry, housing the Registrar of Vehicles&#x27; headquarters, and was the first town designed in metric dimensions.

The first flats in the new town were completed in 1975, and construction work on the initial section of the town centre, and on the new town&#x27;s area office, was underway by September 1976. The town centre was planned to comprise a pedestrian mall, which encompassed most of the town centre, a hawker centre, an open area and a bus terminal, and to cater to residents of the new town along with the adjacent Mayflower and Serangoon Gardens estates. In April 1978, the Housing and Development Board introduced a new numbering system for blocks and streets, in which the numbers of the blocks and streets correspond to the neighbourhood that they are located in, in Ang Mo Kio, and subsequently for new towns developed thereafter.

Construction work on a $13.3 million industrial area along Ang Mo Kio Avenue 5 commenced in June 1979. This industrial area was, according to the Jurong Town Corporation, the first of a new kind of industrial park built beside housing estates. The construction of a polyclinic to serve the new town also commenced in the same year. In 1981, a facility for swimming along Ang Mo Kio Avenue 1 was completed at a cost of $4.7 million, and in July 1981, the polyclinic in Ang Mo Kio commenced operations.

The design of the town won the Singapore Institute of Architects (SIA) Outstanding Buildings Award in 1983. The swimming complex at Avenue 1 also won the 1986 SIA Architectural Award for its unique &quot;tetrahedral skylight&quot; design.

The large commercialization of the Ang Mo Kio throughout the mid-1970s and 1980s also saw the rise of neighbourhood startup businesses that remain prominent throughout Ang Mo Kio Town Centre today. One in particular eventually became one of Singapore&#x27;s largest supermarket chains, Sheng Siong.

===The 1980s and 1990s===
A area of land adjacent to Ang Mo Kio Avenues 3 and 8 was converted into a park and opened as Ang Mo Kio&#x27;s first town garden in 1981. Plans for a park along Ang Mo Kio Avenues 5 and 6 were confirmed by the HDB in August 1981, with construction of the park, by then named Ang Mo Kio Town Garden West, commencing in March 1983.

==Infrastructure==

Following the norm in the 1970s, most of the flats are organised in 12-storey long blocks or 25-storey point blocks. In recent years, certain parts of the estate have been rebuilt as part of the long process of renewal. As a result, segments of higher blocks clustered together can be seen interleaved with the older blocks.

With Ang Mo Kio becoming a matured estate, several plots of residential land have been cleared up and sold to private developers for redevelopment. Many private residential projects are being constructed on these sites.

===Transportation===

==== Road network ====
The town&#x27;s road system utilize a hierarchy of road sizes by design: the major roads are referred to as &quot;Avenues&quot;, and the local-access roads referred to as &quot;Streets&quot;. Ang Mo Kio Avenue 12 is an exception as it is a small road in an industrial estate in Ang Mo Kio. The town&#x27;s avenues are arranged in a grid-like pattern, with the streets filtering traffic from the avenues to the individual blocks. The town itself is served by the Central Expressway, providing a rapid link from the town to the rest of the island via the expressway network.

In the town&#x27;s road numbering system, avenues running from east to west are assigned odd numbers, with numbers increasing from south to north, while north–south avenues are assigned even numbers, increasing from west to east. Street numbers consist of two digits, with the first digit corresponding to the neighbourhood it belongs to and the second running in numerical sequence.

Ang Mo Kio Town was the first town to introduce this road numbering system, and it has since been replicated in other towns such as Hougang, Jurong West and Woodlands. The newer towns such as Sengkang and Punggol no longer follow this system.

==== Mass Rapid Transit ====
The town is well served by a multi-modal public transport system. Four Mass Rapid Transit stations currently serve the town, which are on the North–South Line and Thomson–East Coast Line. They are:

*Yio Chu Kang
*Ang Mo Kio
*Lentor
*Mayflower

Lentor MRT station is located along Lentor Drive, near the junction between Ang Mo Kio Avenue 4 and Yio Chu Kang Road within the Tagore subzone. Mayflower MRT station is located along Ang Mo Kio Avenue 4, within the Kebun Baru subzone. The two stations were scheduled to be opened in 2020, but instead opened on 28 August 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The line runs parallel to the North South line towards Woodlands and the city centre as well as offering direct connections to the eastern parts of Singapore.

In addition, the future Teck Ghee station on the Cross Island MRT line will serve the town alongside the existing stations on the North South line and Thomson–East Coast line. The station will be located underneath Ang Mo Kio Avenue 6, between the junctions of Ang Mo Kio Street 31 and Ang Mo Kio Avenue 1 and will open in 2030 instead of 2029 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

==== Bus ====
The Ang Mo Kio Bus Interchange is directly linked to the Ang Mo Kio MRT station via an underground pedestrian walkway, and provides feeder bus services from the MRT stations to each neighbourhood. Yio Chu Kang MRT station is also served by bus services via the Yio Chu Kang Bus Interchange sited beside the station. Both bus interchanges offer trunk bus services to connect the town with the rest of the island, including a rapid connection to the city centre in the Central Area, as well as other financial and commercial districts in the central region of Singapore, including Shenton Way, Orchard Road, Marina Centre and Marine Parade.

===Amenities===
Administrative, legal, medical, religious, and social services catering towards the general public may also be found in the Ang Mo Kio area, with a major community hospital, Ang Mo Kio - Thye Hua Kwan Hospital, that offers rehabilitative care.

The parks in the area include Ang Mo Kio Town Garden East, a park adjacent to Ang Mo Kio MRT station, along with the Ang Mo Kio Town Garden West adjacent to Ang Mo Kio Avenues 5 and 6.

Several shopping malls are also found in Ang Mo Kio Central:
*AMK Hub
*Broadway Plaza
*Djitsun Mall
*Jubilee Square

Among these malls, AMK Hub is directly connected to the Ang Mo Kio Bus Interchange, and host a varieties of commercial including the Cathay Cineplex AMK Hub.

==Education==
Ang Mo Kio New Town has a total of seven primary schools, seven secondary schools, three tertiary institutions and two special needs schools as of 2024. The list is as follows:

=== Primary schools ===

* Anderson Primary School
* Ang Mo Kio Primary School
* CHIJ St Nicholas Girls&#x27; School (Primary)
* Jing Shan Primary School
* Mayflower Primary School
* Teck Ghee Primary School
* Townsville Primary School

=== Secondary schools ===

* Anderson Secondary School
* Ang Mo Kio Secondary School
* CHIJ St Nicholas Girls&#x27; School (Secondary)
* Deyi Secondary School
* Mayflower Secondary School
* Presbyterian High School
* Yio Chu Kang Secondary School

=== Tertiary institutions ===

* Anderson Serangoon Junior College
* ITE College Central
* Nanyang Polytechnic

Several preschools can be found in Ang Mo Kio including the Al-Muttaqin Mosque Kindergarten, childcare centres operated by the National Trades Union Congress named My First Skool and also kindergartens managed under the PAP Community Foundation. Two special schools may also be found, Chaoyang School (APSN) which caters for children with mild intellectual disability aged 7–12 years old, and Pathlight School with two campuses in Ang Mo Kio with a focus on autism.

==Politics==
The jurisdiction of the area has been largely handled by Ang Mo Kio Town Council which oversees Ang Mo Kio Group Representation Constituency since 1991, and also Kebun Baru and Yio Chu Kang SMCs since 2020. The former Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Hsien Loong, is a member of Ang Mo Kio Town Council and the constituency of the same name.

Another constituency had assumed control over part of Ang Mo Kio which was Nee Soon Group Representation Constituency for the Kebun Baru division. In light of the 2020 general election, the Kebun Baru division of Nee Soon GRC will become an SMC of its own and following the election victory, the constituency is now under the jurisdiction of Ang Mo Kio Town Council.

Previously, the Cheng San Group Representation Constituency from 1988 to 2001 have handled parts of Ang Mo Kio such as Cheng San, Chong Boon and Jalan Kayu. Chong Boon was transferred to Ang Mo Kio GRC in 1997. Yio Chu Kang Single Member Constituency have handled parts of Ang Mo Kio from 2006 to 2011, and later return into a SMC ahead of the 2020 elections.

==Notes==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4761845" start="0" end="10" title="Ang Mo Kio" label="Ang Mo Kio"/>
<link wikidata="Q104527265" start="19" end="32" title="Planning Areas of Singapore" label="planning area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016510" start="37" end="53" title="New towns of Singapore" label="residential town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091495" start="70" end="87" title="North-East Region, Singapore" label="North-East Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="91" end="100" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810086" start="137" end="150" title="Downtown Core" label="Downtown Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053845" start="416" end="422" title="Yishun" label="Yishun"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861365" start="437" end="445" title="Sengkang" label="Sengkang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861231" start="465" end="474" title="Serangoon" label="Serangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249777" start="488" end="494" title="Bishan, Singapore" label="Bishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25171659" start="516" end="539" title="Central Water Catchment" label="Central Water Catchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140056" start="771" end="787" title="secondary forest" label="secondary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="791" end="796" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934365" start="846" end="875" title="Housing and Development Board" label="Housing and Development Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="951" end="968" title="Metric system" label="metric dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761853" start="1487" end="1514" title="Ang Mo Kio Town Garden East" label="Ang Mo Kio Town Garden East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761854" start="1519" end="1546" title="Ang Mo Kio Town Garden West" label="Ang Mo Kio Town Garden West"/>
<link wikidata="Q866299" start="1611" end="1633" title="Bishan-Ang Mo Kio Park" label="Bishan-Ang Mo Kio Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q867997" start="2033" end="2040" title="ang moh" label="ang moh"/>
<link wikidata="Q152357" start="2064" end="2072" title="red hair" label="red hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q476864" start="2154" end="2162" title="rambutan" label="rambutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="2200" end="2207" title="Minnan (linguistics)" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="2305" end="2321" title="white people" label="Caucasian person"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540" start="2477" end="2485" title="eggplant" label="eggplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="2550" end="2556" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2999" end="3014" title="Sungei Tongkang" label="Sungei Tongkang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091243" start="3053" end="3067" title="Cheng San Road" label="Cheng San Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094417" start="3092" end="3105" title="Kallang River" label="Kallang River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261423" start="3423" end="3444" title="John Turnbull Thomson" label="John Turnbull Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926617" start="3482" end="3500" title="Upper Thomson Road" label="Upper Thomson Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899994" start="3831" end="3860" title="Urban Redevelopment Authority" label="Urban Redevelopment Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053845" start="3942" end="3948" title="Yishun" label="Yishun"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861365" start="3981" end="3989" title="Sengkang" label="Sengkang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861231" start="4008" end="4017" title="Serangoon" label="Serangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249777" start="4031" end="4037" title="Bishan, Singapore" label="Bishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25171659" start="4055" end="4078" title="Central Water Catchment" label="Central Water Catchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q498921" start="4988" end="5005" title="The Straits Times" label="The Straits Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926617" start="5077" end="5089" title="Thomson Road, Singapore" label="Thomson Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294875" start="5589" end="5605" title="Minister for Law" label="Minister for Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294478" start="5610" end="5630" title="Ministry of National Development (Singapore)" label="National Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339888" start="5631" end="5642" title="E.W. Barker" label="E.W. Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452691" start="5800" end="5817" title="Serangoon Gardens" label="Serangoon Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521551" start="5942" end="5962" title="Sin Ming" label="Sin Ming road estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109055" start="7380" end="7403" title="Jurong Town Corporation" label="Jurong Town Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="8092" end="8110" title="Startup company" label="startup businesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481878" start="8262" end="8273" title="Sheng Siong" label="Sheng Siong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761854" start="8578" end="8605" title="Ang Mo Kio Town Garden West" label="Ang Mo Kio Town Garden West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053776" start="9708" end="9726" title="Central Expressway, Singapore" label="Central Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860944" start="10337" end="10344" title="Hougang" label="Hougang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315392" start="10346" end="10357" title="Jurong West" label="Jurong West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254438" start="10362" end="10371" title="Woodlands, Singapore" label="Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861365" start="10397" end="10405" title="Sengkang" label="Sengkang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260156" start="10410" end="10417" title="Punggol" label="Punggol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40176" start="10549" end="10567" title="Mass Rapid Transit (Singapore)" label="Mass Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q759229" start="10620" end="10636" title="North–South MRT line" label="North–South Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795883" start="10641" end="10664" title="Thomson–East Coast MRT line" label="Thomson–East Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903146" start="10678" end="10690" title="Yio Chu Kang MRT station" label="Yio Chu Kang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266049" start="10692" end="10702" title="Ang Mo Kio MRT station" label="Ang Mo Kio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523392" start="10704" end="10710" title="Lentor MRT station" label="Lentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15693078" start="10712" end="10721" title="Mayflower MRT station" label="Mayflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523392" start="10723" end="10741" title="Lentor MRT station" label="Lentor MRT station"/>
<link wikidata="Q15693078" start="10868" end="10889" title="Mayflower MRT station" label="Mayflower MRT station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382441" start="10939" end="10949" title="Kebun Baru" label="Kebun Baru"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="11061" end="11078" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254438" start="11135" end="11144" title="Woodlands, Singapore" label="Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q61014529" start="11264" end="11281" title="Teck Ghee MRT station" label="Teck Ghee station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335354" start="11289" end="11310" title="Cross Island MRT line" label="Cross Island MRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="11595" end="11612" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761844" start="11633" end="11659" title="Ang Mo Kio Bus Interchange" label="Ang Mo Kio Bus Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266049" start="11686" end="11708" title="Ang Mo Kio MRT station" label="Ang Mo Kio MRT station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903146" start="11826" end="11850" title="Yio Chu Kang MRT station" label="Yio Chu Kang MRT station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053779" start="11890" end="11918" title="Yio Chu Kang Bus Interchange" label="Yio Chu Kang Bus Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306197" start="12096" end="12108" title="Central Area, Singapore" label="Central Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091778" start="12169" end="12196" title="Central Region, Singapore" label="central region of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299213" start="12208" end="12219" title="Shenton Way" label="Shenton Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735712" start="12221" end="12233" title="Orchard Road" label="Orchard Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763797" start="12235" end="12248" title="Marina Centre" label="Marina Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764201" start="12253" end="12266" title="Marine Parade" label="Marine Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983835" start="12459" end="12494" title="Ang Mo Kio - Thye Hua Kwan Hospital" label="Ang Mo Kio - Thye Hua Kwan Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761853" start="12560" end="12587" title="Ang Mo Kio Town Garden East" label="Ang Mo Kio Town Garden East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652658" start="12778" end="12785" title="AMK Hub" label="AMK Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011153" start="13265" end="13310" title="CHIJ Saint Nicholas Girls&amp;#x27; School" label="CHIJ St Nicholas Girls&amp;#x27; School (Primary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754186" start="13450" end="13475" title="Anderson Secondary School" label="Anderson Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761848" start="13478" end="13505" title="Ang Mo Kio Secondary School" label="Ang Mo Kio Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011153" start="13508" end="13555" title="CHIJ Saint Nicholas Girls&amp;#x27; School" label="CHIJ St Nicholas Girls&amp;#x27; School (Secondary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268533" start="13558" end="13579" title="Deyi Secondary School" label="Deyi Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051710" start="13582" end="13608" title="Mayflower Secondary School" label="Mayflower Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240775" start="13611" end="13635" title="Presbyterian High School" label="Presbyterian High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053780" start="13638" end="13667" title="Yio Chu Kang Secondary School" label="Yio Chu Kang Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754105" start="13702" end="13735" title="Anderson Serangoon Junior College" label="Anderson Serangoon Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974743" start="13738" end="13757" title="ITE College Central" label="ITE College Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964469" start="13760" end="13779" title="Nanyang Polytechnic" label="Nanyang Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783332" start="13841" end="13859" title="Al-Muttaqin Mosque" label="Al-Muttaqin Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978971" start="13908" end="13938" title="National Trades Union Congress" label="National Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118189" start="14001" end="14025" title="PAP Community Foundation" label="PAP Community Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q864055" start="14174" end="14190" title="Pathlight School" label="Pathlight School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761849" start="14357" end="14401" title="Ang Mo Kio Group Representation Constituency" label="Ang Mo Kio Group Representation Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q866756" start="14479" end="14506" title="Prime Minister of Singapore" label="Prime Minister of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q57643" start="14508" end="14523" title="Lee Hsien Loong" label="Lee Hsien Loong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926853" start="14679" end="14721" title="Nee Soon Group Representation Constituency" label="Nee Soon Group Representation Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983901" start="14767" end="14788" title="2020 Singaporean general election" label="2020 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382442" start="14845" end="14859" title="Kebun Baru Single Member Constituency" label="SMC of its own"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926696" start="14988" end="15031" title="Cheng San Group Representation Constituency" label="Cheng San Group Representation Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053781" start="15183" end="15222" title="Yio Chu Kang Single Member Constituency" label="Yio Chu Kang Single Member Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053781" start="15299" end="15302" title="Yio Chu Kang Single Member Constituency" label="SMC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646872" wikidata="Q169059" url="?curid=646872" title="Suitcase nuclear device">
<text>A suitcase nuclear device (also suitcase nuke, suitcase bomb, backpack nuke, snuke, mini-nuke, and pocket nuke) is a tactical nuclear weapon that is portable enough that it could use a suitcase as its delivery method.

During the 1950s and 1960s Both the United States and the Soviet Union developed nuclear weapons small enough to be portable in specially-designed backpacks.

Neither the United States nor the Soviet Union have ever made public the existence or development of weapons small enough to fit into a normal-sized suitcase or briefcase. The W48 however, does fit the criteria of small, easily disguised, and portable. Its explosive yield was extremely small for a nuclear weapon.

In the mid-1970s, debate shifted from the possibility of developing such a device for the military to concerns over its possible use in nuclear terrorism. The concept became a staple of the spy thriller genre in the later Cold War era.

==Etymology==
The term &quot;suitcase (nuclear/atomic) bomb&quot; was introduced during the 1950s with the prospect of reducing the size of the smallest tactical nuclear weapons even further, albeit purely as a &quot;figure of speech&quot; for miniaturization, not necessarily for the delivery in actual suitcases.

==Overview==
The value of portable nuclear weapons lies in their ability to be easily smuggled across borders, transported by means widely available, and placed close to targets of strategic value, or as means to render enemy land uninhabitable. In nuclear weapon design, there is a trade-off in small weapons designs between weight and compact size. Extremely small (as small as diameter and long) linear implosion type weapons, which might conceivably fit in a large briefcase or typical suitcase, have been tested, but the lightest of those weighed nearly and had a maximum yield of only 0.19 kiloton (the Swift nuclear device, tested in Operation Redwing&#x27;s Yuma test on May 27, 1956). The largest yield of a relatively compact linear implosion device was under 2 kilotons for the cancelled (or never deployed but apparently tested) US W82-1 artillery shell design, with yield under 2 kilotons for a artillery shell in diameter and long.

==Soviet Union and Russia==
The potential existence and whereabouts of suitcase-sized Soviet nuclear bombs became an increasingly fierce subject of debate in the aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet Union. Major concerns regarding the new Russian government’s overall security and control of its nuclear stockpile were raised on 30 May 1997, when an American congressional delegation sent to Russia met with General Aleksandr Lebed, former Secretary of the Russian National Security Council. During the meeting, Lebed mentioned the possibility that several portable nuclear suitcase bombs had gone missing. According to Lebed, &quot;during his short tenure as the Secretary of the Security Council in 1996, he received information that the separatist government in Chechnya possessed small nuclear devices. In an attempt to clarify the situation, he created a special commission under the chairmanship of his assistant, Vladimir Denisov. According to Lebed, the commission was only able to locate 48 such munitions of a total of 132, an indication that 84 were lost&quot;. However, Lebed subsequently &quot;changed the total number of suitcase nukes several times, stating in the end that the number was between 100 and 500, but probably closer to 100&quot;, although &quot;[i]t should be noted that almost nothing is known about the methods of the commission’s work&quot;. Lebed would make several press releases and give television interviews regarding the matter later in the year.

During an interview with CBS newsmagazine &quot;Sixty Minutes&quot; on 7 September 1997, Lebed would claim that the Russian military had lost track of more than a hundred out of a total of 250 &quot;suitcase-sized nuclear bombs&quot;. Lebed stated that these devices were made to look like suitcases, and that he had learned of their existence only a few years earlier. On 10 September, the Ministry for Atomic Energy of the Russian Federation (MINATOM) rejected Lebed&#x27;s claims as baseless. &quot;&#x27;We don&#x27;t know what General Lebed is talking about. No such weapons exist,&#x27; a ministry spokesman told AFP. &#x27;Perhaps he meant old Soviet nuclear artillery shells, which are all being safely guarded.&#x27;&quot; Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin &quot;ridiculed Lebed&#x27;s account as &quot;absolute stupidity&quot; and said that &quot;all Russian nuclear weapons are under the total and absolutely reliable control of the Russian armed forces&quot;, while a spokesman for the Russian Ministry of Defence, Vladimir Utavenko, stated that &quot;there are no nuclear bombs in Russia out of [the] control of the Russian armed forces.&quot; Utavenko also questioned the credibility of Lebed on this particular issue because &quot;he never dealt with nuclear security questions and cannot know the situation.&quot; In an interview with Russian news agency Interfax, Lebed&#x27;s former deputy, Denisov, claimed that he had led a special working group in July 1996 to explore whether any such weapons had been deployed. &quot;According to Denisov, the working group concluded within two months that there were no such devices in the active Russian arsenal and that all the weapons were in &quot;appropriate&quot; storage facilities. However, he said the group could not rule out the possibility that similar weapons were located in Ukraine, Georgia or the Baltic states.&quot;

However, despite the Russian government’s rejection of Lebed’s claims, the resulting public interest from Lebed&#x27;s television appearances would eventually provoke a congressional hearing in the United States, which was held between 1–2 October 1997 and was intended to discuss &quot;Nuclear Terrorism and Countermeasures.&quot; Chief among these talks was the matter of the existence of portable nuclear devices in the arsenal of the former Soviet Union and the possibility of these weapons proliferating across the globe.

Although absent from the hearings himself, Lebed&#x27;s interviews were frequently cited as a cause for concern throughout them, particularly his claims regarding the 84 missing nuclear devices and their apparent capability of killing 100,000 people each. Furthermore, one witness who corroborated Lebed&#x27;s claims was the former chairman of the Interagency Commission on Environmental Security for the Russian National Security Council, Alexei Yablokov, who had served as &quot;a former environmental advisor&quot; to Russian President Boris Yeltsin, and was highly regarded by his peers in the Russian Academy of Sciences at the time.

Yablokov himself gave a television interview to Russian television channel NTV shortly after Lebed, and also drafted a letter to Novaya Gazeta affirming both the existence of suitcase-sized nuclear weapons and the possibility that some may in fact have gone missing. &quot;I have spoken to the people who made these bombs, so I know that they exist,&quot; Yablokov stated. &quot;He announced that 700 such devices, which he called “nuclear mines,” had existed in the Soviet Union.&quot; He also clarified that these devices had existed as far back as the 1970s. In these communications, Yablokov claimed to have met with many of the researchers who had a hand in developing suitcase-sized nuclear weapons. Moreover, his primary rebuttal against Moscow’s denial was that these devices were never listed on any inventory to begin with due to their highly sensitive nature, particularly as a result of their supposed use by the KGB, with targets ranging from the United States to various NATO countries in eastern Europe. Therefore, the confirmation of these weapons’ existence in addition to the security and inventory of these weapons would ultimately produce misleading results. However, &quot;Yablokov’s assertion contradicts all available information about the chain of custody of nuclear weapons, which were supposedly the sole responsibility of the 12th GUMO. In addition, it should be possible to check MOD records against logs of production facilities, and then any “unaccounted” devices would be revealed.&quot;

During the hearing itself, Yablokov would also maintain his position that KGB nuclear weapon caches continued to exist independently of the recently defunct Soviet Ministry of Defense, providing further insight into why the Russian government&#x27;s denials conflicted with the claims of Lebed and Yablokov. Yablokov also clarified his source of information, which up until this point had remained ambiguous, citing communications between scientists working at the Krasnoyarsk-26, Tomsk-7, Chelyabinsk-65, and Penza-19 nuclear installations located in Russia. Yablokov also explained that if these weapons were developed in the 1970s, then the warheads would need to have been replaced at least twice by that point owing to degradation of materials, although he could not guarantee that this had occurred, and &quot;[w]ithout detailed knowledge of the design of Soviet warheads, it would be impossible to know which components needed replacement at what time intervals.&quot;

Unfortunately, &quot;[t]he difficulty of assessing the situation stems, first and foremost, from the fact that many, if not all, participants to the 1997–98 scandal could have had ulterior motives. At that time, Lebed was running for the governor of Krasnoyarsk Krai, with an option of running for President again in 2000. Yablokov, a perennial fighter against Minatom, was [...] prepared to support anything that would help his cause; from a technical point of view, his testimony is particularly questionable&quot;. On the other hand, &quot;Russian MOD and Minatom officials could be expected to deny anything, regardless of whether allegations were completely or even partially correct. [...] In the end, not a single source can be considered entirely reliable.&quot; However, it is notable that statements made by MOD and Minatom representatives &quot;were worded very carefully and denied the existence of “nuclear suitcases,” but not necessarily the existence of other small nuclear devices.&quot; Nuclear mines &quot;are a well-known class of nuclear weapons&quot;, while &quot;the existence of smaller devices custom-designed for Special Forces, probably analogous to American small atomic demolition munitions (SADMs), should not be ruled out either [...] with a caveat that their existence cannot be viewed as an established fact.&quot; Although, &quot;there are sufficient grounds to believe that the Soviet Union had one or more types of portable nuclear devices&quot;, reports of large numbers of these devices having been stolen or gone missing &quot;were most probably not true&quot;, and were likely &quot;generated by incomplete information or ulterior motives.&quot;

Stanislav Lunev, the highest-ranking GRU officer to defect to the United States, has claimed that such Russian-made devices exist and described them in more detail. The devices, &quot;identified as RA-115s (or RA-115-01s for submersible weapons)&quot; weigh from fifty to sixty pounds. They can last for many years if wired to an electric source. In case there is a loss of power, there is a battery backup. If the battery runs low, the weapon has a transmitter that sends a coded message either by satellite or directly to a GRU post at a Russian embassy or consulate. According to Lunev, the number of &quot;missing&quot; nuclear devices (as found by General Lebed) &quot;is almost identical to the number of strategic targets upon which those bombs would be used.&quot; However, according to Igor Valynkin, head of the 12th Chief Directorate of the Ministry of Defense, RA-115 &quot;represented a “production index” (i.e., the type of munitions) and that the whole type had already been eliminated.&quot; Valynkin further stated that although &quot;the production of suitcase sized nuclear weapons is theoretically possible&quot;, it would be a &quot;very expensive and ineffective undertaking&quot; because they would only have a short life span and would require frequent maintenance.&quot;

Lunev suggested that suitcase-sized nuclear weapons might already have been deployed by GRU operatives working on US soil to assassinate US leaders in the event of war. He alleged that arms caches were hidden by the KGB in many countries, and were booby-trapped with &quot;Lightning&quot; explosive devices. One such cache, identified by Vasili Mitrokhin, exploded when Swiss authorities sprayed it with a high pressure water gun in a wooded area near Bern. Several other caches were removed successfully. Lunev said that he had personally looked for hiding places for weapons caches in the Shenandoah Valley area and claimed that &quot;it is surprisingly easy to smuggle nuclear weapons into the US&quot;, either across the Mexican border or using a small transport missile that can land undetected when launched from a Russian airplane. US Congressman Curt Weldon supported the claims made by Lunev, but noted that Lunev had also &quot;exaggerated things&quot; according to the FBI. Searches of the areas identified by Lunev have been conducted, &quot;but law-enforcement officials have never found such weapons caches, with or without portable nuclear weapons.&quot; 

The existence of such weapons and their potential usefulness, yield and lethality after a prolonged number of years remains controversial. &quot;Even assuming that some portable nuclear devices were lost, it would be very difficult to use them [...] at least not in the fashion that they were originally designed for.&quot;

==United States==
The lightest nuclear warhead ever acknowledged to have been manufactured by the U.S. is the W54, which was used in both the Davy Crockett 120 mm recoilless rifle-launched warhead and the backpack-carried version called the Mk-54 SADM (Special Atomic Demolition Munition). The bare warhead package was an cylinder that weighed .

The W48 nuclear shell is in diameter and long and weighs . It represents the smallest diameter complete, self-contained physics package to be fielded and had a yield of . Nuclear weapons designer Ted Taylor has alleged that a diameter shell with a mass of is theoretically possible.

Former Under-Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Michael G. Vickers has claimed that he, along with other Green Berets special forces troops, practiced infiltrating Warsaw Pact countries with backpack-sized nuclear weapons, with a mission to &quot;detonate a portable nuclear bomb.&quot; These were known as Green Light Teams.

In 1994, the United States Congress passed &quot;The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1994&quot;, preventing the government from developing nuclear weapons with a yield of less than 5 kilotons, thereby making the official development of these weapons in the US unlawful. This law was repealed in the &quot;National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004&quot;.

==Israel==

Allegations were made in the 1990s that Israel had developed suitcase nuclear bombs during the 1970s.

==See also==
*AIM-26 Falcon
*Dirty bomb
*Neutron bomb
* &quot;The Fourth Protocol&quot;, a 1984 novel about smuggling a suitcase bomb to UK
*W25 (nuclear warhead)
*W33 (nuclear warhead)
*The Cassandra Complex, a 2022 novel by Frazer Douglas about a Russian sleeper agent tasked with detonating the Soviet Union&#x27;s missing suitcase nuclear bombs 

==References==
==External links==

*Suitcase Nukes by National Terror Alert Response Center
*Suitcase Nukes: Permanently Lost Luggage by SAST REPORT
*Alexander Lebed and Suitcase Nukes
*Are Suitcase Bombs Possible?
*&quot;Suitcase Nukes&quot;: A Reassessment, 2002 article by the Center for Nonproliferation Studies at the Monterey Institute of International Studies
*W54 SADM photo by Brookings Institution
*Article discussing the development of smaller nuclear weapons in the U.S.A.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169059" start="2" end="25" title="Suitcase nuclear device" label="suitcase nuclear device"/>
<link wikidata="Q169059" start="32" end="45" title="Suitcase nuclear device" label="suitcase nuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q169059" start="47" end="60" title="Suitcase nuclear device" label="suitcase bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q169059" start="62" end="75" title="Suitcase nuclear device" label="backpack nuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q169059" start="77" end="82" title="Suitcase nuclear device" label="snuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q169059" start="84" end="93" title="Suitcase nuclear device" label="mini-nuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q169059" start="99" end="110" title="Suitcase nuclear device" label="pocket nuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050866" start="117" end="140" title="tactical nuclear weapon" label="tactical nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200814" start="185" end="193" title="suitcase" label="suitcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="255" end="268" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="277" end="289" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5843" start="366" end="374" title="backpack" label="backpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453324" start="554" end="557" title="W48" label="W48"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005754" start="830" end="847" title="nuclear terrorism" label="nuclear terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20664331" start="884" end="896" title="spy thriller" label="spy thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="916" end="924" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221814" start="1496" end="1517" title="nuclear weapon design" label="nuclear weapon design"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221814" start="1646" end="1662" title="Two-point implosion" label="linear implosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062538" start="1824" end="1829" title="nuclear weapon yield" label="yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="1843" end="1850" title="TNT equivalent" label="kiloton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252887" start="1888" end="1905" title="Operation Redwing" label="Operation Redwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564590" start="2091" end="2096" title="W82" label="W82-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2389" end="2401" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="2547" end="2580" title="United States Congress" label="American congressional delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q295898" start="2613" end="2628" title="Alexander Lebed" label="Aleksandr Lebed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="2962" end="2970" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3708" end="3711" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="3731" end="3744" title="Sixty Minutes" label="Sixty Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12835116" start="4074" end="4126" title="Federal Agency on Atomic Energy (Russia)" label="Ministry for Atomic Energy of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q842386" start="4415" end="4437" title="Prime Minister of Russia" label="Russian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q190884" start="4438" end="4457" title="Viktor Chernomyrdin" label="Viktor Chernomyrdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146492" start="4690" end="4717" title="Ministry of Defence (Russia)" label="Russian Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q379271" start="5063" end="5071" title="Interfax" label="Interfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="5538" end="5545" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="5547" end="5554" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="5562" end="5575" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6029" end="6041" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364891" start="6079" end="6092" title="nuclear proliferation" label="proliferating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092064" start="6553" end="6568" title="Alexei Yablokov" label="Alexei Yablokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="6634" end="6651" title="President of Russia" label="Russian President"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="6652" end="6665" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="6711" end="6738" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Russian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q574625" start="6828" end="6831" title="NTV (Russia)" label="NTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q170135" start="6882" end="6895" title="Novaya Gazeta" label="Novaya Gazeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="7678" end="7681" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="7738" end="7742" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294505" start="8430" end="8456" title="Ministry of Defence (Soviet Union)" label="Soviet Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q135869" start="8738" end="8752" title="Krasnoyarsk-26" label="Krasnoyarsk-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q193909" start="8754" end="8761" title="Tomsk-7" label="Tomsk-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q175802" start="8763" end="8777" title="Chelyabinsk-65" label="Chelyabinsk-65"/>
<link wikidata="Q136715" start="8783" end="8791" title="Penza-19" label="Penza-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563" start="9500" end="9516" title="Krasnoyarsk Krai" label="Krasnoyarsk Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031961" start="10936" end="10951" title="Stanislav Lunev" label="Stanislav Lunev"/>
<link wikidata="Q115782" start="10973" end="10976" title="GRU (G.U.)" label="GRU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028498" start="11758" end="11807" title="12th Chief Directorate" label="12th Chief Directorate of the Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896730" start="12500" end="12539" title="Molniya (explosive trap)" label="&amp;quot;Lightning&amp;quot; explosive devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q463328" start="12571" end="12587" title="Vasili Mitrokhin" label="Vasili Mitrokhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="12685" end="12689" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="12824" end="12841" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145362" start="13087" end="13098" title="Curt Weldon" label="Curt Weldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="13213" end="13216" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178658" start="13840" end="13843" title="W54" label="W54"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145948" start="13872" end="13885" title="Davy Crockett (nuclear device)" label="Davy Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q641196" start="13893" end="13909" title="recoilless rifle" label="recoilless rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632738" start="13983" end="14017" title="Special Atomic Demolition Munition" label="Special Atomic Demolition Munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453324" start="14081" end="14084" title="W48" label="W48"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370914" start="14273" end="14283" title="Ted Taylor (physicist)" label="Ted Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883164" start="14368" end="14411" title="Under-Secretary of Defense for Intelligence" label="Under-Secretary of Defense for Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110970" start="14412" end="14430" title="Michael G. Vickers" label="Michael G. Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="14469" end="14481" title="Green Berets" label="Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="14528" end="14539" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349244" start="14671" end="14688" title="Green Light Teams" label="Green Light Teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="14704" end="14726" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612881" start="14744" end="14778" title="National Defense Authorization Act" label="National Defense Authorization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q65455964" start="15131" end="15137" title="nuclear weapons and Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q293734" start="15208" end="15221" title="AIM-26 Falcon" label="AIM-26 Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q867805" start="15223" end="15233" title="Dirty bomb" label="Dirty bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q719349" start="15235" end="15247" title="Neutron bomb" label="Neutron bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171714" start="15256" end="15275" title="The Fourth Protocol" label="The Fourth Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749216" start="15335" end="15356" title="W25 (nuclear warhead)" label="W25 (nuclear warhead)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748925" start="15358" end="15379" title="W33 (nuclear warhead)" label="W33 (nuclear warhead)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946114" start="15868" end="15911" title="Monterey Institute of International Studies" label="Monterey Institute of International Studies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646878" wikidata="Q77420" url="?curid=646878" title="Max Vasmer">
<text>Max Julius Friedrich Vasmer (; ; 28 February 1886 – 30 November 1962) was a Russian and German linguist. He studied problems of etymology in Indo-European, Finno-Ugric and Turkic languages and worked on the history of Slavic, Baltic, Iranian, and Finno-Ugric peoples.

==Biography==
Max Vasmer was born on 28 February 1886 to German parents in Saint Petersburg. Vasmer graduated from Saint Petersburg University in 1907 as a student of Jan Baudouin de Courtenay and Aleksey Shakhmatov. From 1907 to 1908, he studied Greek dialects and the Albanian language in Greece. He continued to study at the universities of Krakow and Vienna from 1908 to 1910. 

From 1910, he delivered lectures and taught at the Bestuzhev Courses in 1912. During the Russian Civil War of 1917–1922, he worked in the universities of Saratov (1917–1918) and Dorpat (1918–1921). From 1921 to 1925, he taught at the University of Leipzig, and from 1925 to 1945, he taught at the University of Berlin. He also founded the journal &quot;Zeitschrift für slavische Philologie&quot;.

In 1938–1939, he delivered lectures at Columbia University in New York City. It was there that he started to work on his &quot;magnum opus&quot;, the . He delivered the eulogy for Professor Aleksander Brückner in Berlin-Wilmersdorf in 1939 and he took over the chair of Slavistic studies at the University of Berlin. In 1941, he published the book &quot;The Slavs in Greece&quot; (&quot;Die Slaven in Griechenland&quot;) and in 1944 the book &quot;The Greek loanwords in Serbo-Croatian&quot; (&quot;Die griechischen Lehnwörter im Serbo-Kroatischen&quot;).

In 1944, the bombing of Vasmer&#x27;s house in Berlin destroyed most of his materials. Nevertheless, Vasmer persevered in his work, which was finally published in three volumes by Heidelberg University in 1950–1958 as . From 1947 to 1949, he taught at the University of Stockholm. He was the head of Slavic studies at the Free University of West Berlin. Vasmer died in West Berlin on 30 November 1962.

The Russian translation of Vasmer&#x27;s dictionary – with extensive commentaries by Oleg Trubachyov – was printed in 1964–1973. , it remains the most authoritative source for Slavic etymology. The Russian version is available on Sergei Starostin&#x27;s &quot;Tower of Babel&quot; web site.

Another monumental work led by Max Vasmer involved the compilation of a multi-volume dictionary of Russian names of rivers and other bodies of water. He initiated an even grander project, completed by a team of workers after his death: the publication of a monumental (11 volumes) gazetteer that included virtually all names of populated places in Russia found both in pre-revolutionary and in Soviet sources.

== See also ==
* Etymological dictionary

== References ==
==Sources==

== External links ==
* Query the Russian dictionaries at Sergei Starostin&#x27;s &quot;Tower of Babel&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q77420" start="0" end="27" title="Max Vasmer" label="Max Julius Friedrich Vasmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="95" end="103" title="linguist" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="128" end="137" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="141" end="154" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q79890" start="156" end="167" title="Finno-Ugric languages" label="Finno-Ugric"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="172" end="178" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="218" end="224" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="226" end="232" title="Balts" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="234" end="241" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="344" end="360" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27621" start="384" end="411" title="Saint Petersburg University" label="Saint Petersburg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q335092" start="436" end="461" title="Jan Baudouin de Courtenay" label="Jan Baudouin de Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q729707" start="466" end="484" title="Aleksey Shakhmatov" label="Aleksey Shakhmatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="613" end="619" title="University of Krakow" label="Krakow"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="624" end="630" title="University of Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999150" start="703" end="720" title="Bestuzhev Courses" label="Bestuzhev Courses"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="741" end="758" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q400422" start="806" end="813" title="Saratov State University" label="Saratov"/>
<link wikidata="Q204181" start="830" end="836" title="University of Tartu" label="Dorpat"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="886" end="907" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="949" end="969" title="University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="1089" end="1108" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q112029" start="1240" end="1259" title="Aleksander Brückner" label="Aleksander Brückner"/>
<link wikidata="Q693628" start="1270" end="1281" title="Wilmersdorf" label="Wilmersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="1787" end="1808" title="Heidelberg University" label="Heidelberg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q221645" start="1863" end="1886" title="University of Stockholm" label="University of Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q156864" start="1907" end="1921" title="Slavic studies" label="Slavic studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q153006" start="1929" end="1959" title="Free University of West Berlin" label="Free University of West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="1976" end="1987" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971573" start="2095" end="2110" title="Oleg Trubachyov" label="Oleg Trubachyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q705907" start="2240" end="2256" title="Sergei Starostin" label="Sergei Starostin"/>
<link wikidata="Q932103" start="2409" end="2450" title="hydronym" label="names of rivers and other bodies of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006160" start="2583" end="2592" title="gazetteer" label="gazetteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q521983" start="2730" end="2753" title="Etymological dictionary" label="Etymological dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q705907" start="2842" end="2858" title="Sergei Starostin" label="Sergei Starostin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646879" wikidata="Q933657" url="?curid=646879" title="Constantine Phaulkon">
<text>Constantine Phaulkon (Greek: Κωνσταντῖνος Γεράκης, &quot;Konstantinos Gerakis&quot;; γεράκι is the Greek word for &quot;falcon&quot;; also known as Costantin Gerachi, &quot;Capitão Falcão&quot; in Portuguese and simply as &quot;Monsieur Constance&quot; in French; 1647 – 5 June 1688) was a Greek adventurer who became chief minister to King Narai of the Ayutthaya Kingdom and assumed the Thai noble title &quot;Chao Phraya Wichayen&quot; (เจ้าพระยาวิชาเยนทร์).

==Origins==
Constantine Phaulkon was born to Greek parents within Assos Castle in the region of Erisso (&quot;pertinenza di Erisso&quot;) on northern Cephalonia (then under Venetian rule). His father&#x27;s name was Zuane (Greek: Τζουγάνης that is John) and his mother&#x27;s is still unknown. The Gerakis (Γεράκης) / Gerachi family was already established in the village of Plagia (Πλαγιά), since the 16th century.

==Early career==
At age 13, Phaulkon left Cephalonia on an English ship and spent the next ten years of his life living in London. It was then, that his name “Gerachi” was anglicised into “Falcon”, before its re-Hellenization into “Phaulkon”. He may have served in the Royal Navy and fought under the command of Prince Rupert of the Rhine against the Dutch during the Second Anglo-Dutch War. In 1669, Phaulkon sailed to Bantam on an English ship, the &quot;Hopewell&quot; as assistant gunner and enlisted as a clerk in the English East India Company.

His time as assistant gunner within the company also coincided with the Third Anglo-Dutch War. He made friends with senior Company official Richard Burnaby and trader George White as well as his younger brother Samuel.

While assistant gunner, Phaulkon came to Siam (present day Thailand), as a merchant in 1675 after working for England&#x27;s East India Company. Phaulkon became fluent in the Siamese language in just a few years (he was also fluent in English, French, Portuguese, and Malay). In 1679, Burnaby pressed Phaulkon into the service of the Phra Khlang Kosa Lek to help facilitate trade relations. In 1681, Lek introduced him to the court of King Narai and Phaulkon began work as an interpreter, quickly gaining royal favor. Due to his experience with the East India Company, he also worked within the royal treasury.

==Rise to power==
There are many accounts telling of Phaulkon&#x27;s rise to power and how his skills gained him the favour of King Narai. One of these skills were supposedly his efficiency in accounting, with which he investigated a claim by Persian traders that the treasury owed them debt. After inspecting the royal accounts, Phaulkon came to the conclusion that it was in actuality the Persian traders that owed the treasury; thus garnering much needed revenue for the royal treasury.

Another account says that King Narai wanted to investigate the weight of a cannon. Phaulkon proceeded to place the cannon in the hold of a boat and then marked where waterline ended up. He then removed the cannon and filled the boat with rice until it reached the same mark.

Thanks to Phaulkon&#x27;s competence and administrative capabilities, as well as his knowledge of Europe, King Narai came to favour him greatly. In 1682, Phaulkon abandoned Anglicanism for Catholicism and soon after married a Catholic woman of mixed Japanese-Portuguese-Bengali descent named Maria Guyomar de Pinha. They lived a life of affluence as Phaulkon rose to become highly influential at the Siamese court of King Narai. Their marriage brought two sons, George &quot;Jorge&quot; Phaulkon and Constantin &quot;João&quot; Phaulkon.

In 1683, Phaulkon suggested to King Narai to construct the fort of Mergui in the modern polygonal style, which was popular in Europe, which was strongly opposed by Kosa Lek. Lek was later accused of receiving bribes from peasants who did not want to be drafted into the construction of the fort and was later flogged with rattan sticks on the King&#x27;s orders. Lek died due to the injuries he sustained about a month later in July, and his properties were confiscated. King Narai offered Lek&#x27;s former position to Phaulkon, which he declined and instead accepted an advisory role to the Malay noble Okya Wang, who had assumed the position.
In 1686, Phaulkon was made a commander in the royal forces during the suppression of the Makassar Revolt. He personally led the troops during the fighting and was almost killed in combat. In the aftermath, Phaulkon oversaw the punishments of rebel prisoners as well as deserters from the royal army.

==French rapprochement==
Following troubles with the English and the Dutch, Phaulkon engineered a Franco-Siamese rapprochement leading to the exchange of numerous embassies between France and the Ayutthaya Kingdom, as well as the dispatch of an expeditionary force by the French by 1687.

Phaulkon, called &quot;Monsieur Constance&quot; by the French and addressed &quot;cher ami&quot; by their king, was their main ally for several years. In recognition King Louis XIV of France awarded him with the knighthood of the Order of Saint Michael, a hereditary title in the French nobility as well as French citizenship for him and his family. King Narai had hoped to use the French as a counterweight to Dutch influence.

The embassy of Chevalier de Chaumont in 1685 further strengthened ties between the two Kingdoms, Chaumont also being accompanied by Jesuit Guy Tachard and French naval commander Claude de Forbin, who would remain to serve King Narai as Governor of Bangkok, as well as training Siamese troops in European tactics with the Thai title &quot;Ok-Phrasaksongkram&quot;. Forbin would later become the subject of Phaulkon&#x27;s bitter jealousy.

During Tachard&#x27;s presence in Siam, Phaulkon plotted to secure his power and influence; through secret diplomacy with the Jesuit. He drafted a letter requesting Frenchmen to be sent from France, whom he would to use his power to place in political and military offices, as his supporters, and under his patronage. Phaulkon also requested that King Louis XIV send troops and warships to secure the southern port city of Singora, which has been conceded to France by King Narai.

The Greek favourite of King Narai also offered the concession of the port of Mergui, previously held by Phaulkon&#x27;s English pirates- to French control, of which the King consented to eventually. Phaulkon became a prime counsellor to the king in 1685 and expressed a desire to designate a Catholic successor to King Narai, most likely, Phra Pi, who was Narai&#x27;s adopted son and a Catholic convert, as well as scheming to convert the Kingdom to Catholicism, albeit peacefully, by winning the masses over through charity and alms.

Phaulkon wanted a successor who would uphold amiable relations with France and offer privileges to the French, which would guarantee his political standing and security in a court that has grown increasingly hostile to his influence and power. Phaulkon selected Kosa Pan to lead as an embassy diplomat. In response, King Narai proceeded to send the embassy to France. Pan&#x27;s audience was granted by King Louis XIV at Versailles and the embassy toured the French country.

==Feud with the East India Company==
As a result of his meteoric rise to power and King Narai&#x27;s trust in him, Phaulkon&#x27;s old English colleagues from the East India Company such as Richard Burnaby and Samuel White were given positions of power. A substantial number of Englishmen and women also left the company&#x27;s jurisdiction, instead pledging fealty to King Narai due to their favoured status and settled in the Ayutthaya Kingdom.

Burnaby was made the governor of Mergui and White became its Harbourmaster. However the two Englishmen entrusted with the port of Mergui had old vendettas against the Kingdom of Golconda in a past trading dispute, and proceeded to use their newly acquired power to engage in piracy and warfare against Golconda and Indian shipping.

This led to retaliation by the East India Company under President Elihu Yale in 1687, who subsequently sent Anthony Weltden with two warships to punish Burnaby and White, as well as demanding recompense from the Ayutthaya Kingdom. The company was also able to obtain an order from King James II forbidding Englishmen serving on foreign ships, due to the excess of Englishmen abandoning Company service for preferential treatment in the Ayutthaya Kingdom.

Upon arrival of Weltden&#x27;s ships, Burnaby and White were cowed into opening the gates and receiving the Company forces, who came ashore. During the negotiations, the local Siamese suspected White and Burnaby of treachery and rallied under the Governor of Tenasserim who led the massacre of many Englishmen and women in Mergui.

Richard Burnaby was slain in the slaughter but Weltden and White escaped with their lives, retreating into the sea. The butchery by the Governor also involved an ugly scene in which innocent Englishmen and women were slain, including an Englishwoman who was tortured and killed with her children for refusing the Governor&#x27;s advances. When King Narai had heard of the transgressions against innocent English civilians, he had the Governor of Tenasserim summoned to Lopburi and executed, at Phaulkon&#x27;s behest. War was also declared on the East India Company.

==Character==
The Abbé de Choisy, who was a member of the first French embassy to Thailand in 1685, wrote about M. Phaulkon&#x27;s character:

==Downfall and death==
Phaulkon&#x27;s closeness to the king earned him the envy of some Thai members of the royal court, which would eventually prove to be his undoing. When King Narai became terminally ill, a rumor spread that Phaulkon wanted to use the designated heir, Phra Pi, as a puppet and actually become ruler himself, according to Thai historical records this was in fact a credible claim. This provided credence for Pra Phetracha, the foster brother of Narai to stage a coup d&#x27;état, the 1688 Siamese revolution. In Lopburi on 31 March 1688, Phaulkon had a discussion with the French general Marshal Desfarges for the plans to put down Phetracha&#x27;s plot before the latter moved to the fort in Bangkok, however a month later on 15 April, Desfarges was persuaded by Frenchmen Véret and Abbé de Lionne to abandon plans to go to Lopburi to help Phaulkon and remained in his fort instead.

On 18 May, King Narai, Phra Pi, and their followers were arrested. Phaulkon was summoned to the palace, where he and his 21 men were surrounded by the Siamese soldiers and disarmed. He was taken to the palace dungeon where he would be restrained and brutally tortured. Phra Pi was later decapitated on 20 May and his head was thrown at the feet of Phaulkon with the remark, &quot;See, there is your king&quot;. On 25 May, Desfarges was summoned to Lopburi by Phetracha and arrived on 2 June. He said nothing about saving Phaulkon, and Phetracha assumed that the French had abandoned Phaulkon.

On 5 June 1688, Desfarges departed Lopburi, leaving his two sons and few others there as hostages. Phaulkon was made to hang Phra Pi&#x27;s head around his neck and Phetracha declared him guilty of high treason. Phaulkon was placed on the silver palanquin mounted on his elephant, and was led out by Phetracha&#x27;s men to the area of Wat Sak temple in the evening, where Luang Sorasak decapitated and also disemboweled him as witnessed by Father de Bèze. His remains were buried in a shallow grave in front of Wat Sak but later on that same day, the remains were dug up and eaten by scavenging dogs. When King Narai learned what had happened, he was furious, but was too weak to take any action. Narai died several days later on 11 July 1688, virtually a prisoner in his own palace. Phetracha then proclaimed himself the new king of Siam and began his regime which expelled almost all French troops from the kingdom.

==Legacy==
The different interpretations of Phetracha&#x27;s motivation for ordering the arrest and execution of Phaulkon have made his position in Thai history somewhat controversial. Supporters of Phetracha&#x27;s actions have depicted Phaulkon as an opportunistic Greek foreigner, who sought to use his influence to control of the kingdom on the behalf of Western interests. More skeptical historians have believed that Phaulkon was simply a convenient scapegoat and a means for Phetracha to seize the throne from the rightful heir by capitalizing on the envy and the suspicion that Phaulkon had engendered.

==In popular culture==
Phaulkon was the central character in the 2013 historical fiction book &quot;The Phaulkon Legacy&quot; by Walter J Strach III.

Phaulkon was portrayed by the Thai-Scottish actor Louis Scott in the 2018 Thai drama &quot;Buppesunniwas&quot; and received critical acclaim for his performance. Phaulkon was depicted as a complex character and as cruel, abusive, cunning, and overly-ambitious but also capable of compassion, love, and remorse. Scott won a TVG Award for the best male supporting actor.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Smithies, Michael (2002), &quot;Three military accounts of the 1688 &quot;Revolution&quot; in Siam&quot;, Itineria Asiatica, Orchid Press, Bangkok, .
* Luang Sitsayamkan (1967), &quot;The Greek Favourite of the King of Siam&quot;, Donald Moore Press, Singapore.
* Cangelaris, Panagiotis D. (2011), &quot;History and Genealogy of the Cangelari Family of Cephalonia (16th-20th Centuries)&quot;, Corfu 2011 (in Greek; online), .
* Cangelaris, &quot;Kefalonitiki Proodos&quot;, No. 3: Παναγιώτης Δ. Καγκελάρης, &quot;Κωσταντής Γεράκης (Constance Phaulkon) - Μια νέα γενεαλογική προσέγγιση&quot;, from: &quot;Η Κεφαλονίτικη Πρόοδος&quot;, Περίοδος Β&#x27;, τεύχος 3 (Ιούλιος-Σεπτέμβριος 2012; in Greek).
* Cangelaris, &quot;Kefalonitiki Proodos&quot;, No. 7: Παναγιώτης Δ. Καγκελάρης, &quot;Το γαλλικό οικόσημο του πρωτοσύμβουλου Κωσταντή Γεράκη (Constance Phaulkon)&quot;, from: &quot;Η Κεφαλονίτικη Πρόοδος&quot;, Περίοδος Β&#x27;, τεύχος 7 (Ιούλιος-Σεπτέμβριος 2013; in Greek).

== External links ==
* George A. Sioris, &quot;Phaulkon - The Greek First Counsellor at the Court of Siam: An Appraisal&quot;, Bangkok 1988 .
* Memoires de Siam - Les personnages - Phaulkon, Monsieur Constance (in French)
* Panayotis D. Cangelaris: &quot;Costantin Gerachi (Constance Phaulkon) - A new genealogical approach&quot; (reprint in Greek)
* Panayotis D. Cangelaris: &quot;The French coat of arms of prime counsellor Costantin Gerachi (Constance Phaulkon)&quot; (reprint in Greek)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q933657" start="0" end="20" title="Constantine Phaulkon" label="Constantine Phaulkon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="22" end="27" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="120" end="126" title="falcon" label="falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q933657" start="148" end="165" title="Constantine Phaulkon" label="Costantin Gerachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="197" end="207" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="256" end="262" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="290" end="295" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436734" start="296" end="306" title="adventurer" label="adventurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q718197" start="341" end="346" title="Narai" label="Narai"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="354" end="371" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="388" end="392" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="411" end="422" title="Thai nobility#Noble titles" label="Chao Phraya"/>
<link wikidata="Q25069728" start="528" end="540" title="Assos Castle" label="Assos Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178488" start="612" end="622" title="Cephalonia" label="Cephalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782789" start="635" end="648" title="Venetian Empire" label="Venetian rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="685" end="690" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1002" end="1008" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1148" end="1158" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76930" start="1191" end="1217" title="Prince Rupert of the Rhine" label="Prince Rupert of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q916495" start="1247" end="1269" title="Second Anglo-Dutch War" label="Second Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086056" start="1299" end="1305" title="Bantam (city)" label="Bantam"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="1402" end="1428" title="English East India Company" label="English East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342568" start="1503" end="1524" title="Third Anglo-Dutch War" label="Third Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q25172164" start="1598" end="1610" title="George White (merchant)" label="George White"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1692" end="1696" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1710" end="1718" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="1776" end="1794" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="1826" end="1842" title="Siamese language" label="Siamese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1886" end="1893" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="1919" end="1924" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16307330" start="1985" end="1996" title="Phra Khlang" label="Phra Khlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11318080" start="1997" end="2005" title="Kosa Lek" label="Kosa Lek"/>
<link wikidata="Q718197" start="2086" end="2096" title="King Narai" label="King Narai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="3203" end="3214" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3219" end="3230" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="3280" end="3288" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="3289" end="3299" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="3300" end="3307" title="Bengali people" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924610" start="3322" end="3344" title="Maria Guyomar de Pinha" label="Maria Guyomar de Pinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q718197" start="3452" end="3457" title="Narai" label="Narai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018163" start="3636" end="3642" title="Mergui" label="Mergui"/>
<link wikidata="Q323021" start="3891" end="3897" title="rattan" label="rattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012471" start="4304" end="4319" title="Makassar Revolt (1686)" label="Makassar Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="4569" end="4576" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="4585" end="4590" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479703" start="4614" end="4642" title="France-Thailand relations" label="Franco-Siamese rapprochement"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="4697" end="4703" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="4712" end="4729" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="4976" end="4995" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347889" start="5035" end="5057" title="Order of Saint Michael" label="Order of Saint Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479703" start="5238" end="5278" title="France-Thailand relations" label="embassy of Chevalier de Chaumont in 1685"/>
<link wikidata="Q29668" start="5331" end="5339" title="Alexandre, Chevalier de Chaumont" label="Chaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557587" start="5373" end="5384" title="Guy Tachard" label="Guy Tachard"/>
<link wikidata="Q662290" start="5412" end="5428" title="Claude de Forbin" label="Claude de Forbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="6020" end="6034" title="King Louis XIV" label="King Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q795595" start="6096" end="6103" title="Singora" label="Singora"/>
<link wikidata="Q718197" start="6142" end="6152" title="King Narai" label="King Narai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6494" end="6501" title="Phra Pi" label="Phra Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q913678" start="6954" end="6962" title="Kosa Pan" label="Kosa Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506753" start="7019" end="7058" title="Siamese embassy to France (1686)" label="proceeded to send the embassy to France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="7095" end="7109" title="King Louis XIV" label="King Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="7113" end="7123" title="Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="7331" end="7349" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="7596" end="7613" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018163" start="7649" end="7655" title="Mergui" label="Mergui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018163" start="7746" end="7752" title="Mergui" label="Mergui"/>
<link wikidata="Q19805959" start="7783" end="7802" title="Kingdom of Golconda" label="Kingdom of Golconda"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083157" start="7954" end="7972" title="Anglo-Siamese War" label="led to retaliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="7980" end="7998" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q514846" start="8015" end="8025" title="Elihu Yale" label="Elihu Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773703" start="8057" end="8072" title="Anthony Weltden" label="Anthony Weltden"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="8161" end="8178" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="8230" end="8243" title="King James II" label="King James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="8385" end="8402" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="8664" end="8674" title="Tenasserim Division" label="Tenasserim"/>
<link wikidata="Q718197" start="9081" end="9091" title="King Narai" label="King Narai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363891" start="9206" end="9213" title="Lopburi" label="Lopburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="9284" end="9302" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q970490" start="9323" end="9337" title="Abbé de Choisy" label="Abbé de Choisy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9721" end="9728" title="Phra Pi" label="Phra Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q561295" start="9880" end="9889" title="Phetracha" label="Phetracha"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="9930" end="9946" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506756" start="9952" end="9975" title="Siamese revolution (1688)" label="1688 Siamese revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363891" start="9980" end="9987" title="Lopburi" label="Lopburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531827" start="10056" end="10073" title="Marshal Desfarges" label="Marshal Desfarges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="10161" end="10168" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q888844" start="11320" end="11333" title="Suriyenthrathibodi" label="Luang Sorasak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12579" end="12598" title="The Phaulkon Legacy" label="The Phaulkon Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13023401" start="12680" end="12691" title="Louis Scott (actor)" label="Louis Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16307488" start="12721" end="12734" title="Love Destiny (TV series)" label="Buppesunniwas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646886" wikidata="Q621231" url="?curid=646886" title="Apple Corps">
<text>Apple Corps Limited is a British multi-armed multimedia corporation founded in London in January 1968 by the members of the Beatles to replace their earlier company Beatles Ltd. and to form a conglomerate. Its name, pronounced &quot;apple core&quot;, is a pun. Its chief division is Apple Records, which was launched in the same year. Other divisions included Apple Electronics, Apple Films, Apple Publishing, and Apple Retail, with the latter&#x27;s most notable venture being the short-lived Apple Boutique on the corner of Baker Street and Paddington Street.

Apple&#x27;s headquarters in the late 1960s was at the upper floors of 94 Baker Street, after that at 95 Wigmore Street, and subsequently at 3 Savile Row. The last of these addresses was also known as the Apple Building, which was home to the Apple studio. From 1970 to 2007, Apple&#x27;s chief executive was former Beatles road manager Neil Aspinall, although he did not officially bear that title until Allen Klein had left the company. The current CEO is Jeff Jones. In 2010, Apple Corps ranked number two on the &quot;Fast Company&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of the world&#x27;s most innovative companies in the music industry, thanks to the release of &quot;The Beatles: Rock Band&quot; video game and the remastering of the Beatles&#x27; catalogue.

== History ==
The Beatles&#x27; accountants had informed the group that they had £2 million that they could either invest in a business venture or else lose to the Inland Revenue, because corporate/business taxes were lower than their individual tax bills. According to Peter Brown, personal assistant to Beatles&#x27; manager Brian Epstein, activities to find tax shelters for the income that the Beatles generated began as early as 1963–64, when Walter Strach was put in charge of such operations. First steps into that direction were the foundation of Beatles Ltd and, in early 1967, Beatles and Co.

The Beatles&#x27; publicist, Derek Taylor, remembered that Paul McCartney had the name for the new company when he visited Taylor&#x27;s company flat in London: &quot;We&#x27;re starting a brand new form of business. So, what is the first thing that a child is taught when he begins to grow up? A is for Apple&quot;. McCartney then suggested the addition of Apple &quot;Core&quot;, but they could not register the name, so they used &quot;Corps&quot; (having the same pronunciation). McCartney later revealed that he had been inspired by René Magritte&#x27;s painting &quot;Le Jeu de Mourre&quot;, featuring an apple with the words &quot;Au revoir&quot; painted on it. Harriet Vyner&#x27;s 1999 book about the late London art dealer Robert Fraser, &quot;Groovy Bob&quot;, contains this anecdote by McCartney about the first time he laid eyes on the painting that would inspire the company logo in 1967:

===Formation===
On the founding of Apple, John Lennon commented: &quot;Our accountant came up and said &#x27;We got this amount of money. Do you want to give it to the government or do something with it?&#x27; So we decided to play businessmen for a bit because we&#x27;ve got to run our own affairs now. So we&#x27;ve got this thing called &#x27;Apple&#x27; which is going to be records, films, and electronics – which all tie up&quot;.

Stefan Granados wrote in &quot;Those Were the Days: An Unofficial History of the &quot;Beatles&quot; Apple Organization 1967–2001&quot;, on the various processes that led to the formation of Apple Corps:
Now that a new business structure was found with a lower tax rate, Epstein mused what to do with it to justify it to the authorities, and originally thought of it mostly as a merchandising company, according to Lennon&#x27;s first wife, Cynthia: &quot;The idea Brian came up with was a company called Apple. His idea was to plough their money into a chain of shops not unlike Woolworth&#x27;s in concept: Apple boutiques, Apple posters, Apple records. Brian needed an outlet for his boundless energy&quot;. Personal assistant to Epstein, Alistair Taylor remembered:

 In the middle of setting up the new company, manager Epstein died unexpectedly in what seemed an accidental sleeping pills overdose on 27 August 1967, which pressed the Beatles to accelerate their plans to gain control of their own financial affairs. In addition to providing an umbrella to cover the Beatles&#x27; own financial and business affairs, Apple was intended to provide a means of financial support to anyone in the wider world struggling to get &#x27;worthwhile&#x27; artistic projects off the ground. According to Granados, this idea probably originated with Paul McCartney as the Beatle most engaged in London&#x27;s local avant-garde scene, &quot;McCartney was among the best-known exponents of swinging London&quot;. Ringo Starr was quoted as saying of the venture:

McCartney at first had obviously intended to use Epstein&#x27;s music publishing company NEMS Enterprises for these plans, but after Epstein&#x27;s death it was learned that Australian Robert Stigwood was trying to get hold of NEMS. All four Beatles were not in favour of such an outcome, as McCartney had previously told Epstein in 1967:

They hurried to set up Apple instead, and seeing that the Beatles would not be part of the NEMS package, Stigwood went to form his own company, RSO Records. The Apple logo was designed by Gene Mahon, with illustrator Alan Aldridge transcribing the copyright notice to appear on record releases. In January 1968, Beatles Ltd. officially changed its name to Apple Corps. Ltd. and registered the Apple trademark in forty-seven countries In February the company also registered Apple Electronics, Apple Films Ltd., Apple Management, Apple Music Publishing, Apple Overseas, Apple Publicity, Apple Records, Apple Retail, and Apple Tailoring Civil and Theatrical with the intent on focusing on five divisions: records, electronics, film, publishing and retailing.

Lennon and McCartney introduced their new business concept on a press conference held on 14 May 1968 in New York City, with McCartney saying it would be, &quot;A beautiful place where you can buy beautiful things… a controlled weirdness… a kind of Western communism&quot;. Lennon said, &quot;It&#x27;s a company we&#x27;re setting up, involving records, films, and electronics, and – as a sideline – manufacturing or whatever. We want to set up a system where people who just want to make a film about anything, don&#x27;t have to go on their knees in somebody&#x27;s office, probably yours&quot;. McCartney also said: &quot;It&#x27;s just trying to mix business with enjoyment. We&#x27;re in the happy position of not needing any more money. So for the first time, the bosses aren&#x27;t in it for profit. We&#x27;ve already bought all our dreams. We want to share that possibility with others&quot;.

=== Early administration ===
For the first few months of Apple&#x27;s existence, it did not even have an office. Most of the company&#x27;s business was conducted from the NEMS building. It was not until the autumn of 1967 that Apple finally opened a London office. Since the Beatles already owned a four-story building at 94 Baker Street that had been purchased as an investment property by their accountants, they decided that Baker Street was as good a location as any for Apple. In September they set up an office for Apple Publishing in the Baker Street building. With Epstein&#x27;s death, there was nobody in the Beatles&#x27; inner circle with business acumen who could manage the company, and, as with their band affairs, the Beatles decided that they would manage it themselves.
In December 1967, shortly after Epstein&#x27;s death, Lennon asked Alistair Taylor to work as General Manager for Apple. It was during this period that Taylor appeared in the famous advertisement to promote Apple asking for new artists. Designed by McCartney, it showed him disguised as a one-man band, claiming: &quot;This man has talent...&quot; The publication in the &quot;New Musical Express&quot; and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; brought an avalanche of applicants. The mail room, telephone switchboard, and conference rooms became jammed at all hours with &quot;artists&quot; begging the Beatles to give them money. George Harrison would later lament that &quot;We had every freak in the world coming in there&quot;. Many of these supplicants received the investments they sought and were never heard from again.

Even though Apple was declared the most successful new record company of the year for 1968, before long the band members&#x27; ignorance of finance and administration combined with their naive, utopian mission of funding struggling, unknown artists left Apple Corps with no solid business plan.

The Beatles&#x27; naivete and inability to keep track of their own accounts was also eagerly exploited by the employees of Apple, who purchased drugs and alcoholic beverages, company lunches at expensive London restaurants, and international calls made regularly on office telephones, all of which would be treated as business expenses. Writers Alan Clayson and Spencer Leigh described the owners&#x27; hopelessness in managing their own creation:

Aspinall finally agreed to direct the company on a temporary basis, simply so that someone would finally be in charge. When, in 1969, the Beatles engaged Klein as their manager, he also inherited the chairmanship of Apple Corps, which led to an immediate streamlining of company affairs: &quot;Overnight, glib lack of concern deferred to pointed questions,&quot; wrote Clayson &amp; Leigh. &quot;Which typist rings Canberra every afternoon? Why has so-and-so given himself a raise of 60 pounds a week? Why is he seen only on payday? Suddenly, lunch meant beans-on-toast in the office kitchen instead of Beluga caviar from Fortnum &amp; Mason&quot;.

=== Beatles break-up and beyond ===
The first two years of the company&#x27;s existence also coincided with a marked worsening of the Beatles&#x27; relationships with each other, ultimately leading to the break-up of the band in April 1970. Apple quickly slid into financial chaos, which was resolved only after many years of litigation. When the Beatles&#x27; partnership was dissolved in 1975, dissolution of Apple Corps was also considered, but it was decided to keep it operating, while effectively retiring or mothballing all its divisions. The company is currently headquartered at 27 Ovington Square, in London&#x27;s prestigious Knightsbridge district. Ownership and control of the company remains with McCartney, Starr and the estates of Lennon and Harrison.

Apple Corps has had a long history of trademark disputes with Apple Computer (now Apple Inc.). The dispute was finally resolved in 2007, with Apple Corps transferring ownership of the &quot;Apple&quot; name and all associated trademarks to Apple Inc., and Apple Inc. exclusively licensing these back to the Beatles&#x27; company. In April 2007, Apple also settled a long-running dispute with EMI and announced the retirement of chief executive Aspinall. Aspinall was replaced by Jeff Jones.

==Subsidiaries==
Apple Corps operated in various fields, mostly related to the music business and other media, through a number of subsidiaries.

===Apple Electronics===

Apple Electronics was the electronics division of Apple Corps, founded as Fiftyshapes Ltd., at 34 Boston Place, Westminster, London. It was headed by Beatles&#x27; associate Yanni Alexis Mardas, whom Lennon had nicknamed Magic Alex. Intending to revolutionise the consumer electronics market, largely through products based on Mardas&#x27; unique and, as it turned out, commercially impractical designs, the electronics division did not make any breakthroughs. After the dismissal of Mardas in 1969, during Klein&#x27;s &#x27;house-cleaning&#x27; of Apple Corps, Apple Electronics fell victim to the same forces that troubled the company as a whole, including the impending Beatles&#x27; break-up. It was later estimated that Mardas&#x27; ideas and projects had cost the Beatles at least £300,000 (worth approximately £ in ).

===Apple Films===

Apple Films is the film-making division of Apple Corps. Its first production was The Beatles&#x27; 1967 TV movie &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;. The Beatles&#x27; films &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot; and &quot;Let it Be&quot; were also produced under Apple Films. Other notable releases included &quot;Raga&quot; (a 1971 documentary on Ravi Shankar), &quot;The Concert for Bangladesh&quot; (1972) and &quot;Little Malcolm&quot; (1974). The latter, produced by George Harrison, included the song &quot;Lonely Man&quot; by Dark Horse Records band Splinter. Apple Films was also responsible for producing Apple Corps&#x27; televised promotions.

The following is a list of releases from Apple Films, usually in the role of production company.

*&quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; (1967). Starring the Beatles; produced and directed by the Beatles; filmed September–October 1967; 54 mins. World premiere: BBC1 (TV), 26 December 1967.
*&quot;Yellow Submarine&quot; (1968). Animated film featuring the Beatles; produced by Al Brodax; directed by George Dunning; animation designed by Heinz Edelmann; written by Lee Minoff, Al Brodax, Jack Mendelsohn and Erich Segal; 85 mins. Distributed by United Artists. World/UK premiere: London, 17 July 1968. US premiere: New York, 13 November 1968.
*&quot;Did Britain Murder Hanratty?&quot; (1969) A 40-minute documentary film commissioned by John Lennon and produced by Apple Films Limited. The only public screening of the complete film was in the crypt of St Martin-in-the-Fields Church, London on 17 February 1970.
*&quot;Let It Be&quot; (1970). Documentary featuring the Beatles; produced by Neil Aspinall; directed by Michael Lindsay-Hogg; filmed January–February 1969; 88 mins. Distributed by United Artists. World/US premiere: New York, 13 May 1970. UK premiere: London, 20 May 1970.
*&quot;Raga&quot; (1971). Documentary featuring Ravi Shankar, Yehudi Menuhin, George Harrison and Ustad Alauddin Khan; produced by Howard Worth and Nancy Bacal; directed by Howard Worth; 96 mins. Distributed by Apple Films. World/US premiere: New York, 23 November 1971.
*&quot;The Concert for Bangladesh&quot; (1972). Concert documentary featuring George Harrison, Ravi Shankar, Ringo Starr, Bob Dylan, Ali Akbar Khan, Billy Preston, Eric Clapton and Leon Russell; produced by George Harrison and Allen Klein; directed by Saul Swimmer; filmed July–August 1971; 103 mins. Distributed by 20th Century Fox. World/US premiere: New York, 23 March 1972. UK premiere: London, 27 July 1972.
*&quot;Born to Boogie&quot; (1972). Documentary featuring Marc Bolan, T. Rex, Elton John and Ringo Starr; produced and directed by Ringo Starr; filmed March–April 1972. Distributed by Apple Films. World/UK premiere: London, 18 December 1972.
*&quot;Son of Dracula&quot; (1974). Starring Harry Nilsson, Ringo Starr, Suzanna Leigh, Freddie Jones and Dennis Price; produced by Ringo Starr, Jerry Gross and Tim Van Rellim; directed by Freddie Francis; screenplay by Jennifer Jayne; filmed August–October 1972; 90 mins. Distributed by Cinemation Industries. World/US premiere: Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 19 April 1974.
*&quot;Little Malcolm&quot; (1974). Starring John Hurt, John McEnery, Raymond Platt, Rosalind Ayres and David Warner; produced by George Harrison and Gavrick Losey; directed by Stuart Cooper; screenplay by David Halliwell and Derek Woodward; 109 mins. Distributed by Apple Films. World/European premiere: Berlin, July 1974.

===Apple Publishing===
Apple&#x27;s music publishing arm predated the record company. In September 1967, the first artists to be signed by Apple Publishing were two songwriters from Liverpool. Paul Tennant and David Rhodes were offered a contract after meeting McCartney in Hyde Park. They were advised to form a band by Epstein after he and Lennon heard their demos, calling the group Focal Point. Epstein was to have managed the band but died before he could become involved. Terry Doran MD of Apple Publishing became their manager and they were signed by Deram Records. Apple published the group&#x27;s self-penned songs from early 1968. Another early band on its publishing roster was the group Grapefruit.

Apple Publishing Ltd. was also used as a publishing stop-gap by Harrison and Starr, as they sought to shift control of their own songs away from Northern Songs, in which their status was little more than paid writers. (Harrison later started Harrisongs, and Starr created Startling Music). Apple&#x27;s greatest publishing successes were the Badfinger hits &quot;No Matter What&quot;, &quot;Day After Day&quot; and &quot;Baby Blue&quot;, all written by group member Pete Ham, and Badfinger&#x27;s &quot;Without You&quot;, a song penned by Ham and Badfinger bandmate Tom Evans. &quot;Without You&quot; became a worldwide No. 1 chart hit for Harry Nilsson in 1972 and Mariah Carey in 1993. In 2005, however, Apple lost the US publishing rights for the work of Ham and Evans. Those rights were transferred to Bug Music, now a branch of BMG Rights Management.

Apple also undertook publishing duties, at various times, for other Apple artists, including Yoko Ono, Billy Preston and the Radha Krishna Temple. Apple received a large number of demo tapes; some songs were published, some were issued on other labels and only Benny Gallagher &amp; Lyle were retained as in-house writers before going on to co-found McGuinness Flint. Many of these demos have been collected on a series of CDs released by Cherry Red Records. They are entitled &quot;94 Baker Street&quot;, &quot;An Apple for the Day&quot;, &quot;Treacle Toffee World&quot;, &quot;Lovers from the Sky: Pop Psych from the Apple Era 1968-1971&quot; and &quot;94 Baker Street Revisited: Poptastic Sounds from the Apple Era 1967-1968&quot;.

Apple Books was largely inactive and had very few releases. One notable release was the book that accompanied the initial pressing of the &quot;Let It Be&quot; album, titled &quot;The Beatles Get Back&quot;, containing photographs by Ethan Russell and text by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; writers Jonathan Cott and David Dalton. Although the book was credited to Apple Publishing, all of the work on the project was actually done by freelancers.

===Apple Records and Zapple Records===

From 1968 onwards, new releases by the Beatles were issued by Apple Records, although the copyright remained with EMI, and Parlophone/Capitol catalogue numbers continued to be used. Apple releases of recordings by artists other than the Beatles, however, used a new set of numbers, and the copyrights were held mostly by Apple Corps Ltd. More than a &quot;vanity label&quot;, Apple Records developed an eclectic roster of their own, releasing records by artists as diverse as Indian sitar guru Ravi Shankar, Welsh easy listening singer Mary Hopkin, the power-pop band Badfinger, classical music composer John Tavener, soul singer Billy Preston, folk singer James Taylor, R&amp;B singer Doris Troy, New York underground rock band Elephant&#x27;s Memory, original bad girl of rock and roll Ronnie Spector, rock singer Jackie Lomax, the Modern Jazz Quartet, and London&#x27;s Radha Krishna Temple.

Since Apple&#x27;s inception, McCartney and Lennon had been very interested in launching a budget-line label to issue what would essentially be known three decades later as &quot;audio books&quot;. In October 1968, Apple hired Barry Miles, who co-owned the Indica bookshop with John Dunbar and Peter Asher, to manage the proposed spoken-word label. The initial idea of Zapple Records was that it would release avant-garde and spoken word records at a reduced price that would be comparable to that of a paperback novel. While the idea looked good on paper, the reality was that when the few records actually put out by Zapple finally made it into the shops, they were priced like any other full-priced music album. Zapple Records was started on 3 February 1969, but after Klein was brought in to run Apple Corps&#x27; affairs, it was closed down after just two releases: Lennon and Ono&#x27;s &quot;Unfinished Music No. 2: Life with the Lions&quot;, and Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Electronic Sound&quot;.

===Apple Retail===

The Apple Boutique was a retail store, located at 94 Baker Street in London, and was one of the first business ventures by Apple Corps. Lennon&#x27;s schoolfriend Pete Shotton was hired as manager, and the Dutch design collective The Fool were brought in to design the store and much of the merchandise. The store opened to much fanfare on 7 December 1967, with Lennon and Harrison attending (Starr was filming, and McCartney was on holiday). The boutique was never profitable, largely due to shoplifting, by customers and its own staff. After Shotton resigned, John Lyndon took over but his management experience could not save the enterprise. The store&#x27;s remaining stock was liquidated by giving it away, after the individual Beatles had taken whatever they liked the night before its closure. The boutique closed its doors on 31 July 1968.

===Apple Studio===
Apple Studio was a recording studio, purchased in 1968 and located in the basement of the Apple Corps headquarters at 3 Savile Row. The facility was renamed Apple Studios after its expansion in 1971.

Originally designed by Alex Mardas, of Apple Electronics, the initial installation proved to be unworkable − with almost no standard studio features such as a patch bay, or a talkback system between the studio and the control room, let alone Mardas&#x27; promised innovations − and had to be scrapped. Nevertheless, the Beatles recorded and filmed portions of their album &quot;Let It Be&quot; in the Apple Studio, with equipment borrowed from EMI; during takes they had to shut down the building&#x27;s central heating, also located in the basement, because the lack of soundproofing allowed the heating system to be heard in the studio.

The redesign and rebuilding of the basement to accommodate proper recording facilities was overseen by former EMI engineer Geoff Emerick, and took eighteen months at an estimated cost of $1.5 million. Beatles&#x27; technical engineer Claude Harper aided on the project, as well. The studio reopened on 30 September 1971 and now included its own natural echo chamber, a wide range of recording and mastering facilities, and could turn out mono, stereo and quadrophonic master tapes and discs. In 1971, it would have cost £37 an hour (equivalent to £ in ) to record to 16-track, £29 an hour (equivalent to £ in ) to mix to stereo, and £12 (equivalent to £ in ) to cut a 12&quot; master. George Harrison attended the launch party, along with Pete Ham of Badfinger and Klaus Voormann.

The studio became a second home for Apple Records artists, although they also used Abbey Road and other studios in London, including Trident Studios, AIR Studios, Morgan Studios and Olympic Studios or elsewhere. The only Beatle solo release to use Apple Studio for a significant portion of its production was Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Living in the Material World&quot; album of 1973, yet most of the recording is thought to have taken place at his Friar Park studio.

The first projects to be carried out there after the re-opening were the recording of Lon &amp; Derrek Van Eaton&#x27;s &quot;Brother&quot; album, and overdubbing and mixing on Badfinger&#x27;s &quot;Straight Up&quot;. Other artists such as Fanny, Harry Nilsson, Nicky Hopkins, Wishbone Ash, Viv Stanshall, Stealers Wheel, Lou Reizner, Clodagh Rodgers and Marc Bolan (as shown in the movie &quot;Born To Boogie&quot;) also worked there. Apple Studio ceased operations on 16 May 1975.

==Legal battles==

===&quot;Apple Corps v. Apple Computer&quot;===

In 1978, Apple Records filed suit against Apple Computer (now Apple Inc.) for trademark infringement. The suit was settled in 1981 with the payment of $80,000 ($ in ) to Apple Corps. As a condition of the settlement, Apple Computer agreed to stay out of the music business. A dispute subsequently arose in 1989 when Apple Corps sued, alleging that Apple Computer&#x27;s machines&#x27; ability to play back MIDI music was a violation of the 1981 settlement agreement. In 1991 another settlement, of around $26.5 million, was reached. In September 2003, Apple Computer was again sued by Apple Corps, this time for introducing the iTunes Music Store and the iPod, which Apple Corps asserted was a violation of Apple&#x27;s agreement not to distribute music. The trial opened on 29 March 2006 in the UK, and in a judgement issued on 8 May 2006, Apple Corps lost the case.

On 5 February 2007, Apple Inc. and Apple Corps announced a settlement of their trademark dispute under which Apple Inc. took ownership of all of the trademarks related to &quot;Apple&quot; (including all designs of the famed &quot;Granny Smith&quot; Apple Corps Ltd. logos), and licensed certain of those trademarks back to Apple Corps for their continued use. The settlement ended the ongoing trademark lawsuit between the companies, with each party bearing its own legal costs, and Apple Inc. continued using its name and logos on iTunes. The settlement includes terms that are confidential. Apple Computer later relied on the Beatles&#x27; first use in 1968 to establish ownership and priority of the trademark APPLE MUSIC prior to a 1985 use by a musician of APPLE JAZZ for musical concerts.

The website for Harmonix&#x27;s &quot;The Beatles: Rock Band&quot; video game was the first evidence of the Apple, Inc./Apple Corps Ltd. settlement: &quot;Apple Corps&quot; is prominently referred to throughout, and the &quot;Granny Smith&quot; Apple logo appears but the text beneath the logo now reads &quot;Apple Corps&quot; rather than the previous &quot;Apple&quot;. The website&#x27;s acknowledgements specifically state that &quot;&#x27;Apple&#x27; and the &#x27;Apple logo&#x27; are exclusively licensed to Apple Corps Ltd&quot;.

On 16 November 2010, Apple Inc. launched the Beatles&#x27; entire catalogue in the iTunes Store.

===Apple versus EMI===
The Beatles alleged in a 1979 lawsuit that EMI and Capitol had underpaid the band by more than £10.5 million. A settlement was reached in that case in 1989, which granted the band an increased royalty rate and required EMI and Capitol to follow more stringent auditing requirements. In a case beginning in 2005, Apple, on behalf of the surviving Beatles and relatives of the band&#x27;s late members, again sued EMI for unpaid royalties. The case was settled in April 2007 with a &quot;mutually acceptable&quot; conclusion, which remained confidential.

===Apple versus Nike/EMI===

In July 1987, Apple Corps sued Nike Inc, Wieden+Kennedy (Nike&#x27;s advertisement agency), EMI and Capitol Records for the use of the song &quot;Revolution&quot; in a 1987
Nike commercial. Apple claimed that it was not informed of the use of the song and was not paid for continued use and therefore sued the four companies for $15 million. EMI countered stating that the case was &quot;groundless&quot; to their claim they had the &quot;active support and encouragement of Yoko Ono Lennon,&quot; who owns 25% of Apple Corps through Lennon&#x27;s estate, and was quoted as saying: &quot;[The commercial] is making John&#x27;s music accessible to a new generation.&quot; Apple&#x27;s lawyer responded by stating that Apple cannot take action unless all four shares are in agreement, meaning that Ono must have supported the idea to take legal action at the moment when the decision was made. Harrison had the following to say about the unauthorised use of Beatles songs for advertisement as well as the importance of this particular case: 

On 9 November 1989, the lawsuit was settled out of court. As with previous cases between Apple and EMI, a condition of the settlement was that terms of the agreement would be kept secret. It was suggested, however, by a spokesman of Ono that in the end of a very &quot;confusing myriad of issues&quot; there was a large exchange of money. Nike had also ceased to use the song for advertisement in March 1988.

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* The complete Apple Records
* Beatles Ltd. at Companies House (&quot;Filing History&quot; tab includes the original foundation and renaming documents)
* Overview of Beatles companies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q621231" start="0" end="19" title="Apple Corps" label="Apple Corps Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="79" end="85" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="120" end="131" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q778575" start="192" end="204" title="Conglomerate (company)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="256" end="259" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q213710" start="283" end="296" title="Apple Records" label="Apple Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780477" start="494" end="508" title="Apple Boutique" label="Apple Boutique"/>
<link wikidata="Q804402" start="526" end="538" title="Baker Street" label="Baker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q21014277" start="543" end="560" title="Paddington Street" label="Paddington Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999677" start="668" end="682" title="Wigmore Street" label="Wigmore Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631609" start="706" end="716" title="Savile Row" label="Savile Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q380912" start="900" end="913" title="Neil Aspinall" label="Neil Aspinall"/>
<link wikidata="Q324737" start="968" end="979" title="Allen Klein" label="Allen Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174185" start="1021" end="1031" title="Jeff Jones (music industry executive)" label="Jeff Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346673" start="1085" end="1097" title="Fast Company (magazine)" label="Fast Company"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1225" end="1247" title="The Beatles: Rock Band" label="The Beatles: Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034804" start="1482" end="1496" title="Inland Revenue" label="Inland Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172998" start="1588" end="1599" title="Peter Brown (music industry)" label="Peter Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q203690" start="1645" end="1658" title="Brian Epstein" label="Brian Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1766" end="1779" title="Walter Strach" label="Walter Strach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711139" start="1951" end="1963" title="Derek Taylor" label="Derek Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="1981" end="1995" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836" start="2460" end="2473" title="René Magritte" label="René Magritte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741129" start="2655" end="2668" title="Robert Fraser (art dealer)" label="Robert Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="2868" end="2879" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q253192" start="3706" end="3713" title="Cynthia Lennon" label="Cynthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611847" start="4007" end="4022" title="Alistair Taylor" label="Alistair Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="4770" end="4781" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q203690" start="4909" end="4925" title="NEMS Enterprises" label="NEMS Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934278" start="5005" end="5020" title="Robert Stigwood" label="Robert Stigwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q778792" start="5304" end="5315" title="RSO Records" label="RSO Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480369" start="5377" end="5390" title="Alan Aldridge" label="Alan Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="5408" end="5424" title="copyright" label="copyright notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="7987" end="8006" title="New Musical Express" label="New Musical Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="8023" end="8036" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="8230" end="8245" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706381" start="9069" end="9081" title="Alan Clayson" label="Alan Clayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576117" start="9086" end="9099" title="Spencer Leigh (radio presenter)" label="Spencer Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q380912" start="9173" end="9181" title="Neil Aspinall" label="Aspinall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="9588" end="9596" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q191816" start="9776" end="9782" title="Beluga (sturgeon)" label="Beluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q498563" start="9795" end="9814" title="Fortnum &amp;amp; Mason" label="Fortnum &amp;amp; Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139144" start="10028" end="10048" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; break-up" label="break-up of the band"/>
<link wikidata="Q56705833" start="10414" end="10429" title="Ovington Square" label="Ovington Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q26328" start="10460" end="10473" title="Knightsbridge" label="Knightsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995539" start="10630" end="10648" title="Apple Corps v Apple Computer" label="trademark disputes"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="10654" end="10668" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="10674" end="10684" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="10984" end="10987" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174185" start="11071" end="11081" title="Jeff Jones (music industry executive)" label="Jeff Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730626" start="11476" end="11486" title="Magic Alex" label="Magic Alex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="12182" end="12193" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q901203" start="12220" end="12240" title="Magical Mystery Tour (film)" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131791" start="12278" end="12294" title="Yellow Submarine (film)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352613" start="12311" end="12320" title="Let It Be (1970 film)" label="Let it Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282787" start="12403" end="12407" title="Raga (film)" label="Raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q103774" start="12437" end="12449" title="Ravi Shankar" label="Ravi Shankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520375" start="12458" end="12484" title="The Concert for Bangladesh (film)" label="The Concert for Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q287580" start="12508" end="12522" title="Little Malcolm" label="Little Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="12561" end="12576" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663658" start="12622" end="12640" title="Dark Horse Records" label="Dark Horse Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493688" start="12646" end="12654" title="Splinter (band)" label="Splinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q901203" start="12849" end="12869" title="Magical Mystery Tour (film)" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="13000" end="13004" title="BBC1" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131791" start="13036" end="13052" title="Yellow Submarine (film)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703612" start="13116" end="13125" title="Al Brodax" label="Al Brodax"/>
<link wikidata="Q340062" start="13139" end="13153" title="George Dunning" label="George Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q564132" start="13177" end="13191" title="Heinz Edelmann" label="Heinz Edelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11865615" start="13227" end="13242" title="Jack Mendelsohn" label="Jack Mendelsohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q315343" start="13247" end="13258" title="Erich Segal" label="Erich Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="13284" end="13298" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q338655" start="13408" end="13416" title="James Hanratty" label="Hanratty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335201" start="13592" end="13622" title="St Martin-in-the-Fields" label="St Martin-in-the-Fields Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352613" start="13659" end="13668" title="Let It Be (1970 film)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q380912" start="13730" end="13743" title="Neil Aspinall" label="Neil Aspinall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308337" start="13757" end="13777" title="Michael Lindsay-Hogg" label="Michael Lindsay-Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282787" start="13932" end="13936" title="Raga (film)" label="Raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q156814" start="13987" end="14001" title="Yehudi Menuhin" label="Yehudi Menuhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837826" start="14023" end="14042" title="Ustad Alauddin Khan" label="Ustad Alauddin Khan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14056" end="14068" title="Howard Worth" label="Howard Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520375" start="14203" end="14229" title="The Concert for Bangladesh (film)" label="The Concert for Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="14305" end="14316" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="14318" end="14327" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q468356" start="14329" end="14343" title="Ali Akbar Khan" label="Ali Akbar Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311450" start="14345" end="14358" title="Billy Preston" label="Billy Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="14360" end="14372" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q319374" start="14377" end="14389" title="Leon Russell" label="Leon Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q324737" start="14423" end="14434" title="Allen Klein" label="Allen Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427344" start="14448" end="14460" title="Saul Swimmer" label="Saul Swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="14512" end="14528" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179593" start="14616" end="14630" title="Born to Boogie" label="Born to Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q287514" start="14667" end="14677" title="Marc Bolan" label="Marc Bolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211770" start="14679" end="14685" title="T. Rex (band)" label="T. Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="14687" end="14697" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937502" start="14858" end="14872" title="Son of Dracula (1974 film)" label="Son of Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q281034" start="14896" end="14909" title="Harry Nilsson" label="Harry Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q526928" start="14924" end="14937" title="Suzanna Leigh" label="Suzanna Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q195396" start="14939" end="14952" title="Freddie Jones" label="Freddie Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q934270" start="14957" end="14969" title="Dennis Price" label="Dennis Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337082" start="15040" end="15055" title="Freddie Francis" label="Freddie Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16017438" start="15071" end="15085" title="Jennifer Jayne" label="Jennifer Jayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q287580" start="15226" end="15240" title="Little Malcolm" label="Little Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q200405" start="15264" end="15273" title="John Hurt" label="John Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701025" start="15275" end="15287" title="John McEnery" label="John McEnery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15289" end="15302" title="Raymond Platt" label="Raymond Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q276165" start="15304" end="15318" title="Rosalind Ayres" label="Rosalind Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q363271" start="15323" end="15335" title="David Warner (actor)" label="David Warner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15369" end="15382" title="Gavrick Losey" label="Gavrick Losey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500787" start="15396" end="15409" title="Stuart Cooper" label="Stuart Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234655" start="15425" end="15440" title="David Halliwell" label="David Halliwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917775" start="15580" end="15596" title="Music publisher (popular music)" label="music publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811939" start="16022" end="16033" title="Terry Doran" label="Terry Doran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733913" start="16102" end="16115" title="Deram Records" label="Deram Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q673868" start="16243" end="16253" title="Grapefruit (band)" label="Grapefruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499404" start="16401" end="16415" title="Northern Songs" label="Northern Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813803" start="16498" end="16508" title="Harrisongs" label="Harrisongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602607" start="16528" end="16543" title="Startling Music" label="Startling Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q798993" start="16598" end="16607" title="Badfinger" label="Badfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044451" start="16619" end="16633" title="No Matter What (Badfinger song)" label="No Matter What"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242806" start="16647" end="16660" title="Day After Day (Badfinger song)" label="Day After Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838206" start="16677" end="16686" title="Baby Blue (Badfinger song)" label="Baby Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493339" start="16722" end="16730" title="Pete Ham" label="Pete Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q698481" start="16759" end="16770" title="Without You (Badfinger song)" label="Without You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286993" start="16822" end="16831" title="Tom Evans (musician)" label="Tom Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q281034" start="16896" end="16909" title="Harry Nilsson" label="Harry Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="16922" end="16934" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958734" start="17062" end="17071" title="Bug Music" label="Bug Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q796316" start="17089" end="17110" title="BMG Rights Management" label="BMG Rights Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="17206" end="17214" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q311450" start="17216" end="17229" title="Billy Preston" label="Billy Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q17334185" start="17238" end="17258" title="Radha Krishna Temple" label="Radha Krishna Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106948" start="17374" end="17389" title="Benny Gallagher" label="Benny Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q761588" start="17463" end="17479" title="McGuinness Flint" label="McGuinness Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="17536" end="17538" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494570" start="17552" end="17570" title="Cherry Red Records" label="Cherry Red Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q199585" start="17994" end="18003" title="Let It Be (album)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426279" start="18042" end="18050" title="Get Back" label="Get Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402981" start="18084" end="18097" title="Ethan Russell" label="Ethan Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q67090103" start="18144" end="18157" title="Jonathan Cott" label="Jonathan Cott"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198090" start="18162" end="18174" title="David Dalton (writer)" label="David Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q213710" start="18396" end="18409" title="Apple Records" label="Apple Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q103774" start="18828" end="18840" title="Ravi Shankar" label="Ravi Shankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q230594" start="18870" end="18881" title="Mary Hopkin" label="Mary Hopkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q798993" start="18902" end="18911" title="Badfinger" label="Badfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q317350" start="18938" end="18950" title="John Tavener" label="John Tavener"/>
<link wikidata="Q311450" start="18964" end="18977" title="Billy Preston" label="Billy Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q310300" start="18991" end="19003" title="James Taylor" label="James Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q451326" start="19020" end="19030" title="Doris Troy" label="Doris Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359277" start="19063" end="19085" title="Elephant&amp;#x27;s Memory" label="Elephant&amp;#x27;s Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295075" start="19122" end="19136" title="Ronnie Spector" label="Ronnie Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999668" start="19150" end="19162" title="Jackie Lomax" label="Jackie Lomax"/>
<link wikidata="Q830379" start="19168" end="19187" title="Modern Jazz Quartet" label="Modern Jazz Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17334185" start="19207" end="19227" title="Radha Krishna Temple" label="Radha Krishna Temple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19599" end="19613" title="Apple Records#Zapple Records" label="Zapple Records"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20129" end="20172" title="Unfinished Music No.2: Life with the Lions" label="Unfinished Music No. 2: Life with the Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q988681" start="20206" end="20222" title="Electronic Sound" label="Electronic Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q11541377" start="20276" end="20288" title="retail store" label="retail store"/>
<link wikidata="Q804402" start="20304" end="20316" title="Baker Street" label="Baker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178697" start="20414" end="20426" title="Pete Shotton" label="Pete Shotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q468872" start="20481" end="20489" title="The Fool (design collective)" label="The Fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q383906" start="20744" end="20755" title="shoplifting" label="shoplifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q746369" start="21138" end="21154" title="recording studio" label="recording studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631609" start="21239" end="21249" title="Savile Row" label="Savile Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570652" start="21479" end="21488" title="patch bay" label="patch bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322330" start="21495" end="21503" title="talkback (recording)" label="talkback"/>
<link wikidata="Q390516" start="21538" end="21550" title="control room" label="control room"/>
<link wikidata="Q199585" start="21698" end="21707" title="Let It Be (album)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="21764" end="21767" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q589260" start="21891" end="21904" title="soundproofing" label="soundproofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q468612" start="22083" end="22096" title="Geoff Emerick" label="Geoff Emerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183986" start="22313" end="22325" title="echo chamber" label="echo chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q782526" start="22415" end="22427" title="quadrophonic" label="quadrophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493339" start="22699" end="22707" title="Pete Ham" label="Pete Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q798993" start="22711" end="22720" title="Badfinger" label="Badfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q366700" start="22725" end="22739" title="Klaus Voormann" label="Klaus Voormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q213710" start="22778" end="22791" title="Apple Records" label="Apple Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="22825" end="22835" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="22857" end="22863" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q907523" start="22875" end="22890" title="Trident Studios" label="Trident Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q743026" start="22892" end="22903" title="AIR Studios" label="AIR Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296666" start="22905" end="22919" title="Morgan Studios" label="Morgan Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q943742" start="22924" end="22939" title="Olympic Studios" label="Olympic Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781651" start="23073" end="23101" title="Living in the Material World" label="Living in the Material World"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23187" end="23197" title="Friar Park#George Harrison and FPSHOT" label="Friar Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258897" start="23293" end="23319" title="Lon &amp;amp; Derrek Van Eaton" label="Lon &amp;amp; Derrek Van Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="23358" end="23369" title="overdubbing" label="overdubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621052" start="23407" end="23418" title="Straight Up (Badfinger album)" label="Straight Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453209" start="23448" end="23453" title="Fanny (band)" label="Fanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q281034" start="23455" end="23468" title="Harry Nilsson" label="Harry Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28348" start="23470" end="23483" title="Nicky Hopkins" label="Nicky Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q137758" start="23485" end="23497" title="Wishbone Ash" label="Wishbone Ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q249966" start="23499" end="23512" title="Viv Stanshall" label="Viv Stanshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q283638" start="23514" end="23528" title="Stealers Wheel" label="Stealers Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685712" start="23530" end="23541" title="Lou Reizner" label="Lou Reizner"/>
<link wikidata="Q468010" start="23543" end="23558" title="Clodagh Rodgers" label="Clodagh Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q287514" start="23563" end="23573" title="Marc Bolan" label="Marc Bolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179593" start="23603" end="23617" title="Born To Boogie" label="Born To Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="23802" end="23816" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="24166" end="24170" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="24388" end="24406" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes Music Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q9479" start="24415" end="24419" title="iPod" label="iPod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607531" start="25442" end="25457" title="Harmonix Music Systems" label="Harmonix&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25464" end="25486" title="The Beatles: Rock Band" label="The Beatles: Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="25534" end="25545" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="26129" end="26132" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="26493" end="26497" title="lawsuit" label="sued"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="26498" end="26501" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="26513" end="26522" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="26700" end="26708" title="Nike Inc" label="Nike Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072897" start="26710" end="26724" title="Wieden+Kennedy" label="Wieden+Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="26761" end="26764" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="26769" end="26784" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619535" start="26815" end="26825" title="Revolution (Beatles song)" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q257303" start="28233" end="28248" title="Companies House" label="Companies House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646888" wikidata="Q645623" url="?curid=646888" title="Longford">
<text>Longford () is the county town of County Longford in Ireland. It had a population of 10,952 at the 2022 census. It is the biggest town in the county and about one third of the county&#x27;s population lives there. Longford lies at the meeting of Ireland&#x27;s N4 and N5 roads, which means that traffic travelling between Dublin and County Mayo, or north County Roscommon passes around the town. Longford railway station, on the Dublin-Sligo line, is used heavily by commuters.

==History==
The town is built at a fording point on the banks of the River Camlin (), which is a tributary of the River Shannon. According to several sources, the name Longford is an Anglicization of the Irish , referring to a fortress or fortified house.

The area came under the sway of the local clan which controlled the south and middle of the County of Longford (historically called or ) and hence, the town was known as (fort/stronghold of O&#x27;Farrell).

A Dominican priory was founded there in 1400. St. John&#x27;s Church of Ireland (formerly known as Templemichael Parish Church) was built on the site of the priory in 1710.

In 1815, the Longford Cavalry Barracks was established by the British Army in the town. 

A spur of the Royal Canal, linking the main canal to Longford town was completed in 1831. Construction on the Royal Canal had begun in May 1790 and concluded in 1817 with the successful joining of Dublin with the River Shannon at Cloondara, County Longford, but had bypassed Longford town itself. 

From at least the 1830s, The Royal Canal Company offered cheap fares on night boats along the canal for passengers wishing to get from Longford to Dublin, and vice versa. The Irish Waterways History website describes the conditions under which the night boat service operated in the late 1830s: &quot;From 1838 the night boat from Dublin left at two o&#x27;clock each afternoon; the boat from Longford left at half-past two. The night boat schedule was arranged to allow links with Charles Bianconi&#x27;s cars, which linked Longford with Carrick-on-Shannon, Boyle and Sligo&quot;. The journey from Dublin to Longford by boat took 17 hours. In November 1845, one of the night boats sank en route to Longford on the outskirts of Dublin, killing 15 people. 

In February 1922, following Irish independence, the Cavalry Barracks in Longford were handed over to the Irish Free State and renamed Connolly Barracks after Sean Connolly, an Irish republican.

==Places of interest==
Located to the south of Longford, in Keenagh, is the visitor centre of the Corlea Trackway. It houses a preserved 18-metre stretch of Iron Age bog road, which was built in . There are also a number of portal dolmens located around Longford.

The town serves as the cathedral town of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise. St Mel&#x27;s Cathedral, dedicated to Saint Mel, the founder of the diocese of Ardagh, was built between 1840 and 1856. It was designed by architect John Benjamin Keane, who also designed St Francis Xavier&#x27;s Church on Gardiner Street in Dublin. St Mel&#x27;s Cathedral features several stained glass windows by Harry Clarke studios. These include one of Clarke&#x27;s earliest works, &quot;The consecration of St. Mel as Bishop of Longford&quot;, which was exhibited at the RDS Annual Art Industries Exhibition in 1910, where it received second prize. The cathedral was extensively damaged in a fire on Christmas Day 2009. It remained closed for five years after the fire, while it was the centre of one of the largest restoration projects undertaken in Europe. It reopened for services at midnight mass on Christmas Eve 2014 and has since become a tourist attraction. Two of the intricate stained-glass windows in the transepts of the cathedral, depicting St Anne and the Resurrection, have been restored.

Longford town has a 212-seat theatre called Backstage Theatre just outside of the town, and a four-screen multiplex cinema, with restaurants. The Irish Prison Service HQ, which is in the Lisnamuck area of the town, has a sculpture by artist Remco de Fouw, which is one of the largest pieces of sculpture in Ireland.

In a 2003 &quot;Guardian&quot; article about Patrick McCabe, Longford&#x27;s &quot;features of distinction&quot; are described as including &quot;a hulking cathedral, a rash of fast-food joints, a grubby cinema and a shopping mall&quot;.

==Economy==

Longford&#x27;s main industries are food production, sawmills, steelworking, generator retailing, cable making and the production of medical diagnostics. It is the major services centre for the county as well as the location of the Department of Social Welfare and the Irish Prison Service. The town is also a local commercial centre, with a number of retail outlets including multiples such as Tesco, German discount retailers, Aldi and Lidl and Irish retail outlets such as Dunnes Stores and Penneys. A retail park, the N4 Axis Centre, opened in Longford in October 2005.

Longford town has a decentralized government department which employs approximately 300 people, and a further 130 are employed at the Irish Prison Service&#x27;s headquarters in the town. Connolly Barracks once employed approximately 180 soldiers, many of whom were involved in UN peace-keeping duties, until the barracks closed in January 2009.

While construction was formerly a major local employer, following the post-2008 Irish economic downturn, there were job losses in the construction industry and an increase in unemployment in the region.

==Education==
Longford town has a number of primary schools (for ages 4–12) and three secondary schools (for ages 12–19): two single-sex schools, St. Mel&#x27;s College (a Catholic boys&#x27; school), and Scoil Mhuire (a Catholic girls&#x27; school run by the Sisters of Mercy), as well as a mixed school, (Templemichael College, formerly known as Longford Vocational School). Primary schools in Longford include a Gaelscoil and St. Joseph&#x27;s. There is also an adult education centre in Longford.

St. Mel&#x27;s College is the oldest of these schools, being founded in the 1860s by the Roman Catholic Bishop of Ardagh and Clonmacnois as a diocesan seminary to train students for the priesthood. While the school only briefly functioned as a seminary, it served for many years as a boarding school, while also admitting day students. The boarding school was discontinued after 2000 and the school is now only a day school, with the largest student enrolment in County Longford.

==Transport==
===Road===
Longford is at the point of divergence of the N5 road to Castlebar/Westport/Ireland West Airport and the N4 road which continues onwards to Sligo.

The N5 originally started in the town centre, causing occasional traffic congestion. The town&#x27;s bypass opened on 3 August 2012.

The N4 Sligo road has a bypass around the town, which consists of single carriageway with hard shoulders and four roundabouts. It was opened on 2 June 1995.

===Rail===
Longford railway station (opened 8 November 1855) is on the Dublin-Sligo line of the Irish railway network. About from Sligo and from Dublin, it is served by Sligo-Dublin intercity services. Despite its distance from Dublin, there is a regular, well-utilised commuter service to Dublin with journeys to Dublin Connolly generally taking about an hour and three-quarters.

===Canals===
The Royal Canal reopened in October 2010 after years of being derelict and overgrown. Navigation is now possible from Spencer Dock, in Dublin, to the Shannon, in Cloondara.
===Bus===
There are a number of bus services to Dublin and other towns both outside and inside the county provided by both the state (Bus Éireann) and private bus companies (Kane&#x27;s, Donnelly&#x27;s and Farrelly&#x27;s.) Third level colleges are also served by the private companies during the academic year.

Donnelly&#x27;s Pioneer Bus Service, a local bus company based in Granard, operate a route from Longford to Granard via Ballinalee. There are three journeys each way daily (no Sunday service).

Whartons Travel, which is also a local bus service, operate a route from Longford railway station and Longford to Cavan via Drumlish, Arvagh and Crossdoney. As of 2014, this service is funded by the National Transport Authority.

===Air===
Longford&#x27;s main air transport centre is located south-east of the town, at Abbeyshrule. Abbeyshrule Aerodrome receives a regular influx of small general aviation aircraft, including the Cessna 182 and 150. The airport also has two flight training centres; one for general aviation fixed wing aircraft training (&quot;Aeroclub 2000&quot;) and one for microlight aircraft flight training (&quot;Ultraflight&quot;).

==Arts and culture==
The Backstage Theatre and Centre for the Arts is a facility for arts and culture projects in the town and surrounding areas. It is funded by Longford County Council with support from the Arts Council. Backstage is a member of two arts touring networks: Nasc a nationwide network of seven venues and Nomad a north midlands based network.

==Sport==
The town has a number of sports clubs and facilities, including the Gaelic Athletic Association, rugby and tennis clubs, a League of Ireland soccer club (Longford Town FC), two indoor swimming pools, a gym and an 18-hole golf course. A swimming pool was opened in Longford in 2007.

===Gaelic football and hurling===
The sport with most support in County Longford is Gaelic football. The headquarters of the Longford Gaelic Athletic Association is located in Pearse Park in Longford Town, with a ground capacity of around 11,000. The Longford Gaelic football team won a Leinster title at Senior level in 1968 and a National League title in 1966. The minor (under-18) Longford county team won the Leinster title in 2002 and 2010. The major boys&#x27; secondary school in Longford town, St. Mel&#x27;s College, also has a tradition in secondary schools&#x27; football (known as Colleges A), winning 29 Leinster and 4 All-Ireland titles (in the Hogan Cup). The main local GAA club is Longford Slashers, based in Longford town, who have won more Longford Senior Football Championship titles (16) than any other team in the county, including a win in 2013.

===Soccer===
Longford town&#x27;s main association football (soccer) club, Longford Town FC, was founded in 1924 and was elected to the League of Ireland in 1984. The club&#x27;s ground is at Strokestown Road. Longford Town FC has twice won the FAI Cup, in 2003 and 2004.

===Other sports===
The local rugby union club, Longford RFC, was formed in the 1960s and participates in the Leinster League.

Longford Sports &amp; Leisure Centre, located in an area known locally as The Mall, contains a swimming pool, gym, and indoor and outdoor football and basketball facilities.

==People==
*Willie Browne (1936–2004), Republic of Ireland international footballer
*Francis &quot;Frank&quot; Butler (1847–1926), rifleshot who toured the US (1876–1884) and husband-manager of American sharpshooter Annie Oakley
*Padraic Colum (1881–1972), Irish poet, novelist and playwright
*Ray Flynn (b.1957), Irish mile record holder
*Gareth Ghee, inter-county hurler
*Michael Gomez (b.1977), champion professional boxer was born in an Irish Traveller family in Longford.
*Patrick McCabe (b.1955) novelist, has lived in Longford.
*Ruairí Ó Brádaigh (1932–2013), founder of Republican Sinn Féin

==Climate==
Climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year-round. The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is &quot;Cfb&quot; (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate).
==See also==
* Carn Clonhugh
* List of towns and villages in Ireland

==References==
==Sources==


==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q645623" start="0" end="8" title="Longford" label="Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="19" end="30" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q186220" start="34" end="49" title="County Longford" label="County Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030587" start="99" end="110" title="2022 census of Ireland" label="2022 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638177" start="261" end="263" title="N4 road (Ireland)" label="N4"/>
<link wikidata="Q496894" start="268" end="270" title="N5 road (Ireland)" label="N5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="322" end="328" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178626" start="333" end="344" title="County Mayo" label="County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179437" start="355" end="371" title="County Roscommon" label="County Roscommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090385" start="396" end="420" title="Longford railway station" label="Longford railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743407" start="429" end="446" title="Dublin-Sligo railway line" label="Dublin-Sligo line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337206" start="548" end="560" title="River Camlin" label="River Camlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="593" end="606" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="946" end="955" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750108" start="956" end="962" title="priory" label="priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q28196213" start="1131" end="1156" title="Connolly Barracks" label="Longford Cavalry Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1180" end="1192" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542268" start="1222" end="1233" title="Royal Canal" label="Royal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="1405" end="1411" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="1421" end="1434" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680912" start="1438" end="1447" title="Cloondara" label="Cloondara"/>
<link wikidata="Q186220" start="1449" end="1464" title="County Longford" label="County Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658938" start="1989" end="2005" title="Charles Bianconi" label="Charles Bianconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q589390" start="2046" end="2064" title="Carrick-on-Shannon" label="Carrick-on-Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124843" start="2066" end="2071" title="Boyle, County Roscommon" label="Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="2076" end="2081" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132745944" start="2166" end="2193" title="1845 Royal Canal disaster" label="one of the night boats sank"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="2369" end="2385" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="2440" end="2456" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220712" start="2519" end="2526" title="Keenagh" label="Keenagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q340086" start="2557" end="2572" title="Corlea Trackway" label="Corlea Trackway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2616" end="2624" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="2683" end="2696" title="portal dolmen" label="portal dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q866900" start="2769" end="2818" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q281026" start="2820" end="2843" title="St Mel&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Mel&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854232" start="2858" end="2867" title="Saint Mel" label="Saint Mel"/>
<link wikidata="Q999475" start="2888" end="2905" title="Bishop of Ardagh" label="diocese of Ardagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219994" start="2969" end="2988" title="John Benjamin Keane" label="John Benjamin Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703372" start="3008" end="3039" title="Saint Francis Xavier Church, Dublin" label="St Francis Xavier&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q981851" start="3136" end="3148" title="Harry Clarke" label="Harry Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q99496486" start="4074" end="4087" title="Remco de Fouw" label="Remco de Fouw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="4166" end="4174" title="The Guardian" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q944204" start="4195" end="4209" title="Patrick McCabe (novelist)" label="Patrick McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q281026" start="4296" end="4315" title="St Mel&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="a hulking cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705434" start="4797" end="4802" title="Tesco Ireland" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q261428" start="4811" end="4828" title="discount retailer" label="discount retailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q125054" start="4831" end="4835" title="Aldi" label="Aldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q151954" start="4840" end="4844" title="Lidl" label="Lidl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266203" start="4878" end="4891" title="Dunnes Stores" label="Dunnes Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q137023" start="4896" end="4903" title="Primark" label="Penneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q28196213" start="5165" end="5182" title="Connolly Barracks" label="Connolly Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q972891" start="5394" end="5427" title="post-2008 Irish economic downturn" label="post-2008 Irish economic downturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590635" start="5674" end="5696" title="St. Mel&amp;#x27;s College" label="St. Mel&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5700" end="5708" title="Roman Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434260" start="5733" end="5745" title="Scoil Mhuire, Longford" label="Scoil Mhuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142854" start="5788" end="5804" title="Sisters of Mercy" label="Sisters of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60557043" start="5835" end="5856" title="Templemichael" label="Templemichael College"/>
<link wikidata="Q322563" start="5885" end="5902" title="Vocational School" label="Vocational School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245166" start="5943" end="5952" title="Gaelscoil" label="Gaelscoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792688" start="6119" end="6166" title="Roman Catholic Bishop of Ardagh and Clonmacnois" label="Roman Catholic Bishop of Ardagh and Clonmacnois"/>
<link wikidata="Q496894" start="6582" end="6589" title="N5 road (Ireland)" label="N5 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q749196" start="6593" end="6602" title="Castlebar" label="Castlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017331" start="6603" end="6611" title="Westport, County Mayo" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q848921" start="6612" end="6632" title="Ireland West Airport" label="Ireland West Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638177" start="6641" end="6648" title="N4 road (Ireland)" label="N4 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="6676" end="6681" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="6749" end="6767" title="traffic congestion" label="traffic congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090385" start="6987" end="7011" title="Longford railway station" label="Longford railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743407" start="7047" end="7064" title="Dublin-Sligo railway line" label="Dublin-Sligo line"/>
<link wikidata="Q837023" start="7072" end="7093" title="rail transport in Ireland" label="Irish railway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="7106" end="7111" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="7121" end="7127" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543742" start="7290" end="7305" title="Dublin Connolly" label="Dublin Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542268" start="7375" end="7386" title="Royal Canal" label="Royal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="7517" end="7528" title="River Shannon" label="the Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680912" start="7533" end="7542" title="Cloondara" label="Cloondara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="7592" end="7598" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017233" start="7678" end="7689" title="Bus Éireann" label="Bus Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q946060" start="7924" end="7931" title="Granard" label="Granard"/>
<link wikidata="Q946060" start="7966" end="7973" title="Granard" label="Granard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076773" start="7978" end="7988" title="Ballinalee" label="Ballinalee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090385" start="8125" end="8149" title="Longford railway station" label="Longford railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q215361" start="8166" end="8171" title="Cavan" label="Cavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167667" start="8176" end="8184" title="Drumlish" label="Drumlish"/>
<link wikidata="Q252045" start="8186" end="8192" title="Arvagh" label="Arvagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q311519" start="8197" end="8207" title="Crossdoney" label="Crossdoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100681" start="8251" end="8279" title="National Transport Authority (Ireland)" label="National Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q306455" start="8372" end="8383" title="Abbeyshrule" label="Abbeyshrule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664119" start="8385" end="8406" title="Abbeyshrule Aerodrome" label="Abbeyshrule Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q686708" start="8483" end="8493" title="Cessna 182" label="Cessna 182"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057117" start="8498" end="8501" title="Cessna 150" label="150"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673830" start="8873" end="8896" title="Longford County Council" label="Longford County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801451" start="8919" end="8931" title="Arts Council (Ireland)" label="Arts Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="9148" end="9175" title="Gaelic Athletic Association" label="Gaelic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="9447" end="9462" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q670530" start="9484" end="9524" title="Longford GAA" label="the Longford Gaelic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590635" start="9865" end="9887" title="St. Mel&amp;#x27;s College" label="St. Mel&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673843" start="10061" end="10078" title="Longford Slashers" label="Longford Slashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673841" start="10122" end="10159" title="Longford Senior Football Championship" label="Longford Senior Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="10272" end="10292" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478917" start="10308" end="10324" title="Longford Town FC" label="Longford Town FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q312370" start="10369" end="10386" title="League of Ireland" label="League of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427047" start="10425" end="10441" title="Strokestown Road" label="Strokestown Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q338594" start="10478" end="10485" title="FAI Cup" label="FAI Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="10535" end="10546" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673838" start="10553" end="10565" title="Longford RFC" label="Longford RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519997" start="10615" end="10630" title="Leinster League" label="Leinster League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021403" start="10820" end="10833" title="Willie Browne" label="Willie Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486365" start="10893" end="10925" title="Frank E. Butler" label="Francis &amp;quot;Frank&amp;quot; Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q230935" start="11024" end="11036" title="Annie Oakley" label="Annie Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q429440" start="11038" end="11051" title="Padraic Colum" label="Padraic Colum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297485" start="11102" end="11111" title="Ray Flynn (athlete)" label="Ray Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522846" start="11148" end="11159" title="Gareth Ghee" label="Gareth Ghee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566758" start="11182" end="11195" title="Michael Gomez" label="Michael Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="11215" end="11233" title="professional boxer" label="professional boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q875651" start="11249" end="11264" title="Irish Traveller" label="Irish Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q944204" start="11286" end="11300" title="Patrick McCabe (novelist)" label="Patrick McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446429" start="11344" end="11361" title="Ruairí Ó Brádaigh" label="Ruairí Ó Brádaigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q174406" start="11386" end="11406" title="Republican Sinn Féin" label="Republican Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11533" end="11562" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11597" end="11600" title="Köppen climate classification#Group C: Temperate/mesothermal climates" label="Cfb"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="11634" end="11649" title="Oceanic climate" label="Oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043755" start="11667" end="11680" title="Carn Clonhugh" label="Carn Clonhugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113044" start="11683" end="11720" title="List of towns and villages in the Republic of Ireland" label="List of towns and villages in Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646891" wikidata="Q2253298" url="?curid=646891" title="Bohumil Mathesius">
<text>Bohumil Mathesius (July 14, 1888 in Prague – June 2, 1952) was a Czech poet, translator, publicist and literary scientist – expert on Russian literature. He was a professor at the Faculty of Arts of the Charles University in Prague. His cousin was Vilém Mathesius.

Bohumil Mathesius enriched the tradition of herald poetry by paraphrases of Chinese poetry: &quot;Zpěvy staré Číny&quot; (&quot;Songs of old China&quot;), &quot;Nové zpěvy staré Číny&quot; (&quot;New songs of old China&quot;), and &quot;Třetí zpěvy staré Číny&quot; (&quot;A third book of songs of old China&quot;). His very particular translating made available to the Czech literature works of Russian authors (Aleksandr Pushkin, Mikhail Lermontov, Nikolai Gogol, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Leo Tolstoy, Vladimir Mayakovsky, Sergei Yesenin, Michail Aleksandrovich Sholokhov). He also translated from German, French and Norwegian literatures, notable among the last being Henrik Ibsen&#x27;s &quot;Peer Gynt&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="65" end="70" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563550" start="180" end="195" title="Faculty of Arts, Charles University in Prague" label="Faculty of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="203" end="221" title="Charles University" label="Charles University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="225" end="231" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q550722" start="248" end="263" title="Vilém Mathesius" label="Vilém Mathesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q255189" start="327" end="337" title="paraphrase" label="paraphrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="342" end="349" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="662" end="669" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="679" end="696" title="Aleksandr Pushkin" label="Aleksandr Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46599" start="698" end="715" title="Mikhail Lermontov" label="Mikhail Lermontov"/>
<link wikidata="Q43718" start="717" end="730" title="Nikolai Gogol" label="Nikolai Gogol"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="732" end="750" title="Fyodor Dostoyevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="752" end="763" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132964" start="765" end="784" title="Vladimir Mayakovsky" label="Vladimir Mayakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q31628" start="786" end="800" title="Sergei Yesenin" label="Sergei Yesenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42398" start="802" end="834" title="Michail Aleksandrovich Sholokhov" label="Michail Aleksandrovich Sholokhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="861" end="867" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="869" end="875" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="880" end="889" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="932" end="944" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208094" start="958" end="967" title="Peer Gynt" label="Peer Gynt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646902" wikidata="Q550722" url="?curid=646902" title="Vilém Mathesius">
<text>Vilém Mathesius (, 3 August 1882 – 12 April 1945) was a Czech linguist, literary historian and co-founder of the Prague Linguistic Circle. He is considered one of the founders of structural functionalism in linguistics.

Mathesius was the editor-in-chief of two linguistic journals, &quot;Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de Prague&quot; (“Works of the Prague Linguistic Circle”) and &quot;Slovo a slovesnost&quot; (&quot;Word and Verbal Art&quot;), and the co-founder of a third, &quot;Nové Athenaeum.&quot; His extensive publications in these journals and elsewhere cover a range of topics, including the history of English literature, syntax, Czech stylistics, and cultural activism.

In addition to his work in linguistics, in 1912 he founded the department of English philology at Charles University, which was the first such department in Czech lands. He remained head of the department until 1939, when the Nazis closed all Czech universities. The department now exists as a branch of the Faculty of Arts, but it is called the &quot;Department of Anglophone Literatures and Cultures.&quot;

== Personal life and education ==
Vilém was born as the youngest of two sons of Bedřich and Evelina Mathesius. His father was a wealthy tanner in a long line of tanners of Saxon origin, claiming Martin Luther&#x27;s biographer Johannes Mathesius as an ancestor. His cousin, Bohumil Mathesius, was a poet and translator.

Vilém was born in Pardubice in Eastern Bohemia in Austria-Hungary (now the Czech Republic). When he was 11, his family moved west to Kolín. There he attended a classic gymnasium and took particular interest in the study of language, taking classes in Latin, Greek, German, and French, in addition to his native language of Czech. He also taught himself some Italian and Russian, and met with the pastor Čeněk Dušek for private lessons in English. Dušek also instructed Mathesius in Calvinism, the religion which Mathesius actively and devotedly practiced his whole life.

In 1901, Mathesius began his studies of Germanic and Romance philology under the Neogrammarian Jan Gebauer at Charles University in Prague, earning both his B.A. and his PhD there. The topic of his doctoral dissertation, which he submitted in 1907, was Hippolyte Taine&#x27;s criticism of Shakespeare. While serving as an assistant teacher of German at a secondary school in Plzeň, he wrote his habilitation thesis and submitted it in 1909. He spent the next 3 years working at Charles University as a &quot;privatdozent,&quot; then in 1912 he was appointed the university&#x27;s first professor of Anglistics (English philology), effectively founding the department. He remained head of the department until Charles University, along with all other Czech universities, was forcibly shut down by the Nazis on November 17, 1939.

In 1908 Mathesius married Růžena Moravcová with whom he later had a son, Vilém (known as Vilík). Moravcová died unexpectedly in 1933 during a routine operation. Soon after, Mathesius married her sister, Antonia.

Mathesius suffered a number of health problems during his lifetime. In 1922 he contracted an eye disease that eventually left him completely blind. This caused him to rely increasingly on his students, including René Wellek and Bohumil Trnka, to assist him in his teaching, reading, and writing. Ten years later, in 1932, he was diagnosed with tuberculosis of the vertebrae, which caused him to be bed-ridden for a year and a half (1932–33). In spite of these ailments, he continued to pursue his studies, teach his classes, and work with the Prague Circle, until his death in Prague on 12 April 1945.

== Work with the Prague Circle ==
Mathesius first met Roman Jakobson, an influential Russian linguist and co-founder of the Moscow Linguistic Circle, soon after Jakobson&#x27;s arrival in Prague in 1920. It was Jakobson who pointed out the need for a center for work and discussion for young linguists in the city, which coincided with Mathesius&#x27;s patriotic desire to improve the state of scholarship in Czechoslovakia. However, their plans would not be realized for half a decade.

For a year and a half (March 1925 – October 1926), Mathesius hosted the sporadic and informal gatherings of young linguists that eventually became the Prague Linguistic Circle at his own house. The first official meeting took place on October 6, 1926, at Mathesius&#x27;s office. Henrik Becker, a young German linguist, was the first speaker invited to give a lecture, which was attended by five people (including Mathesius and Jakobson) and followed by a discussion. The Circle applied for official status in 1930, and Mathesius, as a senior member and well-established academic, served as its president.

The Circle achieved international notice at two linguistic conferences: the First International Congress of Linguists at the Hague in 1928, then the First International Congress of Slavists in Prague in 1929. They used these conferences as an opportunity to develop and present a set of ten theses for linguistic research, promoting a &quot;functionalist&quot; approach to the study of language. Soon after the Prague Congress they issued their first independent publication, two volumes of the journal &quot;Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de Prague&quot; (&quot;Works of the Prague Linguistic Circle&quot;)&quot;,&quot; of which Mathesius was the editor-in-chief. In addition, in 1936 the Circle began issuing a Czech periodical called &quot;Slovo a slovesnost&quot; (&quot;Word and verbal art&quot;), also with Mathesius as editor-in-chief. Publication of &quot;Travaux&quot; ceased in 1939 due to the onset of World War II, but the journal began to be reissued in 1995 as part of a general effort to revive the Circle. &quot;Slovo a slovesnost,&quot; which specializes in structuralist theory and Czech language, now continues (after a brief hiatus from 1942 to 1947) to be published as a quarterly.

== Scholarship ==
Mathesius&#x27;s scholarly work is typically divided into three periods based on his academic and intellectual focus and his increasing interest in linguistic concerns.

=== Literary History (1910–1926) ===
During the early stage of his career, Mathesius&#x27;s interests were split between literary history and linguistics. He started to assemble a compendium of the history of English literature and managed to publish two volumes (1910–1915) before the loss of his eyesight cut his work short. These works, which cover the Anglo-Saxon period through the late Middle Ages, were foundational in establishing the Anglistics department at the university. He also wrote a number of articles on Shakespeare and his critics in 1916, the year of Shakespeare&#x27;s Jubilee.

Alongside his work with literature, he began exploring linguistic theory and questioning the Neogrammarian emphasis on diachronic, or historical, linguistics that defined the study of language at his time. In 1911 he presented one of his more famous lectures to the Royal Learned Society, &quot;On the potentiality of the phenomena of language&quot;, which anticipates Ferdinand de Saussure&#x27;s critical distinction between &quot;langue&quot; and &quot;parole&quot; (1916) and emphasizes the importance of the synchronic (in his words, &quot;static&quot;) study of language.

=== The Founding of the Circle (1926–1936) ===
In his second period of intellectual development, which coincided with the first decade of the Prague Linguistic Circle, Mathesius explored the nature of syntax and semantics and also contributed to the Circle&#x27;s work on phonology, introducing the ideas of functional load and combining capacity of phonemes. This is also the point at which he began to develop his idea of functionalism in contrast to Saussurean structuralism.

=== Linguistic Functionalism (1936–1945) ===
The third and final period of Mathesius&#x27;s work, which lasted until his death, was devoted to functionalist theories of grammar. He was a leading proponent of this school of thought, although he credits the followers of the Polish linguist Jan Baudouin de Courtenay and the Danish linguist Otto Jespersen with having sowed the seeds of the movement. Mathesius built up functionalism as an alternative to the approach of the Neogrammarians, which he criticized as failing to view language as a whole system, overly emphasizing written language at the expense of spoken, and neglecting the role of the speaker/writer in the production of language. Functionalism remedied these problems, and it also preferred synchronic study over diachronic and favored an analytic approach over a genealogical one.

During this time period, Mathesius also became more concerned with issues of stylistics, such as rhythm and intonation, in both Czech and English. The total loss of his eyesight caused him to focus his attention on these aspects of spoken language, because spoken language was now more easily accessible to him.

Throughout his scholarly career and particularly after the Nazi takeover of Czechoslovakia in 1939, Mathesius advocated for cultural activism, as defined by the first president of Czechoslovakia, T. G. Masaryk. In Mathesius&#x27;s mind, cultural activism entailed the revitalization of the Czech national spirit and reform of national holidays, among other things. He published two major collections on the topic: &quot;Kulturní aktivismus&quot; (&quot;Cultural Activism&quot;) in 1925, and &quot;Co daly naše země Evropě a lidstvu&quot; (&quot;What Our Lands Contributed to Europe and Mankind&quot;) in 1940.

== Legacy ==
Mathesius&#x27;s ideas on linguistic functionalism remained central to the work of the Prague Linguistic Circle and have been expanded upon by modern linguists in many directions. Linguistic approaches to information structure, including Functional Sentence Perspective and the topic-comment dichotomy, have grown out of Mathesius&#x27;s writings through the work of Jan Firbas, František Daneš, Petr Sgall, and Eva Hajičová. Mathesius&#x27;s ideas also influenced Michael Halliday&#x27;s development of systemic functional grammar.

Critics maintain that Mathesius lacked refined methodology, and that his observations of data could not amount to much because of his reluctance to propose unified theories to account for them. His work never achieved the international renown of that of his colleagues, possibly because he wrote almost exclusively in Czech.

Mathesius&#x27;s brainchild, the Prague Circle, did much to elevate and improve Prague&#x27;s reputation in the academic world and bring it to international attention. Reflecting on the first ten years of the Circle, Mathesius summed up their contributions: &quot;In foreign linguistics we fought for and won for our group the respectful title of the &#x27;Prague School,&#x27; while at home, nobody can, without ill will, deny us the merit of having given many fresh impulses to Czech linguistic and literary research by our new standpoint and our new methods of work.&quot; Although the Circle dissolved in 1949 due to internal political tension, it was revived in 1989 and now works to publish journals, host conferences, and promote academic work in language and linguistics.

Mathesius is memorialized at Charles University by the &quot;Vilém Mathesius Centre for Research and Education in Semiotics and Linguistics&quot; and by the &quot;Vilém Mathesius Foundation for the Promotion of English and American Studies in Prague&quot;, which issues annual awards for the best MA and BA theses in the Department of English and American Studies.

==Main works==
* &quot;O potenciálnosti jevů jazykových&quot; (On the Potentiality of the Phenomena of Language ), 1911, English trans. J. Vachek 1964. 
* &quot;Dějiny literatury anglické I–II&quot; (The History of English Literature I–II), 1910–1915
* &quot;Kulturní aktivismus&quot; (Cultural activism), 1925
* &quot;On Linguistic Characterology with Illustrations from Modern English&quot;, 1928 [published in English].
* &quot;Co daly naše země Evropě a lidstvu&quot; (What our lands contributed to Europe and mankind), 1940
* &quot;Možnosti, které čekají&quot; (Possibilities that await), 1944
* &quot;Obsahový rozbor současné angličtiny na základě obečně lingvistickém&quot; (A functional analysis of present-day English on a general linguistic basis), 1961 (publ. posthumously)
* &quot;Jazyk, kultura a slovesnost&quot; (Language, culture and poetic art), 1982

==Citation==
It is necessary to subject the language to such simplification that allows further work on it. (source: Vilém Mathesius: Jazyk, kultura a slovesnost (Language, culture and poetic art), 1982

==References==
== Further reading ==

== See also ==
* Prague Linguistic School</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q550722" start="0" end="15" title="Vilém Mathesius" label="Vilém Mathesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="56" end="61" title="Czechs" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="62" end="70" title="Linguistics" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497044" start="72" end="90" title="History of literature" label="literary historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q402282" start="113" end="137" title="Prague school" label="Prague Linguistic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963060" start="179" end="203" title="Functional theories of grammar" label="structural functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="636" end="642" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q28856" start="650" end="660" title="stylistics" label="stylistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q126908927" start="666" end="683" title="cultural activism" label="cultural activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="763" end="780" title="English studies" label="English philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="784" end="802" title="Charles University" label="Charles University"/>
<link wikidata="Q185573" start="843" end="854" title="Czech lands" label="Czech lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q935276" start="912" end="947" title="International Students&amp;#x27; Day" label="Nazis closed all Czech universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="1268" end="1273" title="Saxony" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="1291" end="1304" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q89904" start="1323" end="1341" title="Johannes Mathesius" label="Johannes Mathesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253298" start="1370" end="1387" title="Bohumil Mathesius" label="Bohumil Mathesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q36989" start="1435" end="1444" title="Pardubice" label="Pardubice"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="1456" end="1463" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1467" end="1482" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="1492" end="1506" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q470369" start="1550" end="1555" title="Kolín" label="Kolín"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="1585" end="1594" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1668" end="1673" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1675" end="1680" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1682" end="1688" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1694" end="1700" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="1740" end="1745" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1775" end="1782" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1787" end="1794" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="1813" end="1819" title="pastor" label="pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1855" end="1862" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="1899" end="1908" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620112" start="2029" end="2037" title="Germanic philology" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="2042" end="2059" title="Romance languages" label="Romance philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q998355" start="2070" end="2083" title="Neogrammarian" label="Neogrammarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388833" start="2084" end="2095" title="Jan Gebauer" label="Jan Gebauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q297726" start="2242" end="2257" title="Hippolyte Taine" label="Hippolyte Taine"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2278" end="2289" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="2344" end="2360" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="2364" end="2369" title="Plzeň" label="Plzeň"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="2384" end="2403" title="Habilitation" label="habilitation thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="2497" end="2509" title="privatdozent" label="privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="2588" end="2598" title="English studies" label="Anglistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q935276" start="2798" end="2816" title="International Students&amp;#x27; Day" label="November 17, 1939."/>
<link wikidata="Q732895" start="3243" end="3254" title="René Wellek" label="René Wellek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3375" end="3387" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="3688" end="3702" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Roman Jakobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946536" start="3758" end="3782" title="Moscow linguistic circle" label="Moscow Linguistic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q402282" start="4273" end="4297" title="Prague school" label="Prague Linguistic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930272" start="4811" end="4846" title="International Congress of Linguists" label="International Congress of Linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="4850" end="4859" title="the Hague" label="the Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667643" start="4884" end="4918" title="International Congress of Slavists" label="International Congress of Slavists"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="6477" end="6495" title="History of Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon period"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="6513" end="6524" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="6643" end="6654" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q998355" start="6814" end="6827" title="Neogrammarian" label="Neogrammarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="6840" end="6878" title="Historical linguistics" label="diachronic, or historical, linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="7090" end="7111" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973772" start="7128" end="7189" title="Langue and parole" label="distinction between &amp;quot;langue&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;parole&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208048" start="7234" end="7244" title="Synchrony and diachrony" label="synchronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="7501" end="7507" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="7512" end="7521" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="7572" end="7581" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508830" start="7608" end="7623" title="functional load" label="functional load"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="7650" end="7659" title="Phoneme" label="phonemes."/>
<link wikidata="Q8963060" start="7724" end="7737" title="Functional theories of grammar" label="functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="7753" end="7763" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Saussurean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466334" start="7764" end="7777" title="Structural linguistics" label="structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963060" start="7923" end="7956" title="Functional theories of grammar" label="functionalist theories of grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q335092" start="8069" end="8094" title="Jan Baudouin de Courtenay" label="Jan Baudouin de Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23870" start="8119" end="8133" title="Otto Jespersen" label="Otto Jespersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q998355" start="8253" end="8266" title="Neogrammarian" label="Neogrammarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28856" start="8705" end="8715" title="stylistics" label="stylistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="8725" end="8731" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576720" start="8736" end="8746" title="Intonation (linguistics)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="9000" end="9039" title="German occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="Nazi takeover of Czechoslovakia in 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q126908927" start="9065" end="9082" title="cultural activism" label="cultural activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q78492" start="9137" end="9150" title="Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk" label="T. G. Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031227" start="9770" end="9791" title="information structure" label="information structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508847" start="9803" end="9834" title="Functional sentence perspective" label="Functional Sentence Perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q933845" start="9843" end="9856" title="Topic and comment" label="topic-comment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500840" start="9932" end="9942" title="Jan Firbas" label="Jan Firbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178582" start="9961" end="9971" title="Petr Sgall" label="Petr Sgall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415065" start="9977" end="9989" title="Eva Hajičová" label="Eva Hajičová"/>
<link wikidata="Q562952" start="10030" end="10046" title="Michael Halliday" label="Michael Halliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969375" start="10069" end="10096" title="systemic functional grammar" label="systemic functional grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q402282" start="12700" end="12724" title="Prague school" label="Prague Linguistic School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646904" wikidata="Q5145842" url="?curid=646904" title="Collaborative intelligence">
<text>Collaborative intelligence is distinguished from collective intelligence in three key ways: First, in collective intelligence there is a central controller who poses the question, collects responses from a crowd of anonymous responders, and uses an algorithm to process those responses to achieve a (typically) &quot;better than average&quot; consensus result, whereas collaborative intelligence focuses on gathering, and valuing, diverse input. Second, in collective intelligence the responders are anonymous, whereas in collaborative intelligence, as in social networks, participants are not anonymous. Third, in collective intelligence, as in the standard model of problem-solving, there is a beginning, when the central controller broadcasts the question, and an end, when the central controller announces the &quot;consensus&quot; result. In collaborative intelligence there is no central controller because the process is modeled on evolution. Distributed, autonomous agents contribute and share control, as in evolution and as manifested in the generation of &quot;Wikipedia&quot; articles. Collective intelligence is the dominant model because it aligns with centralized, top-down control, whereas collaborative intelligence aligns with the rise of DAO (Decentralized Autonomous Organization) networks, the Internet Computer initiative, research organizations like Dfinity contributing to that initiative, and other distributed models.

Collaborative intelligence characterizes multi-agent, distributed systems where each agent, human or machine, is autonomously contributing to a problem solving network. Collaborative autonomy of organisms in their ecosystems makes evolution possible. Natural ecosystems, where each organism&#x27;s unique signature is derived from its genetics, circumstances, behavior and position in its ecosystem, offer principles for design of next generation social networks to support collaborative intelligence, crowdsourcing individual expertise, preferences, and unique contributions in a problem solving process.

Four related terms are complementary:
* Collective intelligence processes input from a large number of anonymous responders to quantitative questions to produce better-than-average predictions.
* Crowdsourcing distributes microtasks to a large number of anonymous task performers.
* Human Computation engages the pattern-recognizing capacities of anonymous human microtask workers to improve on machine capabilities and enable machine learning.
* Collaborative intelligence complements the three methods defined above, but here task performers are not anonymous. Task performers have different skills, motivations and may perform different tasks. These non-anonymous devices and human contributors, from tagged sensors to geo-located devices to identified unique human contributors, drive collaborative problem-solving in next generation social networks.

==Overview==
Collaborative intelligence is a term used in several disciplines. In business it describes heterogeneous networks of people interacting to produce intelligent outcomes. It can also denote non-autonomous multi-agent problem-solving systems. The term was used in 1999 to describe the behavior of an intelligent business &quot;ecosystem&quot; where Collaborative Intelligence, or CQ, is &quot;the ability to build, contribute to and manage power found in networks of people.&quot; When the computer science community adopted the term collective intelligence and gave that term a specific technical denotation, a complementary term was needed to distinguish between anonymous homogeneity in collective prediction systems and non-anonymous heterogeneity in collaborative problem-solving systems. Anonymous collective intelligence was then complemented by collaborative intelligence, which acknowledged identity, viewing social networks as the foundation for next generation problem-solving ecosystems, modeled on evolutionary adaptation in nature&#x27;s ecosystems.

==AI and Collaborative Intelligence==
Although many sources warn that AI may cause the extinction of the human species, humans may cause our own extinction via climate change, ecosystem disruption, decline of our ocean lifeline, increasing mass murders and police brutality, and an arms race that could trigger World War III, driving humanity extinct before AI gets a chance. The surge of open source applications in generative AI demonstrates the power of collaborative intelligence (AI-human C-IQ) among distributed, autonomous agents, sharing achievements in collaborative partnerships and networks. The successes of small open source experiments in generative AI provide a model for a paradigm shift from centralized, hierarchical control to decentralized bottom-up, evolutionary development. 
The key role of AI in collaborative intelligence was predicted in 2012 when Zann Gill wrote that collaborative intelligence (C-IQ) requires “multi-agent, distributed systems where each agent, human or machine, is autonomously contributing to a problem-solving network.” Gill’s ACM paper has been cited in applications ranging from an NIH (U. S. National Institute of Health) Center for Biotechnology study of human robot collaboration, to an assessment of cloud computing tradeoffs. A key application domain for collaborative intelligence is risk management, where preemption is an anticipatory action taken to secure first-options in maximising future gain and/or minimising loss. Prediction of gain/ loss scenarios can increasingly harness AI analytics and predictive systems designed to maximize collaborative intelligence. Other collaborative intelligence applications include the study of social media and policing, harnessing computational approaches to enhance collaborative action between residents and law enforcement. In their Harvard Business Review essay, Collaborative Intelligence: Humans and AI Are Joining Forces –
Humans and machines can enhance each other’s strengths, authors H. James Wilson and Paul R. Daugherty report on research involving 1,500 firms in a range of industries, showing that the biggest performance improvements occur when humans and smart machines work together, enhancing each other’s strengths.

==History==
Collaborative intelligence traces its roots to the Pandemonium Architecture proposed by artificial intelligence pioneer Oliver Selfridge as a paradigm for learning. His concept was a precursor for the blackboard system where an opportunistic solution space, or blackboard, draws from a range of partitioned knowledge sources, as multiple players assemble a jigsaw puzzle, each contributing a piece. Rodney Brooks notes that the blackboard model specifies how knowledge is posted to a blackboard for general sharing, but not how knowledge is retrieved, typically hiding from the consumer of knowledge who originally produced which knowledge, so it would not qualify as a collaborative intelligence system.

In the late 1980s, Eshel Ben-Jacob began to study bacterial self-organization, believing that bacteria hold the key to understanding larger biological systems. He developed new pattern-forming bacteria species, Paenibacillus vortex and Paenibacillus dendritiformis, and became a pioneer in the study of social behaviors of bacteria. &quot;P. dendritiformis&quot; manifests a collective faculty, which could be viewed as a precursor of collaborative intelligence, the ability to switch between different morphotypes to adapt with the environment. Ants were first characterized by entomologist W. M. Wheeler as cells of a single &quot;superorganism&quot; where seemingly independent individuals can cooperate so closely as to become indistinguishable from a single organism. Later research characterized some insect colonies as instances of collective intelligence. The concept of ant colony optimization algorithms, introduced by Marco Dorigo, became a dominant theory of evolutionary computation. The mechanisms of evolution through which species adapt toward increased functional effectiveness in their ecosystems are the foundation for principles of collaborative intelligence.

Artificial Swarm Intelligence (ASI) is a real-time technology that enables networked human groups to efficiently combine their knowledge, wisdom, insights, and intuitions into an emergent intelligence. Sometimes referred to as a &quot;hive mind,&quot; the first real-time human swarms were deployed by Unanimous A.I. using a cloud-based server called &quot;UNU&quot; in 2014. It enables online groups to answer questions, reach decisions, and make predictions by thinking together as a unified intelligence. This process has been shown to produce significantly improved decisions, predictions, estimations, and forecasts, as demonstrated when predicting major events such as the Kentucky Derby, the Oscars, the Stanley Cup, Presidential Elections, and the World Series.

A type of collaborative AI was the focus of a DARPA Artificial Intelligence Exploration (AIE) Program from 2021 to 2023. Named Shared Experience Lifelong Learning, the program aimed to develop a population of agents capable of sharing a growing number of machine-learned tasks without forgetting. The vision behind this initiative was later elaborated in a Perspective in Nature Machine Intelligence, which proposed a synergy between lifelong learning and the sharing of machine-learned knowledge in populations of agents. The envisioned network of AI agents promises to bring about emergent properties such as faster and more efficient learning, a higher degree of open-ended learning, and a potentially more democratic society of AI agents, in contrast to monolithic, large-scale AI systems. These research developments were deemed to implement concepts inspired by sci-fi concepts such as the Borg from Star Trek, however, featuring more appealing characteristics such as individuality and autonomy. 

Crowdsourcing evolved from anonymous collective intelligence and is evolving toward credited, open source, collaborative intelligence applications that harness social networks. Evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr noted that competition among individuals would not contribute to species evolution if individuals were typologically identical. Individual differences are a prerequisite for evolution. This evolutionary principle corresponds to the principle of collaborative autonomy in collaborative intelligence, which is a prerequisite for next generation platforms for crowd-sourcing. Following are examples of crowdsourced experiments with attributes of collaborative intelligence:
* SwarmSketch is a crowd-sourced art experiment.
* Galaxy Zoo is a citizen science project led by Chris Lintott at Oxford University to tap human pattern recognition capacities to catalog galaxies.
* DARPA Network Challenge explores how the Internet and social networking can support timely communication, wide-area team-building, and urgent mobilization to solve broad-scope, time-critical problems.
* Climate CoLab, spun out of MIT and its Center for Collective Intelligence.
* reCAPTCHA is a project to digitize books, one word at a time

As crowdsourcing evolves from basic pattern recognition tasks to toward collaborative intelligence, tapping the unique expertise of individual contributors in social networks, constraints guide evolution toward increased functional effectiveness, co-evolving with systems to tag, credit, time-stamp, and sort content. Collaborative intelligence requires capacity for effective search, discovery, integration, visualization, and frameworks to support collaborative problem-solving.

The collaborative intelligence technology category was established in 2022 by MURAL, a software provider of interactive whiteboard collaboration spaces for group ideation and problem-solving. MURAL formalized the collaborative intelligence category through the acquisition of LUMA Institute, an organization that trains people to be collaborative problem solvers through teaching human-centered design. The collaborative intelligence technology category is described by MURAL as combining &quot;collaboration design with collaboration spaces and emerging Collaboration Insights™️ ... to enable and amplify the potential of the team.&quot;

===Contrast with collective intelligence===
The term collective intelligence originally encompassed both collective and collaborative intelligence, and many systems manifest attributes of both. Pierre Lévy coined the term &quot;collective intelligence&quot; in his book of that title, first published in French in 1994. Lévy defined &quot;collective intelligence&quot; to encompass both collective and collaborative intelligence: &quot;a form of universally distributed intelligence, constantly enhanced, coordinated in real time, and in the effective mobilization of skills&quot;. Following publication of Lévy&#x27;s book, computer scientists adopted the term collective intelligence to denote an application within the more general area to which this term now applies in computer science. Specifically, an application that processes input from a large number of discrete responders to specific, generally quantitative, questions (e.g. what will the price of DRAM be next year?) Algorithms homogenize input, maintaining the traditional anonymity of survey responders to generate better-than-average predictions.

Recent dependency network studies suggest links between collective and collaborative intelligence. Partial correlation-based Dependency Networks, a new class of correlation-based networks, have been shown to uncover hidden relationships between the nodes of the network. Research by Dror Y. Kenett and his Ph.D. supervisor Eshel Ben-Jacob uncovered hidden information about the underlying structure of the U.S. stock market that was not present in the standard correlation networks, and published their findings in 2011.

==Application==
Collaborative intelligence addresses problems where individual expertise, potentially conflicting priorities of stakeholders, and different interpretations of diverse experts are critical for problem-solving. Potential future applications include:
* competitions, where submissions must be integrated to produce a synergistic outcome; 
* smart search, where social networks of searchers on related topics co-define search results;
* professional groups, interest collectives, citizen science and other communities, where knowledge-sharing is a prerequisite for effective outcomes;
* planning, development, and sustainable project management;
* smart systems to transform independent cities into collaborative, ecological urban networks

Wikipedia, one of the most popular websites on the Internet, is an exemplar of an innovation network manifesting distributed collaborative intelligence that illustrates principles for experimental business laboratories and start-up accelerators.

A new generation of tools to support collaborative intelligence is poised to evolve from crowdsourcing platforms, recommender systems, and evolutionary computation. Existing tools to facilitate group problem-solving include collaborative groupware, synchronous conferencing technologies such as instant messaging, online chat, and shared white boards, which are complemented by asynchronous messaging like electronic mail, threaded, moderated discussion forums, web logs, and group Wikis. Managing the Intelligent Enterprise relies on these tools, as well as methods for group member interaction; promotion of creative thinking; group membership feedback; quality control and peer review; and a documented group memory or knowledge base. As groups work together, they develop a shared memory, which is accessible through the collaborative artifacts created by the group, including meeting minutes, transcripts from threaded discussions, and drawings. The shared memory (group memory) is also accessible through the memories of group members; current interest focuses on how technology can support and augment the effectiveness of shared past memory and capacity for future problem-solving. Metaknowledge characterizes how knowledge content interacts with its knowledge context in cross-disciplinary, multi-institutional, or global distributed collaboration.

==See also==
* Cloud collaboration
* Collaborative innovation network
* Collaborative learning
* Collective problem solving
* Distributed cognition
* Global brain
* Mass collaboration
* Mass communication
* Social epistemology

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5145842" start="0" end="26" title="Collaborative intelligence" label="Collaborative intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204722" start="1262" end="1299" title="Decentralized Autonomous Organization" label="Decentralized Autonomous Organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1315" end="1332" title="Internet Computer" label="Internet Computer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1373" end="1380" title="Dfinity" label="Dfinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q529909" start="1486" end="1497" title="multi-agent" label="multi-agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="1499" end="1518" title="Distributed computing" label="distributed systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="1589" end="1604" title="problem solving" label="problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="1892" end="1907" title="social networks" label="social networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="1947" end="1960" title="crowdsourcing" label="crowdsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q432197" start="2092" end="2115" title="Collective intelligence" label="Collective intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q748250" start="2233" end="2243" title="prediction" label="prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="2248" end="2261" title="Crowdsourcing" label="Crowdsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840398" start="2274" end="2283" title="microtask" label="microtask"/>
<link wikidata="Q843106" start="2335" end="2352" title="Human computation" label="Human Computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840398" start="2415" end="2424" title="microtask" label="microtask"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="2479" end="2495" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q167676" start="2763" end="2769" title="sensor" label="sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="2890" end="2904" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q529909" start="3124" end="3159" title="multi-agent system" label="multi-agent problem-solving systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q432197" start="3452" end="3475" title="collective intelligence" label="collective intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="3836" end="3850" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="3929" end="3952" title="evolutionary adaptation" label="evolutionary adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="4143" end="4157" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="4159" end="4179" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem disruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q750215" start="4223" end="4235" title="Mass murder" label="mass murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="4240" end="4256" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q322348" start="4265" end="4274" title="arms race" label="arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q363" start="4294" end="4307" title="World War III" label="World War III"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="4372" end="4383" title="open source" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651957" start="6350" end="6366" title="Oliver Selfridge" label="Oliver Selfridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="6385" end="6393" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q92809" start="6629" end="6642" title="Rodney Brooks" label="Rodney Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423395" start="6737" end="6744" title="knowledge sharing" label="sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397805" start="6955" end="6970" title="Eshel Ben-Jacob" label="Eshel Ben-Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q609408" start="6996" end="7013" title="self-organization" label="self-organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124085" start="7147" end="7167" title="Paenibacillus vortex" label="Paenibacillus vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124083" start="7172" end="7200" title="Paenibacillus dendritiformis" label="Paenibacillus dendritiformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124083" start="7275" end="7292" title="Paenibacillus dendritiformis" label="P. dendritiformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352575" start="7528" end="7541" title="William Morton Wheeler" label="W. M. Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q432197" start="7775" end="7798" title="collective intelligence" label="collective intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q460851" start="7815" end="7849" title="ant colony optimization algorithms" label="ant colony optimization algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290091" start="7865" end="7877" title="Marco Dorigo" label="Marco Dorigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197129" start="7907" end="7931" title="evolutionary computation" label="evolutionary computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="7951" end="7960" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q863960" start="8117" end="8146" title="Swarm Intelligence" label="Artificial Swarm Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908355" start="8419" end="8433" title="Unanimous A.I." label="Unanimous A.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="8934" end="8939" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q44062926" start="9260" end="9287" title="Nature Machine Intelligence" label="Nature Machine Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q220652" start="9784" end="9788" title="Borg" label="Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="9794" end="9803" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="9893" end="9906" title="Crowdsourcing" label="Crowdsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204291" start="10775" end="10798" title="DARPA Network Challenge" label="DARPA Network Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="11120" end="11133" title="crowdsourcing" label="crowdsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="11276" end="11291" title="social networks" label="social networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="11311" end="11320" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q723563" start="11707" end="11729" title="interactive whiteboard" label="interactive whiteboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19602141" start="11979" end="12000" title="human-centered design" label="human-centered design"/>
<link wikidata="Q432197" start="12292" end="12315" title="collective intelligence" label="collective intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q950635" start="12433" end="12444" title="Pierre Lévy (philosopher)" label="Pierre Lévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="13200" end="13204" title="Dynamic random-access memory" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="13220" end="13230" title="Algorithms" label="Algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397805" start="13677" end="13692" title="Eshel Ben-Jacob" label="Eshel Ben-Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="13760" end="13777" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="U.S. stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617887" start="13815" end="13835" title="Stock correlation network" label="correlation networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="14250" end="14264" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q554950" start="14990" end="15008" title="recommender system" label="recommender system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197129" start="15015" end="15039" title="evolutionary computation" label="evolutionary computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q287198" start="15125" end="15149" title="synchronous conferencing" label="synchronous conferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="15171" end="15188" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q287198" start="15190" end="15201" title="online chat" label="online chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="15282" end="15297" title="E-Mail" label="electronic mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="15330" end="15335" title="Internet Forum" label="forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="15358" end="15362" title="Wiki" label="Wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135693" start="16250" end="16269" title="Cloud collaboration" label="Cloud collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145839" start="16272" end="16304" title="Collaborative innovation network" label="Collaborative innovation network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349659" start="16307" end="16329" title="Collaborative learning" label="Collaborative learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="16332" end="16358" title="Collective problem solving" label="Collective problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551870" start="16361" end="16382" title="Distributed cognition" label="Distributed cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946951" start="16385" end="16397" title="Global brain" label="Global brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748728" start="16400" end="16418" title="Mass collaboration" label="Mass collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q853710" start="16421" end="16439" title="Mass communication" label="Mass communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589301" start="16442" end="16461" title="Social epistemology" label="Social epistemology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646914" wikidata="Q5077177" url="?curid=646914" title="Charles E. Sebastian">
<text>Charles Edward Sebastian (March 30, 1873 – April 17, 1929) was the 30th mayor of Los Angeles, California, serving from 1915 to 1916. He was a Democrat.

==Biography==
He was born in Farmington, Missouri on March 30, 1873.

Originally a patrolman in the LAPD, Sebastian climbed the ranks to Chief of Police and served in that office from January 3, 1911 to July 16, 1915. He was the first L.A. police chief to be elected mayor, due in no small part to his crusade against vice. While running for office he became embroiled in a litany of charges but was later acquitted of them all. He did, however, later depart City Hall after adverse publicity concerning his personal life arose from the publication of letters of a damaging nature. According to Thomas Reppetto&#x27;s &quot;The Blue Parade&quot;, &quot;In 1915 he resigned to run for mayor but was accused of illicit relations with young ladies. Defended by Earl Rogers, he beat the charge and was elected. The next year, however, the accusations were proved, and to them were added new charges of extortion. Sebastian countered by staging a phony attempt on his life, but the plot was revealed and he resigned.&quot;

During his brief mayoralty, Sebastian oversaw the annexation of numerous outlying areas, including most of the San Fernando Valley and the West Side.

He died April 17, 1929, and is interred at Glen Haven Memorial Park in Sylmar, California.

==References==
== Further reading ==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5077177" start="0" end="24" title="Charles E. Sebastian" label="Charles Edward Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="72" end="77" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="81" end="92" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="94" end="104" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q968752" start="182" end="202" title="Farmington, Missouri" label="Farmington, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="253" end="257" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="LAPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197417" start="290" end="305" title="List of Los Angeles Police Department Chiefs of Police" label="Chief of Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411242" start="471" end="475" title="vice" label="vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q94626814" start="748" end="763" title="Thomas Reppetto" label="Thomas Reppetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326064" start="911" end="922" title="Earl Rogers" label="Earl Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194465" start="1222" end="1232" title="annexation" label="annexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q816843" start="1283" end="1302" title="San Fernando Valley" label="San Fernando Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410741" start="1311" end="1320" title="West Los Angeles (region)" label="West Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506894" start="1394" end="1412" title="Sylmar, California" label="Sylmar, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646917" wikidata="Q1343166" url="?curid=646917" title="Nambour">
<text>Nambour is a rural town and locality in the Sunshine Coast Region, Queensland, Australia. In the , the locality of Nambour had a population of 12,145 people.

== Geography ==
Nambour is north of the state capital, Brisbane. The town lies in the sub-tropical hinterland of the Sunshine Coast at the foot of the Blackall Range It was the administrative centre and capital of the Maroochy Shire and is now the administrative centre of the Sunshine Coast Region. The greater Nambour region includes surrounding suburbs such as Burnside, Coes Creek, and Perwillowen.

Nambour–Mapleton Road exits to the west and Nambour–Bli Bli Road to the east.

== Etymology ==

The name is derived from the Aboriginal word &quot;naamba&quot;, referring to the red-flowering bottle brush &quot;Callistemon viminalis&quot;.

== History ==


In 1862, Tom Petrie with 25 Turrbal and Kabi Kabi men including Ker-Walli, Wanangga and Billy Dinghy entered Petrie&#x27;s Creek with the view to exploit the large cedar growing in the vicinity. They encountered some resident Aboriginal people with whom they had a traditional ceremony together. Petrie&#x27;s group afterwards made a permanent logging camp further up the creek in the area now known as Nambour. At this camp, the Aboriginal workers requested that Petrie brand them with his logging symbol. With a piece of prepared glass, he cut his logging symbol of a P inside a circle into each of the men&#x27;s arms. These Aboriginal workers, as well as local Maroochy men such as Puram, worked hard, returning frequently with Petrie to build the roadway, fell the timber and transport the logs downriver. The Nambour area had its first permanent European settlement in 1870. The town was then still just called Petrie&#x27;s Creek.

Maroochy Provisional School opened on 13 October 1879. It was renamed Nambour Provisional School in 1891. It became Nambour State School in 1897. It had a secondary school department from circa 1940 until 2 February 1953, when Nambour State High School opened on 2 February 1953.

Petrie&#x27;s Creek Post Office opened on 1 June 1888 (a receiving office had been open from 1885, originally known as Carrollo) and was renamed Nambour by 1890.

In 1890 the Maroochy Divisional Board was established.

In 1891, the North Coast railway to Brisbane was completed, and at its opening Petrie&#x27;s Creek was renamed &quot;Nambour&quot;, after the Nambour cattle station. However, it was not until 16 December 1963 when the new Nambour railway station was opened by the Government for Transport Gordon Chalk.

On Monday 2 January 1893, St Joseph&#x27;s Catholic Church was officially opened by Archbishop Robert Dunne. It was at 177 Currie Street () on a site donated by Daniel Currie (after whom Currie Street was named). It was . Circa 1950, it was demolished to make way for a new church. The timber from the demolished church was used to construct Our Lady Star of the Sea (Stella Maris) in Maroochydore as a cost-saving measure. On Sunday 16 April 1950, Archbishop James Duhig laid the foundation stone for the new St Joseph&#x27;s. On Sunday 1 July 1951, Duhig returned to bless and dedicate the new St Joseph&#x27;s Church.

The Moreton Central Sugar Mill Cane Tramway was constructed from 1897. It was used to transport passengers and sugar cane. The tramway closed at the end of 2001. Much of the track and signal lighting still remains. A section of the track can still be seen in central Nambour along the roadway of Mill, Currie and Howard Streets.

Nambour Baptist Church opened in July 1914 on the corner of Currie Street and Mill Street (approx ). On 25 August 1921 a new church was opened. Another new church opened on Sunday 2 November 1952 on the south-west corner of Currie and Bury Streets (). Circa 1970s the site was used to construct a new library.

A fire in 1924 destroyed many of the timber buildings along the main street.

The Nambour branch of the Queensland Country Women&#x27;s Association was founded on 1 November 1928. In 1931 they established their QCWA Rest Rooms in the Shire Hall. In September 1958 they officially opened their own building at 10 Short Street (still in use today).

Nambour Hospital opened as Maroochy District Hospital in 1930, renamed Nambour General Hospital in 1958. Historical milestones for Nambour Hospital were as follows: Block 1 completed (1975), Block 2 completed (1986), dialysis unit opens (1989), Block 6 opened (1993–95), Block 7 built (1998), and Block 1 demolished (2023) for redevelopment. Much of Nambour Hospital&#x27;s acute services relocated to Sunshine Coast University Hospital upon its opening in 2017.

St Joseph&#x27;s Primary School was opened on 2 February 1925 by the Good Samaritan Sisters. From 1940 to 1977 it also provided secondary schooling, an arrangement that ended when St Joseph&#x27;s High School was established in 1977.

Nambour State High School opened on 2 February 1953.

Nambour Infants State School opened on 23 January 1961 and closed on 12 December 1980.

In 1977 the Catholic Education Office established St Joseph&#x27;s High School. In 1979 it moved to a new location in Burnside and in 1985 was renamed St John&#x27;s College.

The Nambour Public Library opened in 1982 and had a major refurbishment in 1998 with a minor refurbishment in 2016.

Nambour Centre for Continuing Secondary Education opened on 4 February 1991. It was subsequently amalgamated into the Nambour State College.

The Nambour &amp; District Historical Museum, more widely known as the Nambour Museum began with an opening ceremony held on 20 April 1996.

== Demographics ==
In the , the locality of Nambour had a population of 10,221 people.

In the , the locality of Nambour had a population of 11,187 people. 52.9% of the population were female and 47.1% were male. The median age was 40 years. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people made up 4.4% of the population. 77.1% of people were born in Australia. The next most common countries of birth were England 4.0% and New Zealand 3.6%. 87.7% of people spoke only English at home. The most common responses for religion were No Religion 33.5%, Catholic 16.0% and Anglican 13.5%.

In the , the locality of Nambour had a population of 12,145 people.
== Heritage listings ==
Nambour has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:
* Mill Street, Currie Street, Howard Street: Moreton Central Sugar Mill Cane Tramway
* 17 &amp; 19 Mill Street, and 14 &amp; 16 Bury Street: former Moreton Central Sugar Mill Worker&#x27;s Housing

Another heritage listing associated with the Moreton Central Sugar Mill is the 
* Store Road, Maroochy River: Tramway Lift Bridge over Maroochy River

== Politics ==
Nambour is represented by the following politicians:

== Economy ==

Nambour&#x27;s primary industry has been sugar, with extensive cane fields surrounding the town, and the Moreton Central Sugar Mill in the town centre. The mill itself began operating in 1897 until it was closed in 2003.

The future of the sugar industry in the area is in doubt, with a number of former cane farms being converted to grazing cattle, turf farms or sold to property developers. Other industries in the area include tourism, and the growing of tropical fruits.

Situated near Nambour is the Queensland Government&#x27;s Maroochy Research Station which is a major subtropical fruit and nut research and extension centre. The 61 ha research facility was established in 1945, and has an office and laboratory complex, glasshouses, netted orchards, postharvest coolrooms and a biotechnology facility. With access to national and international funding sources, specialist staff often work in conjunction with investigators from other research agencies.

== Education ==
Nambour State College is a government primary and secondary (Prep–12) school for boys and girls at 1 Carroll Street (). In 2017, the school had an enrolment of 1,538 students with 147 teachers (134 full-time equivalent) and 83 non-teaching staff (60 full-time equivalent). Its primary (Prep–6) campus is at Coronation Avenue (). The school has a primary and secondary special education program. It also has a primary and secondary Intensive English program.

St Joseph&#x27;s Primary School is a Catholic primary (Prep–6) school for boys and girls at 177 Currie Street (). In 2017, the school had an enrolment of 396 students with 23 teachers (21 full-time equivalent) and 19 non-teaching staff (11 full-time equivalent).

The Nambour campus of OneSchool Global (formerly known as the Agnew School) is a private primary and secondary school (3–12) for boys and girls at 281 Windsor Road (). It is operated by the Plymouth Brethren Christian Church. As at 26 October 2024, it had an enrolment of 35 students.

In addition, other suburbs of Nambour include the following schools:

*Burnside:
**Burnside State School (primary)
**Burnside State High School (secondary)
**Nambour Special School on Windsor Drive for children aged 5 to 18 years.
**St John&#x27;s College (Catholic secondary)
**Sunshine Coast Institute of TAFE has its largest campus in Nambour.
*Kureelpa
** Blackall Range Independent School (primary and secondary)
*Woombye
**Woombye State School (primary)
** Nambour Christian College (primary and secondary)
** Suncoast Christian College (primary and secondary)

== Facilities ==
=== Health ===
Nambour General Hospital is located on Hospital Road and provides a range of acute and subacute services within the Sunshine Coast-Wide Bay Health Service District.

The regions first major private hospital, Nambour Selangor Private Hospital, opened in 1960. It is located on Netherton Street.

=== Electricity ===
The distribution network company that provides electricity to Nambour residents is Energex. On 1 July 2010, Sunshine Coast Regional Council&#x27;s Water Services (along with Moreton Bay Regional Council), moved over to the recently created water body, Unity Water. Unity Water was created by the Queensland Government as part of the State&#x27;s takeover of South East Queensland&#x27;s water facilities, dams and water supply networks. Moreton Bay and Sunshine Coast Regional Councils own 50% of Unity Water. 

=== Media ===
The daily local newspaper is the Sunshine Coast Daily which is published by APN News &amp; Media. There is also a weekly news service provided by the Nambour Weekly which is published on Wednesdays. The Nambour Chronicle was published from 1903 until it ceased publication in the 1980s.

Nambour is also in the television broadcast licence areas of Brisbane (metro), enabling most areas of the Sunshine Coast to receive the commercial Brisbane stations.

Many community access stations, as well as some Brisbane stations can also be received.

== Amenities ==
The Nambour Civic Centre is an arts and entertainment venue that includes cinema, music, theatre, dance and other events. The Nambour Lind Lane Theatre is another live theatre venue.

The Sunshine Coast Regional Council operates a public library in Nambour at the corner of Bury and Currie Streets.

The Nambour branch of the Queensland Country Women&#x27;s Association meets at 10 Short Street.

Nambour Wesleyan Methodist Church is at 165 Perwillowen Road, Perwillowen. It is part of the Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia.

The main shopping areas in Nambour are Nambour Plaza which has approximately 40 stores, Nambour Mill Village Shopping Centre and Centenary Square Shopping Centre.

Nambour boasts a high proportion of parkland, covering approximately 9% of its total land size. This makes it one of the areas with the highest percentage of parkland in the Sunshine Coast region.

== Sport ==
Nambour has a number of amateur sporting clubs including:
* Nambour–Yandina United Football Club
* Nambour and District Tennis Association
* Nambas Tennis Club.
* Nambour Golf Club

The Nambour Wildcats Soccer Club is part of the Sunshine Coast Churches Soccer Association and was established in 1976, it is one of the largest sporting clubs in the region with over 350 players from U6 to senior Mens, Ladies and Over 35&#x27;s.

The Nambour Crushers Rugby League Club was established in 1985. The grounds are situated at 22 Crusher Park Drive. The Crushers have teams in all grades from Under 7s to A Grade and number approximately 300 players.

The Nambour Rugby Union Club entered the Sunshine Coast District Rugby Union Competition in 1981. The club is known as the &quot;Toads&quot;. The club&#x27;s ground is situated on Laidlaw Road in nearby Woombye. Nambour fields four &quot;Senior&quot; sides in the Sunshine Coast Competition: A Grade, Reserve Grade and U19&#x27;s as well as a women&#x27;s team. A junior club with teams from under 7s through to under 17s also runs. Nambour were local premiers in 1912 and 1913.

The Nambour and Districts Netball Association is made up of clubs from Yandina, Burnside, Nambour, Woombye, Palmwoods and the school based Saints club.

Nambour Cricket Club is part of the Sunshine Coast Cricket Association and has played on the Nambour showgrounds since the early 1890s when a Nambour team competed against teams from nearby towns.

The Nambour Aquatic Centre is located in Petrie Park and has heated pools all year round. The complex offers a variety of activities including a 50m heated pool, a 25m heated enclosed pool, toddler pools and fountains/play area, a learn to swim program, aqua aerobics classes, and a poolside cafe.

== Attractions ==
The Big Pineapple tourist attraction on the southern outskirts of the town reflects both of these pursuits.

Other tourist attractions include Thrill Hill Waterslide Park, and the Big Macadamia nut.

== Events ==
The Big Pineapple Music Festival attracts thousands of visitors to Nambour.

Nambour Originals (sibling of Peregian Originals held at Peregian Beach) is an open air community event that involves live music in a picnic style format. It is held at 1pm every 2nd and 4th Sunday of each month at Quota Park Amphitheatre on Matthews Street. The facilities at Quota Park include barbecues, a sheltered area, shady trees, a kids play area, toilets and parking.

The Nambour Festival, which began as the Nambour Sugar Festival in the 1980s, has been held at Quota Park since 2008. The festival showcases local musicians, entertainers, cooking demonstrations, local produce, a diverse range of activities for children, and market stalls.

The Sunshine Coast Agricultural Show was first held in 1905 in Woombye. The first show in Nambour was held in 1909. Today, the Sunshine Coast Agricultural Show is a modern three-day show full of agricultural, community and entertainment events.

The Queensland Home Garden Expo is a three-day gardening event held at the Nambour Showgrounds.

== Transport ==
The Translink Transit Authority (known as Translink) is the authority that coordinates and integrates the public rail and bus services in South East Queensland, of which Nambour is in Zone 6.

Nambour is serviced by several Queensland Rail passenger trains, including the Tilt Train and is approximately one and a half hours north of Brisbane by rail. Regular services depart from Nambour railway station and use the Sunshine Coast line.

The region connected to Brisbane via the Bruce Highway which forms part of the M1 motorway.

Greyhound Australia interstate coach operators also operate daily bus services to Brisbane using the major corridors. The local bus service is operated by Kinetic Group which has various routes between Nambour and Noosa and the Sunshine Coast, including one via Eumundi.

Nambour is also served by Sunshine Coast Airport. The airport is approximately 25 minutes east of Nambour by car. Brisbane Airport is approximately one hour and ten minutes south of Nambour by car.

== Climate ==
Nambour experiences a humid subtropical climate (Köppen: Cfa), with hot, wet summers and mild winters. 
== Notable people ==
=== Entertainment ===
*Sam Atwell, actor
*Mike Chapman, record producer and songwriter who was a major force in the British pop music industry in the 1970s
*Jon Coghill, Powderfinger drummer
*Judith Durham, lead vocalist for The Seekers
*Benjamin Law, writer, author and comedian
*Ivan Sen, filmmaker

=== Politics ===
*Carolyn Male, member of the Legislative Assembly of Queensland from 2001 to 2012
*Kevin Rudd, former prime minister and former foreign minister, attended Nambour State High School
*Fiona Simpson, Queensland Speaker, attended Nambour State High School
*Wayne Swan, former deputy prime minister and former treasurer, attended Nambour State High School

=== Sport ===
*Scott Anderson, rugby league
*Ian Baker-Finch, 1991 British Open winner
*Lee Carseldine, cricketer
*Larissa Crummer, soccer player for Australia
*Jake Friend, rugby league
*Angela Kennedy, Olympic swimmer
*Rhys Magin, Australian rules footballer 
*Reed Mahoney, rugby league
*Casey McGuire, rugby league
*Ashley Noffke, cricketer
*Joel Parkinson, surfer
*Pat Rafter, tennis player made his debut in Nambour. His name has been on the wall of the local tennis club since he won the junior championship as a sixteen-year-old. 
*Clint Robinson, canoeist
*Billy Slater, rugby league
*Tia-Clair Toomey, 6 time CrossFit Games champion
*Sharni Webb, Australian rules footballer

=== Other ===
*Max Gaylard, United Nations Assistant Secretary-General currently working as deputy special coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and United Nations coordinator for humanitarian and development activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
*Daniel Keighran, awarded Australia&#x27;s military highest honour, the Victoria Cross for Australia for bravery during the Battle of Derapet in Afghanistan in 2010.
* Michael Wesley, deputy vice-chancellor international, Melbourne University and former executive director of the Lowy Institute for International Policy.

== See also ==

* List of largest roadside attractions
* List of tramways in Queensland
* Blackall Range road network

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* 
* Town map:
** North-west quadrant
** North-east quadrant
** South-west quadrant
** South-east quadarant
*Nambour and district photographs 1890-1934, State Library of Queensland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1343166" start="0" end="7" title="Nambour" label="Nambour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632426" start="28" end="36" title="Suburbs and localities (Australia)" label="locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065035" start="44" end="65" title="Sunshine Coast Region" label="Sunshine Coast Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="67" end="77" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="214" end="222" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="245" end="257" title="sub-tropical" label="sub-tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354" start="258" end="268" title="hinterland" label="hinterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q828357" start="276" end="290" title="Sunshine Coast, Queensland" label="Sunshine Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q880679" start="310" end="324" title="Blackall Range" label="Blackall Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991315" start="377" end="391" title="Shire of Maroochy" label="Maroochy Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065035" start="436" end="457" title="Sunshine Coast Region" label="Sunshine Coast Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000117" start="523" end="531" title="Burnside, Queensland" label="Burnside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140831" start="533" end="543" title="Coes Creek, Queensland" label="Coes Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q31038591" start="549" end="560" title="Perwillowen, Queensland" label="Perwillowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q115858081" start="563" end="584" title="Nambour–Mapleton Road" label="Nambour–Mapleton Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q123603476" start="607" end="627" title="Nambour–Bli Bli Road" label="Nambour–Bli Bli Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="688" end="698" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q496460" start="755" end="767" title="Callistemon" label="bottle brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22113637" start="774" end="795" title="Callistemon viminalis" label="Callistemon viminalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054881" start="2272" end="2291" title="North Coast railway line, Queensland" label="North Coast railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110886" start="2548" end="2560" title="Gordon Chalk" label="Gordon Chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364209" start="2647" end="2657" title="Roman Catholic Archbishop of Brisbane" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343702" start="2658" end="2670" title="Robert Dunne (bishop)" label="Robert Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294613" start="2948" end="2960" title="Maroochydore" label="Maroochydore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132903" start="3023" end="3034" title="James Duhig" label="James Duhig"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329524" start="3189" end="3228" title="Moreton Central Sugar Mill Cane Tramway" label="Moreton Central Sugar Mill Cane Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740240" start="3930" end="3973" title="Queensland Country Women&amp;#x27;s Association" label="Queensland Country Women&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977361" start="4707" end="4729" title="Good Samaritan Sisters" label="Good Samaritan Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000117" start="5133" end="5141" title="Burnside, Queensland" label="Burnside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471925" start="6289" end="6304" title="heritage-listed" label="heritage-listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329524" start="6368" end="6407" title="Moreton Central Sugar Mill Cane Tramway" label="Moreton Central Sugar Mill Cane Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q24089987" start="6471" end="6519" title="Moreton Central Sugar Mill Worker&amp;#x27;s Housing" label="Moreton Central Sugar Mill Worker&amp;#x27;s Housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772338" start="6615" end="6629" title="Maroochy River, Queensland" label="Maroochy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q24041082" start="6631" end="6670" title="Tramway Lift Bridge over Maroochy River" label="Tramway Lift Bridge over Maroochy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="6797" end="6802" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225183" start="6861" end="6887" title="Moreton Central Sugar Mill" label="Moreton Central Sugar Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="7186" end="7193" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q212105" start="8103" end="8120" title="special education" label="special education"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258191" start="8480" end="8496" title="OneSchool Global" label="OneSchool Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258191" start="8648" end="8682" title="Plymouth Brethren Christian Church" label="Plymouth Brethren Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000117" start="8815" end="8823" title="Burnside, Queensland" label="Burnside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641458" start="9023" end="9055" title="Sunshine Coast Institute of TAFE" label="Sunshine Coast Institute of TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q30748351" start="9092" end="9100" title="Kureelpa, Queensland" label="Kureelpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569877" start="9163" end="9170" title="Woombye, Queensland" label="Woombye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376841" start="9742" end="9749" title="Energex" label="Energex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064985" start="9833" end="9861" title="Moreton Bay Regional Council" label="Moreton Bay Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="9955" end="9976" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641449" start="10218" end="10238" title="Sunshine Coast Daily" label="Sunshine Coast Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740240" start="11071" end="11114" title="Queensland Country Women&amp;#x27;s Association" label="Queensland Country Women&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q31038591" start="11204" end="11215" title="Perwillowen, Queensland" label="Perwillowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984062" start="11235" end="11273" title="Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia" label="Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24089892" start="12084" end="12118" title="Nambour Crushers" label="Nambour Crushers Rugby League Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971743" start="12338" end="12385" title="Sunshine Coast Rugby Union" label="Sunshine Coast District Rugby Union Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443409" start="13449" end="13462" title="Big Pineapple" label="Big Pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13625" end="13642" title="Australia&amp;#x27;s big things#Queensland" label="Big Macadamia nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833625" start="14751" end="14778" title="Translink (Queensland)" label="Translink Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q379439" start="14971" end="14986" title="Queensland Rail" label="Queensland Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803005" start="15019" end="15029" title="Tilt Train" label="Tilt Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361491" start="15081" end="15089" title="Roma Street railway station" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961411" start="15128" end="15151" title="Nambour railway station" label="Nambour railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927337" start="15164" end="15183" title="Sunshine Coast railway line" label="Sunshine Coast line"/>
<link wikidata="Q991666" start="15227" end="15240" title="Bruce Highway" label="Bruce Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713658" start="15265" end="15267" title="M1, Queensland" label="M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546185" start="15279" end="15298" title="Greyhound Australia" label="Greyhound Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15434" end="15447" title="Kinetic Group#Queensland" label="Kinetic Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q903231" start="15577" end="15599" title="Sunshine Coast Airport" label="Sunshine Coast Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q45523" start="15665" end="15681" title="Brisbane Airport" label="Brisbane Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="15786" end="15811" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="15813" end="15820" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen:"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232906" start="15912" end="15922" title="Sam Atwell" label="Sam Atwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q254385" start="15931" end="15943" title="Mike Chapman" label="Mike Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971422" start="16005" end="16022" title="British pop music" label="British pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270511" start="16046" end="16057" title="Jon Coghill" label="Jon Coghill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192255" start="16059" end="16071" title="Powderfinger" label="Powderfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155050" start="16081" end="16094" title="Judith Durham" label="Judith Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q592387" start="16114" end="16125" title="The Seekers" label="The Seekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204323" start="16127" end="16139" title="Benjamin Law (writer)" label="Benjamin Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097453" start="16170" end="16178" title="Ivan Sen" label="Ivan Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="16180" end="16189" title="filmmaker" label="filmmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045417" start="16209" end="16221" title="Carolyn Male" label="Carolyn Male"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518214" start="16237" end="16271" title="Legislative Assembly of Queensland" label="Legislative Assembly of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43135" start="16291" end="16301" title="Kevin Rudd" label="Kevin Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="16310" end="16324" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660943" start="16336" end="16352" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Australia)" label="foreign minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961407" start="16363" end="16388" title="Nambour State High School" label="Nambour State High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451108" start="16390" end="16403" title="Fiona Simpson" label="Fiona Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236571" start="16461" end="16471" title="Wayne Swan" label="Wayne Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261065" start="16480" end="16501" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Australia" label="deputy prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="16513" end="16522" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435890" start="16575" end="16589" title="Scott Anderson (rugby league)" label="Scott Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q939209" start="16605" end="16620" title="Ian Baker-Finch" label="Ian Baker-Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="16627" end="16639" title="The Open Championship" label="British Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513196" start="16648" end="16662" title="Lee Carseldine" label="Lee Carseldine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210470" start="16675" end="16690" title="Larissa Crummer" label="Larissa Crummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q782012" start="16710" end="16719" title="Australia women&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124686" start="16721" end="16732" title="Jake Friend" label="Jake Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762475" start="16748" end="16762" title="Angela Kennedy" label="Angela Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321810" start="16781" end="16791" title="Rhys Magin" label="Rhys Magin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54861403" start="16823" end="16835" title="Reed Mahoney" label="Reed Mahoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940989" start="16851" end="16864" title="Casey McGuire" label="Casey McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805547" start="16880" end="16893" title="Ashley Noffke" label="Ashley Noffke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187443" start="16906" end="16920" title="Joel Parkinson" label="Joel Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q204068" start="16930" end="16940" title="Pat Rafter" label="Pat Rafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979342" start="17100" end="17114" title="Clint Robinson (canoeist)" label="Clint Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903714" start="17126" end="17138" title="Billy Slater" label="Billy Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q26268942" start="17154" end="17170" title="Tia-Clair Toomey" label="Tia-Clair Toomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30137180" start="17204" end="17215" title="Sharni Webb" label="Sharni Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932400" start="17274" end="17316" title="United Nations Assistant Secretary-General" label="United Nations Assistant Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799901" start="17373" end="17398" title="Middle East Peace Process" label="Middle East Peace Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="17481" end="17511" title="Occupied Palestinian Territory" label="Occupied Palestinian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217785" start="17514" end="17529" title="Daniel Keighran" label="Daniel Keighran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003423" start="17585" end="17613" title="Victoria Cross for Australia" label="Victoria Cross for Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870865" start="17637" end="17654" title="Battle of Derapet" label="Battle of Derapet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835295" start="17681" end="17695" title="Michael Wesley" label="Michael Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645814" start="17853" end="17889" title="List of largest roadside attractions" label="List of largest roadside attractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q85780993" start="17892" end="17922" title="List of tramways in Queensland" label="List of tramways in Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q115858081" start="17925" end="17952" title="Blackall Range road network" label="Blackall Range road network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="18168" end="18195" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646929" wikidata="Q8029062" url="?curid=646929" title="Woggle-Bug">
<text>Mr. Highly Magnified Woggle-Bug, Thoroughly Educated is a character in the Oz books by L. Frank Baum (1856–1919). The character first appeared in 1904 in the book &quot;The Marvelous Land of Oz&quot;. He goes by the name H. M. Woggle-Bug, T.E. (&quot;Highly Magnified and Thoroughly Educated&quot;). In later books, the hyphen was sometimes dropped: &quot;Wogglebug&quot;.

In illustrations, he is often depicted wearing bright colors and several pairs of glasses on his elongated proboscis.

==History==
According to &quot;The Marvelous Land of Oz&quot;, the Woggle-Bug was once a regular tiny woggle-bug, about the size of a pea. He lived the life of a normal insect until he crawled into a country schoolhouse (presumably somewhere in the Winkie Country of the Land of Oz) and listened to the lessons and lectures which the famous Professor Nowitall gave his pupils for about three years. One day the teacher found and caught him, and decided to use him for an impromptu lesson on woggle-bugs. Nowitall put the bug under a microscope and projected his highly magnified image onto a screen with advanced technology. The bug was proud of his new size; he bowed to the students, and one unnamed little girl standing on the windowsill was startled and fell backward out of the window. While everyone rushed outside to see if she was all right, the bug secretly jumped off the screen and ran away. He has remained magnified ever since. Later he found a tailor, and after he saved the tailor&#x27;s life in an unknown way (although a few stories have been written to explain how, including &quot;The Wogglebug&#x27;s New Clothes&quot; in the 1987 &quot;Oziana&quot;), the tailor made him his very first clothes.

He later founded and runs the Royal College of Art and Athletic Perfection, also known as the Royal College of Athletic Arts or the Royal College of Athletic Sciences, which is located in the western part of the Munchkin Country, not far from the Emerald City.

In &quot;Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz&quot;, Woggle-Bug appears as the prosecutor in Princess Ozma&#x27;s court.

In &quot;The Road to Oz&quot;, Woggle-Bug is among the guests at Princess Ozma&#x27;s birthday party.

==Personality==
When the Woggle-bug is first introduced in &quot;The Marvelous Land of Oz&quot;, he is portrayed as having a charming disposition and a quirky and somewhat eccentric personality. He has a love of big words, Latin phrases, philosophy, and colorful puns relating to his immediate situation (&quot;Were I to ride upon this sawhorse he would not only be an animal, he would become an equipage for he would then be a horse and buggy&quot;). These puns cause his companions a great deal of distress, in response to the aforementioned pun, &quot;[T]he Scarecrow gave a gasp and the Tin Woodman stopped short and looked reproachfully at the Woggle-Bug. At the same time the Sawhorse loudly snorted in derision; and even the Pumpkinhead put up his hand to hide the smile, which because it was carved upon his face, he could not change to a frown.&quot; Puns have been regarded as a sign of superior education and Baum uses the Woggle-Bug&#x27;s puns repeatedly to highlight his conceitedness regarding his own education. Later the Tinman even threatens to murder the Woggle-Bug if he does not stop using his puns to show off. He is very proud of his education, and wants to put it to good use. He is always courteous and polite whatever the situation, and clearly cares about the well-being of others. In the Sunday comics series through the following year, the Woggle-Bug is depicted as leading his companions out of trouble, displaying his wisdom, and also doing random acts of kindness for the poor citizens of America.

The Woggle-Bug, like many of Baum&#x27;s characters, contains many contradictions. He is polite, kind, and courtly while also at times being conceited and uncaring.

When he next appears in &quot;Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz&quot; as the prosecutor in Ozma&#x27;s court, Baum seemingly decided to portray him as more pompous and arrogant, and decidedly unlikeable. Baum was using him as a mocking of arrogance found in scholars (and also lawyers).

&quot;The Emerald City of Oz&quot; features Dorothy, Aunt Em and Uncle Henry paying a visit to the Woggle-Bug at his academy. In the continuing Oz series, the Professor goes on no more adventures until the last of Baum&#x27;s books, &quot;Glinda of Oz&quot;, in which he is given a very harsh description as being so conceited no one cares to associate with him. He is no one&#x27;s favorite in spite of his famous college of athletics. When Ruth Plumly Thompson took over the series after Baum&#x27;s death, she portrayed him exactly like this. When he sets into motion the plot of &quot;The Royal Book of Oz&quot;, he accuses the Scarecrow of lacking any ancestry for him to list in the Royal Genealogy. Authors have portrayed him in varying ways ever since, sometimes lovable as he was originally, and sometimes extremely arrogant, and sometimes as just well-meaningly lofty.

The Professor has a significant role in John R. Neill&#x27;s &quot;The Runaway in Oz&quot;.

==In other media==

* To promote his new book &quot;The Marvelous Land of Oz&quot;, Baum wrote a series of short stories called &quot;Queer Visitors from the Marvelous Land of Oz&quot;, with comics illustrations by Walt McDougall. These stories were syndicated to newspapers across the country, and appeared in the children&#x27;s page of the Sunday comics. The stories ran from 28 August 1904 through 26 February 1905. The first seventeen of them ended with a bit of missing information and the question, &quot;What did the Woggle-bug say?&quot; One of the characters would ask the Woggle-Bug a question, and readers were invited to guess the answer for a prize. The correct answer was given the following Sunday. Much publicity surrounded the contest including sheet music, pin-back buttons, postcards, games, and more.
* Following the success of &quot;The Marvelous Land of Oz&quot;, Baum wrote a stage musical loosely based on the story; he hoped to recreate the smash hit of the 1902 musical stage adaption of &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;. The new musical was called &quot;The Woggle-Bug&quot; and featured 26-year-old Fred Mace (who later became of star of Mack Sennett comedies) played the Woggle-bug, singing such songs as &quot;Mr. H. M. Woggle-bug, T.E.&quot; and &quot;There&#x27;s a Lady Bug Awaiting for me&quot;, and Sydney Deane, who would become the first Australian to appear in a Hollywood movie. In the play, the Woggle-Bug initially sides with Mombi and General Jinjur&#x27;s Army of Revolt, but falls in with the heroes when he flees from the Army&#x27;s charge and is taken prisoner. The play opened and closed in Chicago. It had many elements of comedy absent from the book; in the play, the Woggle-Bug has a passion for a dress made of a bright Wagnerian plaid and he instantly falls in love with whoever wears it next. It also includes a &quot;colored&quot; (probably blackface) cook named Dinah and has Professor Knowitt [sic] as the male love interest with Prissy Pring, a lieutenant in General Jinjur&#x27;s army, as his female counterpart. The show received a few kind reviews but ultimately it &quot;ceased to woggle,&quot; as one critique put it. It closed in less than a month.
* The play was also adapted as a short book, &quot;The Woggle-Bug Book.&quot;
* The &quot;wogglebugs&quot; (&quot;wogs&quot;) of Philip José Farmer&#x27;s celebrated 1952 science fiction novella &quot;The Lovers&quot; are extraterrestrials that resemble Baum&#x27;s character.
* The Woggle-Bug is a supporting character in &quot;Dorothy and the Wizard of Oz&quot;, voiced by J. P. Karliak. In this show, he wrote a book called &quot;The Great Rulers of Oz.&quot;

==References==
==External links==

* Oz encyclopedia entry for the Wogglebug, including picture and sound bite</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8029062" start="0" end="52" title="Woggle-Bug" label="Mr. Highly Magnified Woggle-Bug, Thoroughly Educated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167095" start="71" end="83" title="List of Oz books" label="the Oz books"/>
<link wikidata="Q207544" start="87" end="100" title="L. Frank Baum" label="L. Frank Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511019" start="146" end="150" title="1904 in literature" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659447" start="169" end="193" title="The Marvelous Land of Oz" label="The Marvelous Land of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029062" start="221" end="243" title="Woggle-Bug" label="H. M. Woggle-Bug, T.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q899348" start="481" end="490" title="proboscis" label="proboscis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025463" start="742" end="756" title="Winkie Country" label="Winkie Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918164" start="764" end="774" title="Land of Oz" label="Land of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890315" start="1922" end="1938" title="Munchkin Country" label="Munchkin Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961610" start="1957" end="1969" title="Emerald City" label="Emerald City"/>
<link wikidata="Q473588" start="1981" end="2009" title="Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz" label="Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997848" start="2057" end="2070" title="Princess Ozma" label="Princess Ozma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250364" start="2095" end="2109" title="The Road to Oz" label="The Road to Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q473588" start="3916" end="3944" title="Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz" label="Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250366" start="4175" end="4197" title="The Emerald City of Oz" label="The Emerald City of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569658" start="4408" end="4420" title="Glinda of Oz" label="Glinda of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q449234" start="4611" end="4631" title="Ruth Plumly Thompson" label="Ruth Plumly Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761670" start="4758" end="4778" title="The Royal Book of Oz" label="The Royal Book of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835867" start="4801" end="4810" title="Scarecrow (Oz)" label="Scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="4864" end="4873" title="Genealogy" label="Genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45111" start="5089" end="5102" title="John R. Neill" label="John R. Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761849" start="5116" end="5133" title="The Runaway in Oz" label="The Runaway in Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271157" start="5276" end="5320" title="Queer Visitors from the Marvelous Land of Oz" label="Queer Visitors from the Marvelous Land of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565651" start="5357" end="5371" title="Walt McDougall" label="Walt McDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990060" start="6126" end="6153" title="The Wizard of Oz (1902 stage play)" label="1902 musical stage adaption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775406" start="6220" end="6234" title="The Woggle-Bug (musical)" label="The Woggle-Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086894" start="6266" end="6275" title="Fred Mace" label="Fred Mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q317574" start="6305" end="6317" title="Mack Sennett" label="Mack Sennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659895" start="6473" end="6485" title="Sydney Deane" label="Sydney Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149038" start="7011" end="7018" title="colored" label="colored"/>
<link wikidata="Q880808" start="7035" end="7044" title="blackface" label="blackface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452788" start="7107" end="7120" title="love interest" label="love interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912727" start="7164" end="7170" title="Jinjur" label="Jinjur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031274" start="7403" end="7422" title="The Woggle-Bug Book" label="The Woggle-Bug Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q296256" start="7481" end="7499" title="Philip José Farmer" label="Philip José Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="7539" end="7546" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230482" start="7553" end="7563" title="The Lovers (Farmer novella and novel)" label="The Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="7574" end="7590" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098215" start="7681" end="7709" title="Dorothy and the Wizard of Oz" label="Dorothy and the Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q107598247" start="7727" end="7740" title="J. P. Karliak" label="J. P. Karliak"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646931" wikidata="Q712170" url="?curid=646931" title="Richard Taylor (mathematician)">
<text>Richard Lawrence Taylor (born 19 May 1962) is a British mathematician working in the field of number theory. He is currently the Barbara Kimball Browning Professor in Humanities and Sciences at Stanford University.

Taylor received the 2002 Cole Prize, the 2007 Shaw Prize with Robert Langlands, and the 2015 Breakthrough Prize in Mathematics.

==Career==
He received his B.A. from Clare College, Cambridge. During his time at Cambridge, he was president of The Archimedeans in 1981 and 1982, following the resignation of his predecessor. He earned his Ph.D. in mathematics from Princeton University in 1988 after completing a doctoral dissertation, titled &quot;On congruences between modular forms&quot;, under the supervision of Andrew Wiles.

He was an assistant lecturer, lecturer, and then reader at the University of Cambridge from 1988 to 1995. From 1995 to 1996 he held the Savilian chair of geometry at Oxford University and Fellow of New College, Oxford. He was a professor of mathematics at Harvard University from 1996 to 2012, at one point becoming the Herchel Smith Professor of Pure Mathematics. He moved to the Institute for Advanced Study as the Robert and Luisa Fernholz Professorship from 2012 to 2019. He has been the Barbara Kimball Browning Professor in Humanities &amp; Sciences at Stanford University since 2018.

==Research==
One of the two papers containing the published proof of Fermat&#x27;s Last Theorem is a joint work of Taylor and Andrew Wiles.

In subsequent work, Taylor (along with Michael Harris) proved the local Langlands conjectures for GL(&quot;n&quot;) over a number field. A simpler proof was suggested almost at the same time by Guy Henniart, and ten years later by Peter Scholze.

Taylor, together with Christophe Breuil, Brian Conrad and Fred Diamond, completed the proof of the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture, by performing quite heavy technical computations in the case of additive reduction.

In 2008, Taylor, following the ideas of Michael Harris and building on his joint work with Laurent Clozel, Michael Harris, and Nick Shepherd-Barron, announced a proof of the Sato–Tate conjecture, for elliptic curves with non-integral j-invariant. This partial proof of the Sato–Tate conjecture uses Wiles&#x27;s theorem about modularity of semistable elliptic curves.

==Awards and honors==
He received the Whitehead Prize in 1990, the Fermat Prize and the Ostrowski Prize in 2001, the Cole Prize of the American Mathematical Society in 2002, and the Shaw Prize for Mathematics in 2007. He received the 2015 Breakthrough Prize in Mathematics &quot;for numerous breakthrough results in the theory of automorphic forms, including the Taniyama–Weil conjecture, the local Langlands conjecture for general linear groups, and the Sato–Tate conjecture.&quot;

He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1995. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society. In 2015 he was inducted into the National Academy of Sciences.
He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2018.

==Personal life==
Taylor is the son of British physicist John C. Taylor. He is married and has two children.

==References==
==External links==
*His home page at the Institute for Advanced Study
*Autobiography upon Shaw Prize acceptance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q712170" start="0" end="23" title="Richard Taylor (mathematician)" label="Richard Lawrence Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="94" end="107" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="194" end="213" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q375668" start="241" end="251" title="Cole Prize" label="Cole Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q584250" start="262" end="272" title="Shaw Prize" label="Shaw Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q711278" start="278" end="294" title="Robert Langlands" label="Robert Langlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278380" start="309" end="342" title="Breakthrough Prize in Mathematics" label="Breakthrough Prize in Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="372" end="376" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q760967" start="382" end="406" title="Clare College, Cambridge" label="Clare College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="427" end="436" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13538733" start="458" end="474" title="The Archimedeans" label="The Archimedeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="553" end="558" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="579" end="599" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q870797" start="686" end="698" title="modular form" label="modular form"/>
<link wikidata="Q184433" start="732" end="744" title="Andrew Wiles" label="Andrew Wiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755172" start="883" end="909" title="Savilian chair of geometry" label="Savilian chair of geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="913" end="930" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="945" end="964" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1003" end="1021" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736301" start="1067" end="1110" title="Herchel Smith Professor of Pure Mathematics" label="Herchel Smith Professor of Pure Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="1128" end="1156" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1306" end="1325" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q132469" start="1408" end="1434" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184433" start="1465" end="1477" title="Andrew Wiles" label="Andrew Wiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927708" start="1519" end="1533" title="Michael Harris (mathematician)" label="Michael Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664175" start="1546" end="1573" title="local Langlands conjectures" label="local Langlands conjectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q524607" start="1578" end="1595" title="General linear group" label="GL(&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q616608" start="1603" end="1615" title="number field" label="number field"/>
<link wikidata="Q730373" start="1674" end="1686" title="Guy Henniart" label="Guy Henniart"/>
<link wikidata="Q98034" start="1711" end="1724" title="Peter Scholze" label="Peter Scholze"/>
<link wikidata="Q370140" start="1749" end="1766" title="Christophe Breuil" label="Christophe Breuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q912029" start="1768" end="1780" title="Brian Conrad" label="Brian Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q356638" start="1785" end="1797" title="Fred Diamond" label="Fred Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q649469" start="1826" end="1853" title="Taniyama–Shimura conjecture" label="Taniyama–Shimura conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147415" start="2031" end="2045" title="Laurent Clozel" label="Laurent Clozel"/>
<link wikidata="Q470475" start="2067" end="2087" title="Nick Shepherd-Barron" label="Nick Shepherd-Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993331" start="2114" end="2134" title="Sato–Tate conjecture" label="Sato–Tate conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q268493" start="2140" end="2154" title="elliptic curve" label="elliptic curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q287419" start="2174" end="2185" title="j-invariant" label="j-invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814850" start="2347" end="2362" title="Whitehead Prize" label="Whitehead Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367879" start="2376" end="2388" title="Fermat Prize" label="Fermat Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q690881" start="2397" end="2412" title="Ostrowski Prize" label="Ostrowski Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q375668" start="2426" end="2436" title="Cole Prize" label="Cole Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="2444" end="2473" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q584250" start="2491" end="2501" title="Shaw Prize" label="Shaw Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278380" start="2548" end="2581" title="Breakthrough Prize in Mathematics" label="Breakthrough Prize in Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134435" start="2639" end="2655" title="automorphic form" label="automorphic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q649469" start="2672" end="2696" title="Taniyama–Weil conjecture" label="Taniyama–Weil conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664175" start="2702" end="2728" title="local Langlands conjecture" label="local Langlands conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q524607" start="2733" end="2753" title="general linear group" label="general linear group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993331" start="2764" end="2784" title="Sato–Tate conjecture" label="Sato–Tate conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="2810" end="2837" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="2881" end="2910" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="2945" end="2973" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="2997" end="3027" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627065" start="3095" end="3109" title="John Clayton Taylor" label="John C. Taylor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646933" wikidata="Q155939" url="?curid=646933" title="Triangular bipyramid">
<text>&lt;/math&gt;
 | dual = triangular prism
 | angle = As a Johnson solid:
 | properties = convex,&lt;br&gt;composite,&lt;br&gt;face-transitive
A triangular bipyramid is a hexahedron with six triangular faces constructed by attaching two tetrahedra face-to-face. The same shape is also known as a triangular dipyramid or trigonal bipyramid. If these tetrahedra are regular, all faces of a triangular bipyramid are equilateral. It is an example of a deltahedron, composite polyhedron, and Johnson solid.

Many polyhedra are related to the triangular bipyramid, such as similar shapes derived from different approaches and the triangular prism as its dual polyhedron. Applications of a triangular bipyramid include trigonal bipyramidal molecular geometry which describes its atom cluster, a solution of the Thomson problem, and the representation of color order systems by the eighteenth century.

== Special cases ==
=== As a right bipyramid ===
Like other bipyramids, a triangular bipyramid can be constructed by attaching two tetrahedra face-to-face. These tetrahedra cover their triangular base, and the resulting polyhedron has six triangles, five vertices, and nine edges. A triangular bipyramid is said to be &quot;right&quot; if the tetrahedra are symmetrically regular and both of their apices are on a line passing through the center of the base; otherwise, it is &quot;oblique&quot;.
According to Steinitz&#x27;s theorem, a graph can be represented as the skeleton of a polyhedron if it is a planar (the edges of the graph do not cross, but intersect at the point) and three-connected graph (one of any two vertices leaves a connected subgraph when removed). A triangular bipyramid is represented by a graph with nine edges, constructed by adding one vertex to the vertices of a wheel graph representing tetrahedra.

Like other right bipyramids, a triangular bipyramid has three-dimensional point-group symmetry, the dihedral group formula_1 of order twelve: the appearance of a triangular bipyramid is unchanged as it rotated by one-, two-thirds, and full angle around the axis of symmetry (a line passing through two vertices and the base&#x27;s center vertically), and it has mirror symmetry with any bisector of the base; it is also symmetrical by reflection across a horizontal plane. A triangular bipyramid is face-transitive, or isohedral.

=== As a Johnson solid ===
If the tetrahedra are regular, all edges of a triangular bipyramid are equal in length and form equilateral triangular faces. A polyhedron with only equilateral triangles as faces is called a deltahedron. There are eight convex deltahedra, one of which is a triangular bipyramid with regular polygonal faces. A convex polyhedron in which all of its faces are regular polygons is the Johnson solid, and every convex deltahedron is a Johnson solid. A triangular bipyramid with regular faces is numbered as the twelfth Johnson solid formula_2. It is an example of a composite polyhedron because it is constructed by attaching two regular tetrahedra.

A triangular bipyramid&#x27;s surface area formula_3 is six times that of each triangle. Its volume formula_4 can be calculated by slicing it into two tetrahedra and adding their volume. In the case of edge length formula_5, this is:
formula_6

The dihedral angle of a triangular bipyramid can be obtained by adding the dihedral angle of two regular tetrahedra. The dihedral angle of a triangular bipyramid between adjacent triangular faces is that of the regular tetrahedron: 70.5 degrees. In an edge where two tetrahedra are attached, the dihedral angle of adjacent triangles is twice that: 141.1 degrees.

== Related polyhedra ==

Some types of triangular bipyramids may be derived in different ways. The Kleetope of a polyhedron is a construction involving the attachment of pyramids. A triangular bipyramid&#x27;s Kleetope can be constructed from a triangular bipyramid by attaching tetrahedra to each of its faces, replacing them with three other triangles; the skeleton of the resulting polyhedron represents the Goldner–Harary graph. Another type of triangular bipyramid results from cutting off its vertices, a process known as truncation.

Bipyramids are the dual polyhedron of prisms. This means the bipyramids&#x27; vertices correspond to the faces of a prism, and the edges between pairs of vertices of one correspond to the edges between pairs of faces of the other; doubling it results in the original polyhedron. A triangular bipyramid is the dual polyhedron of a triangular prism, and vice versa. A triangular prism has five faces, nine edges, and six vertices, with the same symmetry as a triangular bipyramid.

== Applications ==

The Thomson problem concerns the minimum energy configuration of charged particles on a sphere. A triangular bipyramid is a known solution in the case of five electrons, placing vertices of a triangular bipyramid within a sphere. This solution is aided by a mathematically rigorous computer.

A chemical compound&#x27;s trigonal bipyramidal molecular geometry may be described as the atom cluster of a triangular bipyramid. This molecule has a main-group element without an active lone pair, described by a model which predicts the geometry of molecules known as VSEPR theory. Examples of this structure include phosphorus pentafluoride and phosphorus pentachloride in the gaseous phase.

In color theory, the triangular bipyramid was used to represent the three-dimensional color-order system in primary colors. German astronomer Tobias Mayer wrote in 1758 that each of its vertices represents a color: white and black are the top and bottom axial vertices, respectively, and the rest of the vertices are red, blue, and yellow.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1193827" start="24" end="40" title="triangular prism" label="triangular prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193657" start="88" end="94" title="Convex set" label="convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q130244125" start="105" end="114" title="composite polyhedron" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847067" start="125" end="140" title="face-transitive" label="face-transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q155939" start="143" end="163" title="Triangular bipyramid" label="triangular bipyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q668113" start="169" end="179" title="hexahedron" label="hexahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="235" end="245" title="Tetrahedron" label="tetrahedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q155939" start="294" end="314" title="Triangular bipyramid" label="triangular dipyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q155939" start="318" end="336" title="Triangular bipyramid" label="trigonal bipyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="411" end="422" title="Equilateral triangle" label="equilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140112" start="446" end="457" title="deltahedron" label="deltahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q130244125" start="459" end="479" title="composite polyhedron" label="composite polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059659" start="485" end="498" title="Johnson solid" label="Johnson solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193827" start="622" end="638" title="triangular prism" label="triangular prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053857" start="646" end="661" title="dual polyhedron" label="dual polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867924" start="710" end="749" title="trigonal bipyramidal molecular geometry" label="trigonal bipyramidal molecular geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22302226" start="770" end="782" title="atom cluster" label="atom cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795912" start="802" end="817" title="Thomson problem" label="Thomson problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294018" start="845" end="864" title="Color model" label="color order systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076140" start="953" end="962" title="bipyramid" label="bipyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26401" start="1148" end="1156" title="Vertex (geometry)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858200" start="1291" end="1297" title="Apex (geometry)" label="apices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606897" start="1403" end="1426" title="Steinitz&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Steinitz&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="1430" end="1435" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154570" start="1462" end="1470" title="n-skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q547823" start="1498" end="1504" title="Planar graph" label="planar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115621" start="1575" end="1596" title="k-vertex-connected graph" label="three-connected graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q948887" start="1785" end="1796" title="wheel graph" label="wheel graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="1810" end="1820" title="tetrahedra" label="tetrahedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208207" start="1879" end="1917" title="Point groups in three dimensions" label="three-dimensional point-group symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q558339" start="1923" end="1937" title="dihedral group" label="dihedral group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886264" start="2080" end="2096" title="Axial symmetry" label="axis of symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955882" start="2185" end="2200" title="mirror symmetry" label="mirror symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847067" start="2322" end="2337" title="face-transitive" label="face-transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="2477" end="2499" title="Equilateral triangle" label="equilateral triangular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140112" start="2573" end="2584" title="deltahedron" label="deltahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q714886" start="2665" end="2680" title="regular polygon" label="regular polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059659" start="2764" end="2777" title="Johnson solid" label="Johnson solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q130244125" start="2944" end="2964" title="composite polyhedron" label="composite polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="3008" end="3026" title="Tetrahedron" label="regular tetrahedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q911907" start="3278" end="3292" title="dihedral angle" label="dihedral angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670289" start="3737" end="3745" title="Kleetope" label="Kleetope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115488" start="4049" end="4069" title="Goldner–Harary graph" label="Goldner–Harary graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847476" start="4166" end="4176" title="Truncation (geometry)" label="truncation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053857" start="4198" end="4213" title="dual polyhedron" label="dual polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q180544" start="4217" end="4223" title="Prism (geometry)" label="prisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193827" start="4509" end="4525" title="triangular prism" label="triangular prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795912" start="4683" end="4698" title="Thomson problem" label="Thomson problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414689" start="4892" end="4907" title="Circumscribed sphere" label="within a sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="4974" end="4991" title="chemical compound" label="chemical compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867924" start="4999" end="5038" title="trigonal bipyramidal molecular geometry" label="trigonal bipyramidal molecular geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22302226" start="5063" end="5075" title="atom cluster" label="atom cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q428830" start="5123" end="5141" title="main-group element" label="main-group element"/>
<link wikidata="Q804644" start="5160" end="5169" title="lone pair" label="lone pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q719461" start="5242" end="5254" title="VSEPR theory" label="VSEPR theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q414652" start="5291" end="5315" title="phosphorus pentafluoride" label="phosphorus pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q283427" start="5320" end="5344" title="phosphorus pentachloride" label="phosphorus pentachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="5360" end="5365" title="Phase (matter)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520130" start="5371" end="5383" title="color theory" label="color theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5454" end="5490" title="Primary color#Color order systems" label="color-order system in primary colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q60406" start="5510" end="5522" title="Tobias Mayer" label="Tobias Mayer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646935" wikidata="Q1001056" url="?curid=646935" title="Dalby, Queensland">
<text>Dalby () is a rural town and locality in the Western Downs Region, Queensland, Australia. In the , the locality of Dalby had a population of 12,758 people.

It is on the Darling Downs and is the administrative centre for the Western Downs Region.

== Geography ==
Dalby is approximately west of Toowoomba, west northwest of the state capital, Brisbane, east southeast of Roma and east southeast of Charleville at the junction of the Warrego, Moonie and Bunya Highways. State Route 82 also passes through Dalby. It enters from the north as Dalby–Jandowae Road and exits to the south as Dalby–Cecil Plains Road. Dalby–Cooyar Road exits to the east.

Dalby is the centre of Australia&#x27;s richest grain and cotton growing area.

Mocattas Corner is a neighbourhood on the eastern boundary of the locality with Irvingdale (). It takes its name from the former Mocattas Corner railway station (), which in turn was named after George Gershon Mocatta, a pastoralist who took up the Cumkillenbar pastoral run in August 1849.

== Transport ==
=== Western railway line ===
The Western railway line passes through Dalby with a number of railway stations serving the locality:

* Baining railway station ()
* Yarrala railway station, now closed ()
* Tycanba railway station ()
* Dalby railway station in Hunter Street () serving the town
* Blaxland railway station ()

=== Glenmorgan railway line ===
The Glenmorgan railway line branches from the Western railway line just west of the Dalby railway station with the following railway stations within the locality of Dalby&quot;:

*Yumborra railway station, now closed ()
* Dalby West railway station ()
*Natcha railway station, serving the Dalby Butter Factory, now closed ()

=== Bell Branch railway line ===
The now-closed Bell Branch railway line also branched from the Western railway line with the following railway stations within the locality of Dalby:

* Bonyumba railway station ()
*Sanatorium railway station, serving the Dalby Sanatorium ()
* Mocattas Corner railway station ()

=== Airports ===
Dalby Aerodrome is an airport ().

There is a heliport at Dalby Hospital ().

== History ==

Baranggum (also known as Barrunggam, Barunggam Parrungoom and Murrumgama) is an Australian Aboriginal language spoken by the Baranggum people. The Baranggum language region includes the landscape within the local government boundaries of the Western Downs Regional Council, particularly Dalby, Tara, Jandowae and west towards Chinchilla.

Dalby was founded in the early 1840s at a place known locally as &quot;The Crossing&quot; on Myall Creek, a tributary of the Condamine River. The first settler was Henry Dennis, who explored the region and chose land for himself and others in the locality. Today an obelisk in Edward Street denotes the location where Dennis camped.

A small settlement was founded to assist travellers heading north to nearby Jimbour Station. The explorer Ludwig Leichhardt visited the area in 1844, on his way to Port Essington.

In February 1853, the New South Wales government sent the Deputy Surveyor General Captain Samuel Perry to the area to survey a township. In August of the following year, Charles Douglas Eastaughffe arrived with a document under the Seal of the NSW Government officially proclaiming &#x27;Dalby&#x27; a township. Eastaughffe was later appointed Chief Constable and remained in Dalby until his retirement.

The name of the town is believed to come from the village of Dalby on the Isle of Man and reflects immigration from the Isle of Man in the mid-19th century. The name was apparently chosen by Captain Samuel Perry when he surveyed the settlement in 1853.

Myall Creek Post Office also opened in 1854 in Roche&#x27;s store, with Mr. Simpson as the first postmaster. It was renamed Dalby in 1855.

In 1859, Dalby became part of the new Colony of Queensland.

Dalby State School opened on 1 June 1861. In 1869, the school split into Dalby Boys State School Dalby Girls State School. In 1885, the girls&#x27; school became Dalby Girls &amp; Infants State School. In 1893, the two schools were combined as Dalby State School. In 1914, the school expanded to include a secondary school, which closed in 1954, due to the establishment of a separate secondary school, Dalby State High School.

In August 1863, Dalby was officially proclaimed a municipality, the Borough of Dalby, in the Queensland Government Gazette.

Dalby Non-Vested School opened as a Roman Catholic girls school in 1864 and in 1866 became a non-vested school (the teachers&#x27; salaries were paid by the Queensland Government but the government did not operate the school). Circa 1880, the school either closed or continued without government funding.

On Sunday 5 August 1866, Bishop James Quinn dedicated St Joseph&#x27;s Catholic Church.

Dalby was linked by the Western railway line to Ipswich on 16 April 1868.

On Sunday 20 June 1869, the first Presbyterian church was opened in Dalby. Reverend George Grimm had conducting regular services since 1865.

St Columba&#x27;s School was a Catholic primary school which was opened in 1877 by the Sisters of Mercy. In 2008, it merged with St Mary&#x27;s College to create Our Lady of the Southern Cross College.

From 1873 to 1949, the electoral district of Dalby was an electoral district of the Legislative Assembly of Queensland.

Mocatta&#x27;s Corner Provisional School opened on circa 1887. On 1 January 1909, it became Mocatta&#x27;s Corner State School. It closed in 1925. It was on the south-west corner of the junction of Dalby Cooyar Road and Mocattas Corner Road ().

Dalby was believed to have a healthy climate and in October 1900 the Queensland Government opened the Jubilee Sanitorium for consumptive patients. The name &quot;Jubilee&quot; commemorates the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria. In 1904 the Dalby Town Council erected therapeutic thermal baths using artesian water from a local bore for those wishing to improve their health by &quot;taking the waters&quot;. In 1938, the council closed the artesian baths as interest in &quot;taking the waters&quot; was declining. Medical opinion became increasingly doubtful of the benefits of bathing in mineral waters, favouring drugs and physiotherapy as better treatments. It closed in January 1938 with its remaining patients transferred to Westwood Sanatorium.

Kincora Provisional School opened in 1908 &quot;via Dalby&quot; and was renamed Moonie River Provisional School circa December 1908. It closed circa 1916.

On 8 December 1912, the Dalby Methodist Church in Condamine Street was officially opened by the Reverend Henry Youngman, the President of the Queensland Methodist Conference. In March 1949 it was announced that a new church would be built with the original church to be moved on the site and be used as a church hall. On 1 October 1949 the foundation stone for the new Dalby Methodist Church was laid by Reverend Henry William Prouse, the President of the Queensland Methodist Conference. Construction commenced in May 1950, but there were delays in obtaining building materials until August 1951. The new church was dedicated on Saturday 8 December 1951 by Reverend Tom Hardy Blackburn. When the Methodist Church amalgamated into the Uniting Church in Australia in 1977, it became the Dalby Uniting Church.

The Dalby War Memorial was unveiled by the Queensland Governor, Matthew Nathan, on 26 July 1922.

The Paragon Cafe was purchased in 1935 by Milton (Miltiadis) Dimitrios Samios part of the cultural phenomenon of Greek cafes in Queensland. Paragon Cafe employed three men and six women with taking increasing from 90 pounds to 200 pounds within the first year of trading.

The Dalby Olympic Swimming Pool complex was constructed in 1936 and is the earliest identified Olympic standard pool in Queensland constructed outside Brisbane.

Dalby State High School opened on 2 February 1954. Bunya Campus was acquired by Dalby State High School at the start of 2011 and has since provided students who live out of the catchment area the opportunity to attend Dalby State High School and participate in all it has to offer as a boarding student.

St Mary&#x27;s College was a Catholic secondary school opened on 21 January 1963 by the Christian Brothers. In 2008, it merged with St Columba&#x27;s School to create Our Lady of the Southern Cross College.

Dalby South State School opened on 29 March 1965.

Dalby Christian School was opened on 1 February 1981 by the Dalby Gospel Chapel.

The Christian Outreach College opened on 28 January 1984. It closed on 18 September 1991.

In 2004, Dalby began treating its water with state-of-the-art reverse osmosis process. The first Reverse Osmosis plant, opened in 2004, was the first in Queensland. The second and larger plant opened in 2011.

In 2006, the opening of Dalby Shoppingworld at the northern end of Cunningham Street has brought new life to the Dalby CBD. The centre includes Woolworths, Big W, Amcal and other specialty shops. As part of nationwide restructuring, Target Country closed its store in January 2021 and was replaced by K Hub, which opened in February.

Dalby Library opened in 2014.

In 2016, Dalby&#x27;s population was increasing rapidly with many new estates created and subdivisions made. Some notable new estates include Sunnyside Estate, Heritage Gardens, Callistemon Park and a new estate on the Warrego Highway side of Sandalwood Avenue.

== Demographics ==
In the , the locality of Dalby had a population of 12,719 people. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people made up 7.0% of the population. 84.0% of people were born in Australia. The next most common countries of birth were Philippines 1.9%, New Zealand 1.3%, England 1.1% and South Africa 0.8%. 88.7% of people spoke only English at home. Other languages spoken at home included Tagalog at 1.0%. The most common responses for religion were Catholic 26.3%, Anglican 19.6% and No Religion 16.9%.

In the , the locality of Dalby had a population of 12,758 people.

== Heritage listings ==

Dalby has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:

* 133 Cunningham Street: former Dalby Town Council Chambers and Offices
* 153 Cunningham Street: St John&#x27;s Anglican Church
* 169 Cunningham Street: St Columba&#x27;s Convent
* 21 New Street: Dalby Fire Station
* 28B Nicholson Street: Dalby State High School
* Patrick Street: Dalby War Memorial and Gates
* 58 Patrick Street: Dalby Olympic Swimming Pool

== Economy ==
Industry in Dalby includes large-scale engineering, coal mining, and fuels (ethanol). Dalby is the centre of a diverse and productive agricultural area with rich black soil allowing the production of crops such as wheat, cotton and sorghum. Livestock raising including pigs, cattle and sheep is also popular. Two cotton gins are situated within of the town.

Dalby is to be the site of the first dry mill grain-to-ethanol plant constructed in Australia (the first plant built specifically for the production of ethanol for fuel since World War II).

=== Power ===
The local area is developing an energy-based economy with a large coal-fired power station and a number of coal mines and natural gas bores being established to the west of Dalby. A local company has been awarded a contract to establish wind turbines on adjacent farm land.

Approximately west of Dalby is the Kogan Creek Power Station. This A$1.2 billion project is a 750-megawatt coal-fired power station, with adjacent coal mine being developed at the small town of Kogan, which is roughly equidistant between Dalby, Chinchilla, and Tara.

== Education ==

Dalby State School is a government primary (Preparatory to Year 6) school for boys and girls at 155 Cunningham Street (). In 2017, the school had an enrolment of 579 students with 43 teachers (39 full-time equivalent) and 35 non-teaching staff (23 full-time equivalent) and has a special education program. It is one of the oldest state primary schools in Queensland. 

Dalby South State School is a government primary (Early Childhood to Year 6) school for boys and girls at 65 Owen Street (corner of Bunya Street, ). In 2017, the school had an enrolment of 653 students with 46 teachers (43 full-time equivalent) and 32 non-teaching staff (21 full-time equivalent). It includes a special education program (Preparatory to Year 10).

Our Lady of the Southern Cross College is a Catholic primary and secondary (Preparatory to Year 12) school for boys and girls at 2 Nicholson Street (). In 2017, the school had an enrolment of 594 students with 48 teachers (44 full-time equivalent) and 31 non-teaching staff (20 full-time equivalent). It has a special education program.

Dalby Christian College is a private primary and secondary (Preparatory to Year 12) school for boys and girls at 2A Mary Street (). It is operated by the Christian Community Ministries. In 2017, the school had an enrolment of 328 students with 25 teachers (24 full-time equivalent) and 17 non-teaching staff (13 full-time equivalent). It has an early learning centre and boarding for secondary students as well as a special education program.

Dalby State High School is a government secondary (7–12) school for boys and girls at 26 Nicholson Street (). In 2017, the school had an enrolment of 1,040 students with 94 teachers (89 full-time equivalent) and 71 non-teaching staff (54 full-time equivalent). It includes a special education program. The school has a boarding facility for boys and girls at 463 Bunya highway (). Many students from small towns surrounding Dalby (such as Jandowae and Warra) attend Dalby State High School, as these communities do not have schools which provide senior level education. The school also performs an annual musical, usually in late May, with performances running for a full week. It is produced and directed by teachers at the school and stars students from all year levels.

== Local media ==
There are two locally published newspapers, the &quot;Dalby Herald&quot; and &quot;Northern Downs News&quot;, as well as the &quot;Dalby Magazine&quot;.

Dalby also has its own community radio station, 89.9 FM 4DDD, which was founded on 26 January 1992.

Dalby receives most commercial and ABC radio and television services from Toowoomba, the nearest regional city. Local news stories from Dalby and other Western Downs communities are often featured on WIN News, a regional television news bulletin compiled in Toowoomba.

== Facilities ==
Water and sewerage treatment services are provided by Western Downs Regional Council. The town has made a ground-breaking deal with nearby gas companies by taking water from gas fields. It has been noted that the town will have a definite water supply for at least another 30 years, taking into account demographic trends.

There is also the Dalby Cemetery, a monumental cemetery.

== Amenities ==
Western Downs Regional Council operates a public library at 107 Drayton Street. It is open 10am to 5.30pm Monday to Friday and 10am to 12.30pm Saturday. Dalby Library has two Creative Studios which have the latest in content creation tools, professional equipment and software, music production and recording, and digital production and editing to help create and share projects.

St Mark&#x27;s Lutheran Church is at 58A Condamine Street ().

Dalby Uniting Church is at 71-73 Condamine Street ().

The Springvale Kupunn branch of the Queensland Country Women&#x27;s Association meets at 52 Cunningham Street.

== Sport ==
Dalby has a strong rugby League history with a senior rugby league team in the Toowoomba Rugby League known as The Dalby Diehard (founded 1980). The Junior Rugby League Team, The Dalby Devils, that participate in to Toowoomba Junior Rugby League.

Dalby has an Australian rules football team, the Dalby Swans (founded 1980) based at the Dalby AFL oval which fields men&#x27;s, women&#x27;s and junior teams in the AFL Darling Downs competition. It has produced top level players like Zimmorlei Farquharson.

Condamine, 124 kilometres away has a rugby union team which compete in the Darling Downs Rugby Union competition, against such teams as the University of Southern Queensland Rugby Union Club, Toowoomba Rangers Rugby Union Club, Toowoomba City Rugby Club, Roma Echidnas, the Condamine Cods, the Dalby Wheatmen, the Goondiwindi Emus, the Warwick Water Rats and the University of Queensland Rugby Union Club (Gatton Campus).

== Attractions ==

Dalby has a monument to the &quot;Cactoblastis cactorum&quot; in a park by the Myall Creek which runs through the town. The Argentinian caterpillar successfully eradicated the prickly pear in the 1920s.

== Climate ==
Dalby has a humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot; in the Köppen climate classification) and being located just to the west of the Great Dividing Range it is hotter and less humid in summer and colder and drier in winter than nearby locations on the other side of the range. Dalby has had a recording weather station since 1893, but that was replaced in 1992 by another station at the Dalby Airport. The town&#x27;s highest recorded temperature was on 4 December 1913, while the coldest was on 5 July 1895. The annual rainfall is , the majority of which falls as thunderstorms in the summer months.

Dalby experienced its worst floods since 1981 in late December 2010. The town&#x27;s water purification system was flooded, resulting in water restrictions that have hampered clean-up efforts. 112,500 litres (24,700 imp gal; 29,700 US gal) of water were transported to the town of 14,000 residents. In early March 2013, Dalby received another severe flood, cutting the town in two after of rain was recorded over a few days. Flood waters peaked at 3.21 metres and a number of homes received water damage.

== Notable residents ==
* Luke and Cody Cook, Winners of &quot;House Rules&quot; (2016)
*Brodie Croft, rugby league player 
*B. R. Dionysius, poet
*Beau Fermor, rugby league player
*Zimmorlei Farquharson, Australian rules footballer
*Jayson Gillham, classical pianist
*David Gleeson, golfer
*Stirling Hinchliffe, Queensland Labor politician
*Jerry Jerome, stockman and boxer
*Alan Jones, radio host and rugby coach
* Sir James Killen, Liberal MP for Moreton 1955–1983
*George Lee, gliding champion
*Jason Little, former Australian professional rugby union player
*Andrew McCullough, rugby league player
*Andrew McGahan, author
* Mark O&#x27;Shea, of the country music duo O&#x27;Shea
*Steve Price, rugby league player
*Margot Robbie, actress
*John Size, Australian Racing Hall of Fame trainer
*Hugh Sweeny, first Australian prisoner of war in World War II
*Carl Webb- NRL, Queensland and Australian Rugby League Player
*Stephen Wilson, Paralympic athlete

== See also ==

* Bunya Mountains

== References ==
=== Attribution ===
== External links ==

*Dalby Town Council official site
*University of Queensland: Queensland Places: Dalby
*Dalby Community
* Town map of Dalby, 1985 east west
* Annual reports Dalby Hospitals Board 1951 to 1990, State Library of Queensland
* Queensland Small Towns Documentary Project 2013: Dalby and Moranbah, State Library of Queensland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1001056" start="0" end="5" title="Dalby, Queensland" label="Dalby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632426" start="29" end="37" title="Suburbs and localities (Australia)" label="locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066815" start="45" end="65" title="Western Downs Region" label="Western Downs Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="67" end="77" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166361" start="170" end="183" title="Darling Downs" label="Darling Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066815" start="225" end="245" title="Western Downs Region" label="Western Downs Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q478302" start="295" end="304" title="Toowoomba" label="Toowoomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="343" end="351" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063327" start="371" end="375" title="Roma, Queensland" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q656048" start="398" end="409" title="Charleville, Queensland" label="Charleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q914124" start="433" end="440" title="Warrego Highway" label="Warrego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338243" start="442" end="448" title="Moonie Highway" label="Moonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010039" start="453" end="466" title="Bunya Highway" label="Bunya Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951065" start="539" end="558" title="Dalby–Jandowae Road" label="Dalby–Jandowae Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950867" start="585" end="608" title="Dalby–Cecil Plains Road" label="Dalby–Cecil Plains Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951406" start="610" end="627" title="Dalby–Cooyar Road" label="Dalby–Cooyar Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q55466714" start="808" end="818" title="Irvingdale, Queensland" label="Irvingdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288494" start="1069" end="1089" title="Western railway line, Queensland" label="Western railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935400" start="1269" end="1290" title="Dalby railway station" label="Dalby railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568640" start="1395" end="1418" title="Glenmorgan railway line" label="Glenmorgan railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883132" start="1765" end="1789" title="Bell Branch railway line" label="Bell Branch railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q12692382" start="2047" end="2062" title="Dalby Aerodrome" label="Dalby Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865914" start="2140" end="2149" title="Barunggam language" label="Baranggum"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="2220" end="2250" title="Australian Aboriginal language" label="Australian Aboriginal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q48791727" start="2265" end="2281" title="Baruŋgam" label="Baranggum people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066815" start="2382" end="2412" title="Western Downs Region" label="Western Downs Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935570" start="2434" end="2438" title="Tara, Queensland" label="Tara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161838" start="2440" end="2448" title="Jandowae" label="Jandowae"/>
<link wikidata="Q985273" start="2466" end="2476" title="Chinchilla, Queensland" label="Chinchilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q805500" start="2604" end="2619" title="Condamine River" label="Condamine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="2745" end="2752" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q57763" start="2919" end="2936" title="Ludwig Leichhardt" label="Ludwig Leichhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104686" start="2977" end="2991" title="Port Essington" label="Port Essington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076946" start="3164" end="3191" title="Charles Douglas Eastaughffe" label="Charles Douglas Eastaughffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210270" start="3460" end="3465" title="Dalby, Isle of Man" label="Dalby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="3473" end="3484" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410805" start="3590" end="3610" title="Samuel Augustus Perry" label="Captain Samuel Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878838" start="3827" end="3851" title="Separation of Queensland" label="new Colony of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559118" start="4351" end="4367" title="Borough of Dalby" label="Borough of Dalby"/>
<link wikidata="Q24185355" start="4376" end="4405" title="Queensland Government Gazette" label="Queensland Government Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364209" start="4739" end="4745" title="Roman Catholic Bishop of Brisbane" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15915758" start="4746" end="4757" title="James Quinn (bishop)" label="James Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288494" start="4827" end="4847" title="Western railway line, Queensland" label="Western railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009253" start="4851" end="4858" title="Ipswich, Queensland" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q21538137" start="4962" end="4974" title="George Grimm (Presbyterian minister)" label="George Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142854" start="5107" end="5123" title="Sisters of Mercy" label="Sisters of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355301" start="5246" end="5273" title="electoral district of Dalby" label="electoral district of Dalby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356184" start="5281" end="5299" title="Queensland Legislative Assembly electoral districts" label="electoral district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518214" start="5307" end="5341" title="Legislative Assembly of Queensland" label="Legislative Assembly of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="5659" end="5680" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="5715" end="5726" title="Tuberculosis" label="consumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q107395117" start="5783" end="5816" title="Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria" label="Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559118" start="5830" end="5848" title="Dalby Town Council" label="Dalby Town Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="5917" end="5921" title="Water well" label="bore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946461" start="5973" end="5990" title="taking the waters" label="taking the waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946461" start="6066" end="6083" title="taking the waters" label="taking the waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q105386624" start="6604" end="6618" title="Henry Youngman (minister)" label="Henry Youngman"/>
<link wikidata="Q523620" start="7234" end="7261" title="Uniting Church in Australia" label="Uniting Church in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467097" start="7351" end="7370" title="Queensland Governor" label="Queensland Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q973005" start="7372" end="7386" title="Matthew Nathan" label="Matthew Nathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83382213" start="7519" end="7544" title="Greek cafes in Queensland" label="Greek cafes in Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183950" start="7683" end="7710" title="Dalby Olympic Swimming Pool" label="Dalby Olympic Swimming Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q783988" start="8234" end="8252" title="Congregation of Christian Brothers" label="Christian Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q272175" start="8640" end="8655" title="reverse osmosis" label="reverse osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="8731" end="8741" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q607272" start="8932" end="8942" title="Woolworths Limited" label="Woolworths"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906646" start="8944" end="8949" title="Big W" label="Big W"/>
<link wikidata="Q63367373" start="8951" end="8956" title="Amcal" label="Amcal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685854" start="9021" end="9035" title="Target Australia" label="Target Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421682" start="9089" end="9094" title="Kmart Australia" label="K Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471925" start="10050" end="10065" title="heritage-listed" label="heritage-listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183971" start="10117" end="10156" title="Dalby Town Council Chambers and Offices" label="Dalby Town Council Chambers and Offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900495" start="10182" end="10212" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Anglican Church, Dalby" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183977" start="10238" end="10263" title="St Columba&amp;#x27;s Convent, Dalby" label="St Columba&amp;#x27;s Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183955" start="10281" end="10299" title="Dalby Fire Station" label="Dalby Fire Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817968" start="10324" end="10347" title="Dalby State High School" label="Dalby State High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23002813" start="10366" end="10394" title="Dalby War Memorial and Gates" label="Dalby War Memorial and Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183950" start="10416" end="10443" title="Dalby Olympic Swimming Pool" label="Dalby Olympic Swimming Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="10535" end="10542" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="10691" end="10698" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="10728" end="10732" title="pigs" label="pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10993" end="11005" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425761" start="11333" end="11358" title="Kogan Creek Power Station" label="Kogan Creek Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="11396" end="11404" title="megawatt" label="megawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28428588" start="11492" end="11497" title="Kogan, Queensland" label="Kogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q985273" start="11543" end="11553" title="Chinchilla, Queensland" label="Chinchilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935570" start="11559" end="11563" title="Tara, Queensland" label="Tara"/>
<link wikidata="Q212105" start="11863" end="11880" title="special education" label="special education"/>
<link wikidata="Q212105" start="12265" end="12282" title="special education" label="special education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111046" start="12318" end="12356" title="Our Lady of the Southern Cross College, Dalby" label="Our Lady of the Southern Cross College"/>
<link wikidata="Q212105" start="12628" end="12645" title="special education" label="special education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210272" start="12656" end="12679" title="Dalby Christian College" label="Dalby Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q212105" start="13072" end="13089" title="special education" label="special education"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817968" start="13100" end="13123" title="Dalby State High School" label="Dalby State High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161838" start="13539" end="13547" title="Jandowae" label="Jandowae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969912" start="13552" end="13557" title="Warra, Queensland" label="Warra"/>
<link wikidata="Q109700195" start="13946" end="13958" title="Dalby Herald" label="Dalby Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="14182" end="14185" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q478302" start="14221" end="14230" title="Toowoomba" label="Toowoomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950814" start="14347" end="14355" title="WIN News" label="WIN News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066815" start="14488" end="14518" title="Western Downs Regional Council" label="Western Downs Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="14794" end="14813" title="monumental cemetery" label="monumental cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740240" start="15367" end="15410" title="Queensland Country Women&amp;#x27;s Association" label="Queensland Country Women&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="15474" end="15486" title="rugby League" label="rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057011" start="15534" end="15556" title="Toowoomba Rugby League" label="Toowoomba Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="15716" end="15741" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651526" start="15869" end="15886" title="AFL Darling Downs" label="AFL Darling Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q110745898" start="15939" end="15960" title="Zimmorlei Farquharson" label="Zimmorlei Farquharson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="16000" end="16011" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189531" start="16038" end="16063" title="Darling Downs Rugby Union" label="Darling Downs Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989906" start="16417" end="16425" title="monument" label="monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q961141" start="16439" end="16460" title="Cactoblastis cactorum" label="Cactoblastis cactorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="16581" end="16593" title="Opuntia" label="prickly pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="16635" end="16660" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="16685" end="16714" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q192583" start="16758" end="16778" title="Great Dividing Range" label="Great Dividing Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q12692382" start="17012" end="17025" title="Dalby Airport" label="Dalby Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q837833" start="17233" end="17294" title="2010–2011 Queensland floods" label="experienced its worst floods since 1981 in late December 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q25217807" start="17796" end="17807" title="House Rules (season 4)" label="House Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q24688873" start="17822" end="17834" title="Brodie Croft" label="Brodie Croft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834161" start="17858" end="17873" title="B. R. Dionysius" label="B. R. Dionysius"/>
<link wikidata="Q96913227" start="17881" end="17892" title="Beau Fermor" label="Beau Fermor"/>
<link wikidata="Q110745898" start="17915" end="17936" title="Zimmorlei Farquharson" label="Zimmorlei Farquharson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061874" start="17967" end="17981" title="Jayson Gillham" label="Jayson Gillham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474334" start="18002" end="18015" title="David Gleeson (golfer)" label="David Gleeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617574" start="18025" end="18044" title="Stirling Hinchliffe" label="Stirling Hinchliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604512" start="18046" end="18062" title="Queensland Labor" label="Queensland Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183823" start="18075" end="18087" title="Jerry Jerome (boxer)" label="Jerry Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830529" start="18109" end="18119" title="Alan Jones (talkback host)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137315" start="18154" end="18166" title="James Killen" label="James Killen"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="18168" end="18175" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973781" start="18183" end="18190" title="Division of Moreton" label="Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541628" start="18202" end="18212" title="George Lee (pilot)" label="George Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q624161" start="18214" end="18221" title="gliding" label="gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162966" start="18232" end="18244" title="Jason Little (rugby union)" label="Jason Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846680" start="18297" end="18314" title="Andrew McCullough" label="Andrew McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846681" start="18337" end="18351" title="Andrew McGahan" label="Andrew McGahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071959" start="18405" end="18416" title="O&amp;#x27;Shea (band)" label="O&amp;#x27;Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613665" start="18418" end="18429" title="Steve Price (rugby league)" label="Steve Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924847" start="18452" end="18465" title="Margot Robbie" label="Margot Robbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133308" start="18476" end="18485" title="John Size" label="John Size"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824594" start="18487" end="18517" title="Australian Racing Hall of Fame" label="Australian Racing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932799" start="18527" end="18538" title="Hugh Sweeny" label="Hugh Sweeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="18557" end="18572" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18576" end="18588" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040941" start="18590" end="18599" title="Carl Webb" label="Carl Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610867" start="18653" end="18667" title="Stephen Wilson (athlete)" label="Stephen Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010045" start="18707" end="18722" title="Bunya Mountains" label="Bunya Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="18975" end="19002" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646955" wikidata="Q5076901" url="?curid=646955" title="Charles Dodge">
<text>Charles Dodge may refer to:

* Charles C. Dodge (1841–1910), Brigadier General during the American Civil War at the age of twenty-one
* Charles Dodge (composer) (born 1942), composer of electronic music</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5075980" start="31" end="47" title="Charles C. Dodge" label="Charles C. Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064137" start="136" end="160" title="Charles Dodge (composer)" label="Charles Dodge (composer)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646962" wikidata="Q433862" url="?curid=646962" title=".gb">
<text>.gb is a reserved Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for the United Kingdom, derived from [[.gb|G]]reat [[.gb|B]]ritain.

The domain was introduced with RFC 920 in October 1984 that set out the creation of ccTLD generally using country codes derived from the corresponding two-letter code in the ISO 3166-1 list. However, the .uk domain had been created separately a few months before the compilation of this list. Consequently, .gb was never widely used. It is no longer possible to register under this domain.

.gb was used for a number of years, mainly by British government organisations and commercial e-mail services using X.400-based e-mail infrastructure. This simplified translating between DNS domains and X.400 addresses, which used &quot;GB&quot; as a country code.

With the demise of X.400 e-mail and IANA&#x27;s general aim of one TLD per country, use of .gb declined; the domain remains in existence, but it is not currently open to new domain registrations.

As of 2024, there are at least three subdomains resolving through DNS (although none serve a website): codice_1, codice_2, and codice_3. They were originally owned by the Defence Research Agency, which became the Defence Evaluation and Research Agency in 1995 and was split into QinetiQ and the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory in 2001; the websites became defunct some time thereafter.

, Central Digital and Data Office&#x27;s (see Cabinet Office) intention is to inform ICANN early in 2023 that the UK wishes to retire .gb.

==References==
==External links==
* IANA .gb whois information
* JANET(UK) website 
* Last accessible copy of www.dra.hmg.gb in the Internet Archive
* Official country code for Britain = GB or UK? Email discussion on GB domain (2002) with historical zonefiles.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q433862" start="0" end="3" title=".gb" label=".gb"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="18" end="26" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="27" end="39" title="country code" label="country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="40" end="56" title="top-level domain" label="top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="58" end="63" title="ccTLD" label="ccTLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="73" end="87" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="102" end="131" title="Great Britain" label="[[.gb|G]]reat [[.gb|B]]ritain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25275" start="308" end="318" title="ISO 3166-1" label="ISO 3166-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q37913" start="338" end="341" title=".uk" label=".uk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="619" end="625" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q300851" start="641" end="646" title="X.400" label="X.400"/>
<link wikidata="Q300851" start="810" end="815" title="X.400" label="X.400"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="1054" end="1057" title="DNS" label="DNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021192" start="1159" end="1182" title="Defence Research Agency" label="Defence Research Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834769" start="1201" end="1239" title="Defence Evaluation and Research Agency" label="Defence Evaluation and Research Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759946" start="1267" end="1274" title="QinetiQ" label="QinetiQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251253" start="1283" end="1324" title="Defence Science and Technology Laboratory" label="Defence Science and Technology Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995" start="1431" end="1445" title="Cabinet Office" label="Cabinet Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="1470" end="1475" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646965" wikidata="Q80367" url="?curid=646965" title="Triumph Palace">
<text>Triumph Palace (, transliterated as &quot;Triumf Palas&quot;) is the tallest apartment building in Moscow and all of Europe. It is sometimes called the Eighth Sister because it is similar in appearance to the Seven Sisters skyscrapers built in Moscow under Joseph Stalin through the 1950s. Construction began in 2001 and was completed in 2006.

The 57-storey building, containing about 1,000 luxury apartments, was topped out on 20 December 2003, making it Europe&#x27;s and Russia&#x27;s tallest skyscraper at until the inauguration in 2007 of Moscow&#x27;s 268-metre Naberezhnaya Tower block C.

Triumph Palace is featured in detail in the 2009 Channel 4 series &quot;Vertical City&quot; (series 1, episode 8).

== Residents ==
Russian figures Dima Bilan, Marina Abrosimova, Alsu Abramova, Marina Zudina (theater and film actress), Alexey Pushkov (member of the Federation Council), Maxim Fadeev (producer) have apartments in Triumph Palace.

==See also==
*List of skyscrapers
*List of skyscrapers in Europe

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80367" start="0" end="14" title="Triumph Palace" label="Triumph Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453319" start="18" end="32" title="Romanization of Russian" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="77" end="95" title="apartment building" label="apartment building"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="99" end="105" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057816" start="152" end="165" title="Eighth Sister" label="Eighth Sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q521935" start="209" end="222" title="Seven Sisters (Moscow)" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="257" end="270" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q831691" start="352" end="358" title="storey" label="storey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344004" start="569" end="587" title="Naberezhnaya Tower" label="Naberezhnaya Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="647" end="656" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="670" end="683" title="Vertical City" label="Vertical City"/>
<link wikidata="Q42904" start="746" end="756" title="Dima Bilan" label="Dima Bilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127252" start="758" end="775" title="MakSim" label="Marina Abrosimova"/>
<link wikidata="Q270951" start="777" end="790" title="Alsou" label="Alsu Abramova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293186" start="792" end="805" title="Marina Zudina" label="Marina Zudina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384817" start="834" end="848" title="Aleksey Pushkov" label="Alexey Pushkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393147" start="885" end="897" title="Maxim Fadeev" label="Maxim Fadeev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779466" start="959" end="978" title="List of skyscrapers" label="List of skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q924418" start="980" end="1009" title="List of skyscrapers in Europe" label="List of skyscrapers in Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646966" wikidata="Q48832" url="?curid=646966" title="Tea tree oil">
<text>Tea tree oil, also known as melaleuca oil, is an essential oil with a fresh, camphoraceous odour and a colour that ranges from pale yellow to nearly colourless and clear. It is derived from the leaves of the tea tree, &quot;Melaleuca alternifolia&quot;, native to southeast Queensland and the northeast coast of New South Wales, Australia. The oil comprises many constituent chemicals, and its composition changes if it is exposed to air and oxidises. Commercial use of tea tree oil began in the 1920s, pioneered by the entrepreneur Arthur Penfold.

There is little evidence for the effectiveness of tea tree oil in treating mite-infected crusting of eyelids, although some claims of efficacy exist. In traditional medicine, it may be applied topically in low concentrations for skin diseases, although there is little evidence for efficacy.

Tea tree oil is neither a patented product nor an approved drug in the United States, although it has been used in skin care products and is approved as a complementary medicine for aromatherapy in Australia. It is poisonous if consumed by mouth and is unsafe for children.

==Uses==
Although tea tree oil is claimed to be useful for treating dandruff, acne, lice, herpes, insect bites, scabies, and skin fungal or bacterial infections, insufficient evidence exists to support any of these claims due to the limited quality of research. A 2015 Cochrane review of acne complementary therapies found a single low-quality trial showing benefit on skin lesions compared to placebo. Tea tree oil was also used during World War II to treat skin lesions of munitions factory workers.

According to the Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (CHMP) of the European Medicines Agency, traditional usage suggests that tea tree oil is a possible treatment for &quot;small, superficial wounds, insect bites, and small boils&quot; and that it may reduce itching in minor cases of athlete&#x27;s foot. The CHMP states that tea tree oil products should not be used on people under 12 years of age.

Tea tree oil is not recommended for treating nail fungus because it is yet to be proven effective, It is not recommended for treating head lice in children because its effectiveness and safety have not been established and it could cause skin irritation or allergic reactions. , there is uncertainty regarding the effectiveness of 5-50% tea tree oil as an effective treatment for demodex mite infestations, although products claiming efficacy exist.

== Toxicity ==
Tea tree oil is highly toxic when ingested orally. It may cause drowsiness, confusion, hallucinations, coma, unsteadiness, weakness, vomiting, diarrhoea, nausea, blood-cell abnormalities, and severe rashes. It should be kept away from pets and children. It should not be used in or around the mouth.

Application of tea tree oil to the skin can cause an allergic reaction in some, the potential for which increases as the oil ages and its chemical composition changes. Adverse effects include skin irritation, allergic contact dermatitis, systemic contact dermatitis, linear immunoglobulin A disease, erythema multiforme-like reactions, and systemic hypersensitivity reactions. Allergic reactions may be due to the various oxidation products that are formed by exposure of the oil to light and air. Consequently, oxidised tea tree oil should not be used.

In Australia, tea tree oil is one of the many essential oils causing poisoning, mostly of children. From 2014 to 2018, 749 cases were reported in New South Wales, accounting for 17% of essential oil poisoning incidents.

=== Hormonal effects ===
Tea tree oil potentially poses a risk for causing abnormal breast enlargement in men and prepubertal children. A 2018 study by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences found four of the constituent chemicals (eucalyptol, 4-terpineol, dipentene, and alpha-terpineol) are endocrine disruptors, raising concerns of potential environmental health impacts from the oil.

===In animals===
In dogs and cats, death or transient signs of toxicity (lasting two to three days), such as lethargy, weakness, incoordination, and muscle tremors, have been reported after external application at high doses.

As a test of toxicity by oral intake, the median lethal dose (LD50) in rats is 1.9–2.4 ml/kg.

==Composition and characteristics==

Tea tree oil is defined by the International Standard ISO 4730 (&quot;Oil of &quot;Melaleuca&quot;, terpinen-4-ol type&quot;), containing terpinen-4-ol, γ-terpinene, and α-terpinene as about 70% to 90% of whole oil, while &quot;p&quot;-cymene, terpinolene, α-terpineol, and α-pinene collectively account for some 15% of the oil (table). The oil has been described as colourless to pale yellow having a fresh, camphor-like smell.

Tea tree oil products contain various phytochemicals, among which terpinen-4-ol is the major component. Adverse reactions diminish with lower eucalyptol content.

== History and extraction ==
The name &quot;tea tree&quot; is used for several plants, mostly from Australia and New Zealand, from the family Myrtaceae related to the myrtle. The use of the name probably originated from Captain James Cook&#x27;s description of one of these shrubs that he used to make an infusion to drink in place of tea.

The commercial tea tree oil industry originated in the 1920s when Australian chemist Arthur Penfold investigated the business potential of a number of native extracted oils; he reported that tea tree oil had promise, as it exhibited antiseptic properties.

Tea tree oil was first extracted from &quot;Melaleuca alternifolia&quot; in Australia, and this species remains the most important commercially. In the 1970s and 1980s, commercial plantations began to produce large quantities of tea tree oil from &quot;M. alternifolia&quot;. Many of these plantations are located in New South Wales. Since the 1970s and 80s, the industry has expanded to include several other species for their extracted oil: &quot;Melaleuca armillaris&quot; and &quot;Melaleuca styphelioides&quot; in Tunisia and Egypt; &quot;Melaleuca leucadendra&quot; in Egypt, Malaysia, and Vietnam; &quot;Melaleuca acuminata&quot; in Tunisia; &quot;Melaleuca ericifolia&quot; in Egypt; and &quot;Melaleuca quinquenervia&quot; in the United States (considered an invasive species in Florida).

Similar oils can also be produced by water distillation from &quot;Melaleuca linariifolia&quot; and &quot;Melaleuca dissitiflora&quot;. Whereas the availability and nonproprietary nature of tea tree oil would make it – if proved effective – particularly well-suited to a disease such as scabies that affects poor people disproportionately, those same characteristics diminish corporate interest in its development and validation.

== See also ==
* Cajeput oil — derived from &quot;M. cajuputi&quot;

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48832" start="0" end="12" title="Tea tree oil" label="Tea tree oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q48832" start="28" end="41" title="Tea tree oil" label="melaleuca oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="49" end="62" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="77" end="84" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q485537" start="91" end="96" title="odour" label="odour"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="194" end="200" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q782073" start="224" end="246" title="Melaleuca alternifolia" label="Melaleuca alternifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="274" end="284" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="312" end="327" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="442" end="449" title="oxidise" label="oxidise"/>
<link wikidata="Q21341953" start="533" end="547" title="Arthur R. Penfold" label="Arthur Penfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q292297" start="625" end="638" title="demodex" label="mite-infected"/>
<link wikidata="Q845698" start="639" end="658" title="blepharitis" label="crusting of eyelids"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="703" end="723" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="743" end="752" title="topical medication" label="topically"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="869" end="875" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781752" start="893" end="906" title="approved drug" label="approved drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="958" end="975" title="skin care product" label="skin care product"/>
<link wikidata="Q206202" start="1025" end="1037" title="aromatherapy" label="aromatherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="1058" end="1064" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q117484" start="1186" end="1194" title="dandruff" label="dandruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="1196" end="1200" title="Acne vulgaris" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q532158" start="1202" end="1206" title="Head lice infestation" label="lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473911" start="1208" end="1214" title="Herpes simplex" label="herpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470772" start="1216" end="1227" title="insect bite" label="insect bite"/>
<link wikidata="Q167178" start="1230" end="1237" title="scabies" label="scabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="1248" end="1254" title="fungus" label="fungal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1258" end="1266" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="1387" end="1395" title="Cochrane (organisation)" label="Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="1512" end="1519" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1555" end="1567" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153064" start="1638" end="1676" title="Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products" label="Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="1691" end="1716" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q917620" start="2071" end="2082" title="nail fungus" label="nail fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="2283" end="2301" title="Allergy" label="allergic reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q292297" start="2406" end="2413" title="demodex" label="demodex"/>
<link wikidata="Q783903" start="3040" end="3058" title="contact dermatitis" label="contact dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405504" start="3060" end="3091" title="Linear IgA bullous dermatosis" label="linear immunoglobulin A disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363732" start="3093" end="3112" title="erythema multiforme" label="erythema multiforme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958765" start="3142" end="3158" title="hypersensitivity" label="hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="3394" end="3407" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q339221" start="3644" end="3671" title="Gynecomastia" label="abnormal breast enlargement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284039" start="3725" end="3776" title="National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences" label="National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q161572" start="3818" end="3828" title="eucalyptol" label="eucalyptol"/>
<link wikidata="Q416114" start="3830" end="3841" title="4-terpineol" label="4-terpineol"/>
<link wikidata="Q278809" start="3843" end="3852" title="dipentene" label="dipentene"/>
<link wikidata="Q420786" start="3858" end="3873" title="alpha-terpineol" label="alpha-terpineol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138899" start="3879" end="3898" title="endocrine disruptor" label="endocrine disruptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q932068" start="3931" end="3951" title="environmental health" label="environmental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="4215" end="4223" title="toxicity" label="toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="4244" end="4262" title="median lethal dose" label="median lethal dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="4388" end="4391" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q416114" start="4434" end="4447" title="terpinen-4-ol" label="terpinen-4-ol"/>
<link wikidata="Q424891" start="4489" end="4498" title="terpinene" label="terpinene"/>
<link wikidata="Q284072" start="4556" end="4576" title="P-Cymene" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-cymene"/>
<link wikidata="Q300852" start="4608" end="4616" title="alpha-Pinene" label="α-pinene"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="4743" end="4750" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="4802" end="4815" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q416114" start="4830" end="4843" title="terpinen-4-ol" label="terpinen-4-ol"/>
<link wikidata="Q161572" start="4906" end="4916" title="eucalyptol" label="eucalyptol"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5026" end="5035" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="5040" end="5051" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q156563" start="5069" end="5078" title="Myrtaceae" label="Myrtaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q165152" start="5094" end="5100" title="Myrtus" label="myrtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="5147" end="5165" title="James Cook" label="Captain James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q61951" start="5232" end="5240" title="infusion" label="infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="5262" end="5265" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q21341953" start="5353" end="5367" title="A. R. Penfold" label="Arthur Penfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q274493" start="5501" end="5511" title="antiseptic" label="antiseptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259977" start="5548" end="5555" title="extract" label="extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q782073" start="5569" end="5591" title="Melaleuca alternifolia" label="Melaleuca alternifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145525" start="5974" end="5994" title="Melaleuca armillaris" label="Melaleuca armillaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811101" start="6011" end="6034" title="Melaleuca styphelioides" label="Melaleuca styphelioides"/>
<link wikidata="Q310876" start="6069" end="6090" title="Melaleuca leucadendra" label="Melaleuca leucadendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15370322" start="6136" end="6155" title="Melaleuca acuminata" label="Melaleuca acuminata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116547" start="6180" end="6200" title="Melaleuca ericifolia" label="Melaleuca ericifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813408" start="6227" end="6250" title="Melaleuca quinquenervia" label="Melaleuca quinquenervia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709936" start="6391" end="6413" title="Melaleuca linariifolia" label="Melaleuca linariifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811014" start="6430" end="6452" title="Melaleuca dissitiflora" label="Melaleuca dissitiflora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="6489" end="6503" title="property" label="nonproprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q857162" start="6772" end="6783" title="Cajeput oil" label="Cajeput oil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646969" wikidata="Q333858" url="?curid=646969" title="Peter Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester">
<text>Peter Edward Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester, (25 March 1932 – 23 June 2010) was a British Conservative politician who served in Cabinet under Edward Heath and Margaret Thatcher. He was Member of Parliament (MP) for Worcester from 1961 to 1992 and was made a life peer in 1992.

Walker became the youngest National Chairman of the Young Conservatives in 1958. He was a founder of the Tory Reform Group, and served as Chairman of the Carlton Club.

==Early life and education==
Born in Middlesex, younger son of Sydney Walker, a capstan operator at HMV&#x27;s factory at Hayes, and his wife Rose (née Dean), Walker was privately educated at Latymer Upper School in London. He did not go to college or university.

==Parliamentary career==
Walker rose through the ranks of the Conservative Party&#x27;s youth wing, the Young Conservatives. He was a branch chairman at the age of 14, and later National Chairman. He fought the Parliamentary seat of Dartford in the general elections of 1955 and 1959, being beaten each time by Labour&#x27;s Sydney Irving.

Walker was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 1960 Birthday Honours for political services. Within four years of his election to Parliament in a by-election in 1961, he had entered the Shadow Cabinet. He later served under Prime Minister Edward Heath as Minister of Housing and Local Government (1970), Secretary of State for the Environment (1970–72), the first person in the world to hold such a position, and Secretary of State for Trade and Industry (1972–74). From late 1974 to February 1975, Walker served as Shadow Defence Secretary. When Margaret Thatcher became the party leader, Walker did not serve in her Shadow Cabinet. But when the party came to power in 1979, he returned to the Cabinet as Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, in 1979. He later served as Secretary of State for Energy (1983–87). Whilst at the Department for Energy he played an important role in the Government&#x27;s successful opposition to the 1984–85 miners&#x27; strike.

Walker then served as Secretary of State for Wales between 1987 and 1990. Although the role of Welsh Secretary was ostensibly one of the most junior jobs in the Cabinet, Walker claimed it gave him more influence as it gave access to key economic committees. He stood down from the Cabinet shortly before Thatcher herself was ousted in 1990. Though he had previously been a close ally of Heath&#x27;s and was generally considered to be on the left of the party, he was nevertheless one of the longest-serving Cabinet members in Thatcher&#x27;s government, serving during the entirety bar the last six months of her premiership. In October 1985, however, he had hit out at Thatcher&#x27;s reluctance to inject money into the economy in order to ease mass unemployment, speaking of his fears that she could lose the next general election if unemployment did not fall. However, the Tories were re-elected in 1987, by which time unemployment was falling.

As noted above, Walker&#x27;s 1970 appointment as Secretary of State for the Environment was notable in that he became the world&#x27;s first Environment Minister, and was thus a source of considerable interest at the 1972 Stockholm Conference. The creation of the Department of the Environment came in response to the growing environmental concerns of the 1960s (not least the Torrey Canyon oil spill of 1967), and one of Walker&#x27;s immediate concerns was to clean up the nation&#x27;s waterways. The measures put in place have had substantial results for river life. For instance, the Thames was declared biologically dead in 1957 but today many species of fish thrive in the river, including wild salmon and trout.

Walker was a determined supporter of the hospice movement, becoming a patron of St Richard&#x27;s Hospice in Worcester when it was founded in 1984. He campaigned determinedly for greater NHS support for St Richard&#x27;s and the wider hospice movement, which is staffed largely by dedicated volunteers. During a House of Lords debate in 2000, Lord Walker stated: &quot;Anyone who visits hospices and meets the volunteers—the people running them and guiding them—will recognise their unique spiritual and compassionate contribution to the health service.&quot;

Upon his retirement from Parliament, he was appointed a life peer in the 1992 Dissolution Honours, as Baron Walker of Worcester, of Abbots Morton in the County of Hereford and Worcester.

==Business career==
During the 1960s he was the junior partner in Slater Walker, an asset stripping vehicle used by Jim Slater to generate immense paper profits until 1973. An ill-timed attempt to take over Hill Samuel resulted in the loss of city confidence in Slater Walker and Jim Slater became for a time a &quot;minus millionaire&quot;. Peter Walker&#x27;s political career survived and after retirement from politics he returned to the City as Chairman of Kleinwort Benson.

Other business positions Walker held included: Chairman of Allianz Insurance plc, Vice Chairman of Dresdner Kleinwort and non-executive director of ITM Power plc.

==Personal life and death==
Walker and his wife had five children. His son Robin Walker was elected MP for the Worcester constituency in the 2010 general election.

He died at St Richard&#x27;s Hospice, Worcester, on 23 June 2010, after suffering from cancer.

==Coat of arms==
==References==
==External links==


|-


|-


|-

|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333858" start="0" end="46" title="Peter Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester" label="Peter Edward Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="93" end="105" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="145" end="157" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="162" end="179" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="188" end="208" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q613294" start="218" end="227" title="Worcester (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="261" end="270" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173260" start="333" end="352" title="Young Conservatives (UK)" label="Young Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827492" start="386" end="403" title="Tory Reform Group" label="Tory Reform Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q931825" start="435" end="447" title="Carlton Club" label="Carlton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854572" start="550" end="553" title="HMV" label="HMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q678138" start="572" end="577" title="Hayes, Hillingdon" label="Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497526" start="642" end="662" title="Latymer Upper School" label="Latymer Upper School"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173260" start="819" end="838" title="Young Conservatives (UK)" label="Young Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138553" start="948" end="956" title="Dartford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Dartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q918412" start="985" end="989" title="1955 United Kingdom general election" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q918420" start="994" end="998" title="1959 United Kingdom general election" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="1026" end="1039" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659989" start="1040" end="1053" title="Sydney Irving" label="Sydney Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1077" end="1118" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="Member of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949281" start="1132" end="1153" title="1960 Birthday Honours" label="1960 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034236" start="1229" end="1250" title="1961 Worcester by-election" label="a by-election in 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="1309" end="1323" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="1324" end="1336" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867155" start="1340" end="1380" title="Minister of Housing and Local Government" label="Minister of Housing and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122313" start="1389" end="1427" title="Secretary of State for the Environment" label="Secretary of State for the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="1498" end="1539" title="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry" label="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866025" start="1791" end="1834" title="Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food" label="Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444345" start="1864" end="1893" title="Secretary of State for Energy" label="Secretary of State for Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846384" start="2075" end="2103" title="Secretary of State for Wales" label="Secretary of State for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="2943" end="2961" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="re-elected in 1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781365" start="3227" end="3247" title="Stockholm Conference" label="Stockholm Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755956" start="3382" end="3395" title="Torrey Canyon" label="Torrey Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236263" start="3614" end="3631" title="biologically dead" label="biologically dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="4343" end="4352" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973847" start="4360" end="4384" title="1992 Dissolution Honours" label="1992 Dissolution Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584125" start="4419" end="4432" title="Abbots Morton" label="Abbots Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609779" start="4450" end="4472" title="Hereford and Worcester" label="Hereford and Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538910" start="4541" end="4554" title="Slater Walker" label="Slater Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894831" start="4559" end="4574" title="asset stripping" label="asset stripping"/>
<link wikidata="Q15502721" start="4591" end="4601" title="Jim Slater (accountant)" label="Jim Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762285" start="4682" end="4693" title="Hill Samuel" label="Hill Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="4913" end="4921" title="City of London" label="the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420368" start="4937" end="4953" title="Kleinwort Benson" label="Kleinwort Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q487292" start="5015" end="5036" title="Allianz Insurance plc" label="Allianz Insurance plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q48699118" start="5055" end="5073" title="Dresdner Kleinwort" label="Dresdner Kleinwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q837703" start="5078" end="5100" title="non-executive director" label="non-executive director"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5104" end="5117" title="ITM Power plc" label="ITM Power plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q263076" start="5195" end="5207" title="Robin Walker" label="Robin Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q613294" start="5231" end="5240" title="Worcester (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="5261" end="5282" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="5372" end="5378" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646974" wikidata="Q2613931" url="?curid=646974" title="Wilkinson's polynomial">
<text>In numerical analysis, Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial is a specific polynomial which was used by James H. Wilkinson in 1963 to illustrate a difficulty when finding the root of a polynomial: the location of the roots can be very sensitive to perturbations in the coefficients of the polynomial.

The polynomial is
formula_1
Sometimes, the term &quot;Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial&quot; is also used to refer to some other polynomials appearing in Wilkinson&#x27;s discussion.

==Background==
Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial arose in the study of algorithms for finding the roots of a polynomial
formula_2
It is a natural question in numerical analysis to ask whether the problem of finding the roots of from the coefficients is well-conditioned. That is, we hope that a small change in the coefficients will lead to a small change in the roots. Unfortunately, this is not the case here.

The problem is ill-conditioned when the polynomial has a multiple root. For instance, the polynomial has a double root at . However, the polynomial (a perturbation of size &quot;ε&quot;) has roots at , which is much bigger than when is small.

It is therefore natural to expect that ill-conditioning also occurs when the polynomial has zeros which are very close. However, the problem may also be extremely ill-conditioned for polynomials with well-separated zeros. Wilkinson used the polynomial to illustrate this point (Wilkinson 1963).

In 1984, he described the personal impact of this discovery:

&quot;Speaking for myself I regard it as the most traumatic experience in my career as a numerical analyst.&quot;

Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial is often used to illustrate the undesirability of naively computing eigenvalues of a matrix by first calculating the coefficients of the matrix&#x27;s characteristic polynomial and then finding its roots, since using the coefficients as an intermediate step may introduce an extreme ill-conditioning even if the original problem was well conditioned.

==Conditioning of Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial==
Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial
formula_3
clearly has 20 roots, located at . These roots are far apart. However, the polynomial is still very ill-conditioned.

Expanding the polynomial, one finds
formula_4

If the coefficient of &quot;x&quot;19 is decreased from −210 by 2−23 to −210.0000001192, then the polynomial value &quot;w&quot;(20) decreases from 0 to −2−232019 = −6.25×1017, and the root at grows to . The roots at and collide into a double root at which turns into a pair of complex conjugate roots at as the perturbation increases further. The 20 roots become (to 5 decimals)
formula_5

Some of the roots are greatly displaced, even though the change to the coefficient is tiny and the original roots seem widely spaced. Wilkinson showed by the stability analysis discussed in the next section that this behavior is related to the fact that some roots &quot;α&quot; (such as &quot;α&quot; = 15) have many roots &quot;β&quot; that are &quot;close&quot; in the sense that |&quot;α&quot; − &quot;β&quot;| is smaller than |&quot;α&quot;|.

Wilkinson chose the perturbation of 2−23 because his Pilot ACE computer had 30-bit floating point significands, so for numbers around 210, 2−23 was an error in the first bit position not represented in the computer. The two real numbers, −210 and −210 − 2−23, are represented by the same floating point number, which means that 2−23 is the &quot;unavoidable&quot; error in representing a real coefficient close to −210 by a floating point number on that computer. The perturbation analysis shows that 30-bit coefficient precision is insufficient for separating the roots of Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial.

==Stability analysis==
Suppose that we perturb a polynomial 
with roots by adding a small multiple of a polynomial , and ask how this affects the roots . To first order, the change in the roots will be controlled by the derivative
formula_6
When the derivative is small, the roots will be more stable under variations of , and conversely if this derivative is large the roots will be unstable. In particular,
if is a multiple root, then the denominator vanishes. In this case, α&quot;j&quot; is usually not differentiable with respect to (unless happens to vanish there), and the roots will be extremely unstable.

For small values of the perturbed root is given by the power series expansion in 
formula_7
and one expects problems when |&quot;t&quot;| is larger than the radius of convergence of this power series, which is given by the smallest value of |&quot;t&quot;| such that the root becomes multiple. A very crude estimate for this radius takes half the distance from to the nearest root, and divides by the derivative above.

In the example of Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial of degree 20, the roots are given by for , and is equal to &quot;x&quot;19.
So the derivative is given by
formula_8
This shows that the root will be less stable if there are many roots
 close to , in the sense that the distance
|α&quot;j&quot; − α&quot;k&quot;| between them is smaller than |α&quot;j&quot;|.

Example. For the root α1 = 1, the derivative is equal to
1/19! which is very small; this root is stable even for large changes in &quot;t&quot;. This is because all the other roots &quot;β&quot; are a long way from it, in the sense that |&quot;α&quot;1 − &quot;β&quot;| = 1, 2, 3, ..., 19 is larger than |&quot;α&quot;1| = 1.
For example, even if &quot;t&quot; is as large as –10000000000, the root &quot;α&quot;1 only changes from 1 to about 0.99999991779380 (which is very close to the first order approximation 1 + &quot;t&quot;/19! ≈ 0.99999991779365). Similarly, the other small roots of Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial are insensitive to changes in &quot;t&quot;.

Example. On the other hand, for the root &quot;α&quot;20 = 20, the derivative is equal to −2019/19! which is huge (about 43000000), so this root is very sensitive to small changes in &quot;t&quot;. The other roots &quot;β&quot; are close to &quot;α&quot;20, in the sense that |&quot;β&quot; − &quot;α&quot;20| = 1, 2, 3, ..., 19 is less than |&quot;α&quot;20| = 20. For &quot;t&quot; = −2 − 23 the first-order approximation 20 − &quot;t&quot;·2019/19! = 25.137... to the perturbed root 20.84... is terrible; this is even more obvious for the root &quot;α&quot;19 where the perturbed root has a large imaginary part but the first-order approximation (and for that matter all higher-order approximations) are real. The reason for this discrepancy is that |&quot;t&quot;| ≈ 0.000000119 is greater than the radius of convergence of the power series mentioned above (which is about 0.0000000029, somewhat smaller than the value 0.00000001 given by the crude estimate) so the linearized theory does not apply. For a value such as &quot;t&quot; = 0.000000001 that is significantly smaller than this radius of convergence, the first-order approximation 19.9569... is reasonably close to the root 19.9509...

At first sight the roots &quot;α&quot;1 = 1 and &quot;α&quot;20 = 20 of Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial appear to be similar, as they are on opposite ends of a symmetric line of roots, and have the same set of distances 1, 2, 3, ..., 19 from other roots. However the analysis above shows that this is grossly misleading: the root &quot;α&quot;20 = 20 is less stable than &quot;α&quot;1 = 1 (to small perturbations in the coefficient of &quot;x&quot;19) by a factor of 2019 = 5242880000000000000000000.

==Wilkinson&#x27;s second example==
The second example considered by Wilkinson is
formula_9
The twenty zeros of this polynomial are in a geometric progression with common ratio 2, and hence the quotient
formula_10
cannot be large. Indeed, the zeros of are quite stable to large &quot;relative&quot; changes in the coefficients.

==The effect of the basis==
The expansion
formula_11
expresses the polynomial in a particular basis, namely that of the monomials. If the polynomial is expressed in another basis, then the problem of finding its roots may cease to be ill-conditioned. For example, in a Lagrange form, a small change in one (or several) coefficients need not change the roots too much. Indeed, the basis polynomials for interpolation at the points 0, 1, 2, ..., 20 are
formula_12

Every polynomial (of degree 20 or less) can be expressed in this basis:
formula_13

For Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial, we find
formula_14

Given the definition of the Lagrange basis polynomial , a change in the coefficient will produce no change in the roots of . However, a perturbation in the other coefficients (all equal to zero) will slightly change the roots. Therefore, Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial is well-conditioned in this basis.

==Notes==
==References==
Wilkinson discussed &quot;his&quot; polynomial in
* J. H. Wilkinson (1959). The evaluation of the zeros of ill-conditioned polynomials. Part I. &quot;Numerische Mathematik&quot; 1:150–166.
* J. H. Wilkinson (1963). &quot;Rounding Errors in Algebraic Processes&quot;. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
It is mentioned in standard text books in numerical analysis, like
*F. S. Acton, &quot;Numerical methods that work&quot;, , p. 201.
Other references:
* Ronald G. Mosier (July 1986). Root neighborhoods of a polynomial. &quot;Mathematics of Computation&quot; 47(175):265–273.
* J. H. Wilkinson (1984). The perfidious polynomial. &quot;Studies in Numerical Analysis&quot;, ed. by G. H. Golub, pp. 1–28. (Studies in Mathematics, vol. 24). Washington, D.C.: Mathematical Association of America.
A high-precision numerical computation is presented in:
* Ray Buvel, Polynomials And Rational Functions, part of the &quot;RPN Calculator User Manual&quot; (for Python), retrieved on 29 July 2006.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="3" end="21" title="numerical analysis" label="numerical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613931" start="23" end="50" title="Wilkinson&amp;#x27;s polynomial" label="Wilkinson&amp;#x27;s polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="65" end="75" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q62877" start="94" end="112" title="James H. Wilkinson" label="James H. Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085860" start="153" end="169" title="root-finding algorithm" label="finding the root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147936" start="718" end="734" title="condition number" label="well-conditioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="1691" end="1701" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q849705" start="1774" end="1799" title="characteristic polynomial" label="characteristic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q937690" start="3119" end="3128" title="Pilot ACE" label="Pilot ACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="3149" end="3163" title="floating point" label="floating point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096921" start="3164" end="3175" title="significand" label="significand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056761" start="3586" end="3595" title="precision (arithmetic)" label="precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="4340" end="4352" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q861606" start="8025" end="8038" title="Lagrange polynomial" label="Lagrange form"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646975" wikidata="Q1527102" url="?curid=646975" title="Briquet">
<text>Briquet may refer to:

==People named Briquet==
* Briquet (possibly Jehan de Villeroye) , an early Renaissance composer
* Charles-Moïse Briquet (1880–1918), Swiss paper merchant and scholar of watermarks
* Fortunée Briquet (1782–1815), French femme de lettres
* John Briquet (1870–1931), Swiss botanist
* Paul Briquet (1796–1881), French psychiatrist
* Robert Briquet (14th century), mercenary captain during the Hundred Years&#x27; War

==Other==
* Artois Hound or Briquet, a rare breed of dog, and a descendant of the Bloodhound
* Briquet (coin), a medieval silver coin
* Briquette or briquet, a block of flammable matter which is used as fuel to start and maintain a fire
* Briquet&#x27;s, a famous 19th century private school at Plain Palais, Geneva, Switzerland
* Sabre, a sword with a curved, single-edged blade and a rather large hand guard, often carried in past centuries by infantrymen and artillerymen
* A type of sandwich</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1527102" start="0" end="7" title="Briquet" label="Briquet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50" end="57" title="Ars nova#Briquet" label="Briquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q116571" start="122" end="143" title="Charles-Moïse Briquet" label="Charles-Moïse Briquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078595" start="206" end="222" title="Fortunée Briquet" label="Fortunée Briquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q746034" start="262" end="274" title="John Isaac Briquet" label="John Briquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370736" start="305" end="317" title="Paul Briquet" label="Paul Briquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631798" start="353" end="367" title="Robert Briquet" label="Robert Briquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37758" start="450" end="462" title="Artois Hound" label="Artois Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q18516840" start="533" end="547" title="Briquet (coin)" label="Briquet (coin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q153022" start="574" end="583" title="Briquette" label="Briquette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="677" end="691" title="Briquet&amp;#x27;s" label="Briquet&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="747" end="753" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q231204" start="769" end="774" title="Sabre" label="Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803" start="925" end="933" title="sandwich" label="sandwich"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646979" wikidata="Q893380" url="?curid=646979" title="Bord na Móna">
<text>Bord na Móna (; English: &quot;The Peat Board&quot;) is a semi-state company in Ireland, created in 1946 by the Turf Development Act 1946. The company began developing the peatlands of Ireland with the aim to provide economic benefit for Irish Midland communities and achieve security of energy supply for the recently formed Irish Republic. The development of peatlands involved the mechanised harvesting of peat, which took place primarily in the Midlands of Ireland.

Over the years, Bord na Móna has expanded and diversified its portfolio of businesses to include biomass procurement and supply, power generation (peat based and renewable), waste recovery, domestic fuel products and professional and consumer horticulture products. In 2015, the company announced that the harvesting of peat for power generation is to be &quot;phased out&quot; by 2030, at which point the company would complete its transition to new sustainable businesses located across its bogs and landholding.

The new sustainable businesses and activities located across Bord na Móna&#x27;s bogs are said to include; renewable energy development, domestic fuels, biomass development, waste recovery, horticulture, eco-tourism, and community amenities. Although Bord na Móna will cease harvesting vast amounts of peat to supply power plants, they will continue to harvest peat for their horticulture and fuels businesses.

Despite these changes Bord na Móna and the extraction of turf remains controversial in Ireland as it is criticised as being the most environmentally unfriendly form of fuel and having a negative impact on local biodiversity while in receipt of state subsidies.

== History ==
Bord na Móna was originally established in 1933 as the Turf Development Board, Limited. The reason for the formation of the Turf Development Board was &quot;to develop and improve the Turf Industry...&quot; and &quot;...to operate and drain bogs...&quot;. Later, in 1946 the Turf Development Board changed its name to Bord na Móna under the Turf Development Act 1946. This move saw a change in status from that of a limited liability company to a statutory company as well as some significant changes in strategy and operations.

World War II had a substantial impact on the development of Ireland&#x27;s peat industry and the foundation of Bord na Móna in 1946. During the war, it was necessary to stockpile peat as a fuel given that coal was in short supply. This was due to a sharp reduction in imports and because the coal being imported was of poor quality. World War II resulted in the implementation of a number of emergency fuel schemes with a particular focus on peat as fuel for the people of Ireland, both inside and outside of traditional turf areas. It is estimated that before the war the annual production of turf per year was three million tons. The war effort added two million tons a year to this. The use of peat as a fuel source during World War II reinforced the government&#x27;s commitment to develop Ireland&#x27;s bogs as an indigenous source of energy.

After the war, the Irish government had a renewed focus on &quot;the production of turf by mechanical processes and its sale at prices that cause it to compete effectively with other fuels&quot;. The war raised a valid concern around the security of indigenous fuel for Ireland. The resulting solution was a white paper issued by the government setting out what later became known as the First Development Programme.

Up to the 1950s, Ireland&#x27;s bogs were harvested for turf, but from the 1950s right through to modern times the bogs were harvested for milled peat. This new method of peat harvesting gave way to harvesting on a scale not yet seen before in Ireland. A number of bogs in the Midlands were the proving ground for this new style of harvesting and are still in production to this day. The primary counties for peat harvesting were Kildare, Offaly, Galway, Longford, Roscommon, and Tipperary. These areas still continue to be the main areas of peat production.

In 2018, West Offaly and Lough Ree power stations received €87.75 million from the taxpayer to operate under the public service obligation (PSO) scheme. 5.3% of Irish homes used peat for heating. In 2020, the Bord na Móna announced that it was phasing out peat harvesting in Ireland. No jobs would be lost, and existing peat workers would be reassigned to bog reclamation projects rather than laid off.

On 15 January 2021 it was announced that peat briquettes would no longer be available after 2024.

== Biodiversity ==
Bord na Móna has been responsible for both gains and losses of biodiversity across the bogs under their control. This loss of biodiversity is due to the company&#x27;s operations which progressively altered the terrain of bogs in their ownership. Bord na Móna has made considerable effort to offset the impact of their operations over the years. In the 1970s, a group of Bord na Móna employees, led by Tom Barry who was Peatland Environmental Officer at the time, drove an initiative to preserve a number of bogs, including Pollardstown Fen located in County Kildare and Raheenmore Bog in County Offaly. During the 1980s and 1990s, another internal drive saw the conservation of more bogs, including Bellacorick Flush County Mayo, Mongan Bog, Clara Bog, and All Saints Bog in County Offaly. These bogs are now owned and managed by An Taisce, the National Parks and Wildlife Service, and other organisations.

In 2010, Bord na Móna launched its first Biodiversity Action Plan. This plan set out a number of objectives and actions to be carried out over a five-year period 2010–2015. It gave an overview of rehabilitation work, natural colonisation projects, and the biodiversity of the company&#x27;s cutaway bogs. It also highlighted the biodiversity projects in progress and those completed. In 2016, Bord na Móna released a second biodiversity action plan. This subsequent plan was developed to build upon the objectives of the first action plan while also looking to the future of Bord na Móna&#x27;s peatlands with regard to Bord na Móna&#x27;s announcement to stop harvesting peat for electricity production by 2030. Speaking about the biodiversity action plans, Bord na Móna&#x27;s Senior Ecologist, Dr. Catherine Farrell said &quot;We all need to work together in Bord na Móna to ensure the best outcomes for rehabilitation and biodiversity. This will be critical to the delivery of our Biodiversity Action Plans&quot;.

== Harvesting ==

Peat was traditionally manually harvested by operating cutaway bogs. This method (still privately used today) consists of sods being vertically cut from the side face of a peat deposit. Technology was derived to mechanically cut and remove layers of peat from blanket bogs. Today, equipment is used to remove tonnes of peat each day at suitable times of year (rainfall is a significant variable in peat harvesting). Almost all the peat now harvested is milled peat, scraped from the surface of the bog by tractor-towed pin millers. The milled peat is ridged into small piles which are then transferred by harvesters into large piles running parallel along the bog. Railways are laid alongside each pile, the pile loaded into trains and the railway lifted and moved to the next pile. This is the &#x27;Peco&#x27; method of working. A few bogs use the &#x27;Haku&#x27; method whereby the milled peat is loaded into tractor-towed caterpillar-tracked trailers and deposited in a single heap at the edge of the bog adjacent to a railway line. Each year, the network of drainage ditches is deepened by a few inches before the next harvest.

Bord na Móna has developed a number of products which were novel developments in their time. Today peat briquettes replace sods of raw peat as a domestic fuel. These briquettes consist of shredded peat, compressed to form a slow-burning, easily stored and transported fuel. The first peat briquette factory built by the Board, the Derrinlough briquette factory in Offaly opened in 1959 peat, financed with a loan of £500,000 from Guinness in 1957. Derrinlough, the last remaining briquette factory out of four in total closed in June 2023. Another product developed was [[peat moss], a combination of peat and [[soil]] for use in the garden – particularly in pot plants. The company also supplied peat to [[power station]]s of the [[Electricity Supply Board]] and its own [[power station]] [[Edenderry Power Station|Edenderry Power]].The ESB stations have all closed as of 2021 and Edenderry transitioned to 100% biomass in December 2023, ending all peat use by the company.

== Railways ==
An extensive [[Narrow gauge railway|narrow gauge]] network is operated by the company in the midlands. Some smaller sections of railway were used in other bog locations, for example in [[County Donegal]] until recent years. Bord na Móna has an extensive network, which has carried up to 5 million tonnes annually, and is larger than the [[Rail transport in Ireland|main network]] (passenger and freight) operated by [[Iarnród Éireann]]. Bord na Móna has one of the largest industrial railways in [[Europe]].
Permanent railways run from a hundred peat bogs, each covering hundreds of acres, to power stations, briquette factories, moss peat factories and roadside tipplers. On most of the bogs, temporary tracks are laid along the piles of peat the full length of most bogs. Before a pile has been cleared, another temporary line will have been laid a few hundred feet farther along. More than 300 kilometers (approx 180 miles) of temporary track are laid each year and the Bord have specialist track fabrication workshops, tracklaying machines, and a fleet of dedicated locomotives and rolling stock on hand.
A few bogs are operated by the &quot;Haku&quot; process, where the peat is collected in one huge heap at the end or side of a bog, requiring only one railway line to serve it.

Part of the Blackwater bog system was also used for tourist trains – the &quot;[[Clonmacnoise and West Offaly Railway]]&quot; (colloquially the &quot;Bog Train&quot;) for about twelve years. This service ceased permanently in October 2008 as it interfered with the heavy peat traffic heading for West Offaly Power Station. One line of the Blackwater system runs along a section of the former [[Ballinasloe]] branch canal. This includes a section where the railway runs through [[Kylemore Lock]]. The newest branch of this system runs north from existing bogs at Bloomhill to the new bogs of Kilgarvan and Bunnahinley – the latter in the outskirts of Athlone – and opened for traffic c. 2011.

All three of Bord na Móna&#x27;s old steam locomotives are preserved, one by the [[Irish Steam Preservation Society]] at [[Stradbally]], [[County Laois]].

Each of the three power stations – [[West Offaly Power Station|West Offaly]] at Shannonbridge, County Offaly; [[Edenderry Power Station|Edenderry]], County Offaly; [[Lough Ree Power Station|Lough Ree]], Lanesborough, County Longford – is the hub of an extensive rail network carrying heavy traffic. As an example, twelvetrains or &quot;rakes&quot; (locomotive and sixteen wagons) were in daily use sixteen hours a day at West Offaly in April 2009. Other, generally older locomotives, handle fuel trains, track trainloads of track, ash trains and permanent way gangs. the Edenderry Power Station is deriving a lot of its fuel from [[woodchips]] and other types of biomass. Thus the amount of peat arriving by rail is diminishing.

The two [[briquette]] factories at Derrinlough, County Offaly and Littleton, County Tipperary each have rail connections to 6 or 8 working bogs. Between four and six peat trains work on each system, the trains almost always travelling in pairs as they do at the power stations.

Bord na Móna also operates several smaller bog railways delivering the peat to tipplers for transfer by road to factories and power stations.

They can be found at Gilltown, Ummeras, Kilberry, Prosperous and Almhain North – all in County Kildare, Coolnamona in County Laois, Derryfadda in Galway, Coolnagun, [[Ballivor]] and Kinnegad in Westmeath, Monettia, Bellair and Killaun in Offaly, and Templetuohy on the Tipperary / Kilkenny border. The Coolnamona Works is largely closed but the railway system was upgraded in 2010/11 to serve a new tippler supplying peat by road to Littleton (Lanespark) Briquette Factory.

Locomotives and rolling stock, for many years bought in from outside companies, are now designed and built in-house. New locomotives are invariably 0-4-0DH (diesel-hydraulic) or 4wDH (no connecting rods). Most peat wagons are of the bogie type with aluminium bodies to reduce weight, though there were still thirty or so old steel-bodied wagons in use as of 2009. Templetuohy, the Bord&#x27;s last traditional sod peat operation, uses four-wheeled open-slatted wagons which end tip into waiting lorries.

With the ending of peat harvesting, the Bord na Móna railway system will cease operations. As part of the rundown of services, two of the most modern locomotives were sold to the [[Isle of Man Railway]] in 2024.

== Land reclamation ==

The company is responsible, under government action, for reclaiming spent bogland. These areas of land are usually cleared up, with trees or other suitable vegetation being introduced. Reclaimed bogland is then usually used as a [[wildlife preserve]]. With much of the bogs of Ireland depleted, peat-fired electricity stations all closed by 2020. [[Rhode, County Offaly|Rhode]] Power Station near [[Edenderry]], [[County Offaly]], had its [[cooling tower]]s demolished on 16 March 2004 as it was no longer viable, followed by [[Bellacorick]] in north [[County Mayo]] on 14 October 2007. The [[West Offaly Power Station]] in [[Shannonbridge]] was scheduled to be demolished in 2020 or 2021. However, the demolition has now been postponed to at least 2027.

== See also ==
* [[List of companies of Ireland]]
* [[List of narrow-gauge railways in Ireland]]
* [[Peat in Finland]] – another EU member still burning significant amount of peat for energy generation

== References ==
== External links ==
* Official site – Bord na Móna
* Kylemore Lock and BNM train
* Heartland, celebrating the 75th anniversary of the Turf Development Board</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q893380" start="0" end="12" title="Bord na Móna" label="Bord na Móna"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="80" end="87" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36449705" start="172" end="181" title="peatlands" label="peatlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="409" end="413" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345331" start="449" end="468" title="Midlands of Ireland" label="Midlands of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="964" end="967" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2205" end="2217" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="2410" end="2414" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="3363" end="3374" title="white paper" label="white paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257987" start="4146" end="4171" title="public service obligation" label="public service obligation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="4673" end="4693" title="loss of biodiversity" label="loss of biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283363" start="5126" end="5140" title="Raheenmore Bog" label="Raheenmore Bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q60574007" start="5286" end="5296" title="Mongan Bog" label="Mongan Bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090966" start="5298" end="5307" title="Clara Bog" label="Clara Bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750223" start="5386" end="5395" title="An Taisce" label="An Taisce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336919" start="5401" end="5436" title="National Parks and Wildlife Service (Ireland)" label="National Parks and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6556" end="6567" title="cutaway bog" label="cutaway bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925171" start="6761" end="6772" title="blanket bog" label="blanket bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q153022" start="7740" end="7749" title="briquette" label="briquette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7781" end="7794" title="domestic fuel" label="domestic fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q118966905" start="7967" end="7996" title="Derrinlough briquette factory" label="Derrinlough briquette factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q194297" start="8066" end="8074" title="Guinness" label="Guinness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646984" wikidata="Q1350743" url="?curid=646984" title="Maurice Bedel">
<text>Maurice Bedel (Paris, 30 December 1883 – Thuré (Vienne), 15 October 1954) was a French novelist and essayist.

He was awarded with the prix Goncourt in 1927 for &quot;Jérôme 60° latitude nord&quot;. He was elected in 1948 as president of the Société des gens de lettres.

== Works ==

* &quot; (1927)
* &quot; (1928)
* &quot; (1930)
* &quot; (1929)
* &quot; (1931)
* &quot; (1932)
* &quot; (1933)
* &quot; (1932)
* &quot; (1934)
* &quot; (1935)
* &quot; (1935)
* &quot; (1935)
* &quot; (1936)
* &quot; (1936)
* &quot; (1937)
* &quot; (1937)
* &quot; (1937)
* &quot; (1937)
* &quot; (1943)
* &quot; (1946)
* &quot; (1948)
* &quot; (1950)
* &quot; (1951)
* &quot; (1953)
* &quot;&quot; (1953)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1350743" start="0" end="13" title="Maurice Bedel" label="Maurice Bedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="15" end="20" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q900173" start="41" end="46" title="Thuré" label="Thuré"/>
<link wikidata="Q12804" start="48" end="54" title="Vienne (department)" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q35760" start="100" end="108" title="essayist" label="essayist"/>
<link wikidata="Q187300" start="135" end="148" title="prix Goncourt" label="prix Goncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488144" start="242" end="269" title="Société des gens de lettres" label="Société des gens de lettres"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646986" wikidata="Q3071680" url="?curid=646986" title="Face card">
<text>In a deck of playing cards, the term face card (US) or court card (British and US), and sometimes royalty, is generally used to describe a card that depicts a person as opposed to the pip cards. In a standard 52-card pack of the English pattern, these cards are the King, Queen and 
Jack. The term picture card is also common, but that term sometimes includes the Aces. After the American innovation of corner-indices, the idea of &quot;pictured&quot; cards from tarot trumps was used to replace all 52 cards from the standard deck with pictures, art, or photography in some souvenir packs featuring a wide variety of subjects (animals, scenery, cartoons, pin-ups, vehicles, etc.) that may garner interest with collectors.

In the standard packs of non-English speaking regions, the face or court cards may be different. For example, in Italian- and Spanish-suited packs there is a Knight or Cavalier instead of a Queen. In French-suited Tarot card packs, the Cavalier is a fourth court card. By contrast, German-suited packs typically depict an officer or overlord, known as the Ober, and a sergeant or peasant known as the Unter.

Until the early 20th century, the term coat card was also common.
==History==
While playing cards were invented in China, Chinese playing cards do not have a concept of court cards, though two entire suits featured faces for a period of time when were popular. When playing cards arrived in Iran, the Persians created the first face cards. The best preserved deck is located in the Topkapı Palace. To avoid idolatry, the cards did not depict human faces and instead featured abstract designs or calligraphy for the &quot;malik&quot; (king), &quot;nā&#x27;ib malik&quot; (viceroy or deputy king) and &quot;thānī nā&#x27;ib&quot; (second or under-deputy). It is possible that the Topkapı deck, a custom made luxury item used for display, does not represent the cards played by commoners. There are fragments of what may be Mamluk court cards from cheaper decks showing human figures which may explain why seated kings and mounted men appear in both Indo-Persian and European cards. Both Mamluk and modern European decks include three face cards per suit, or twelve face cards in a deck of four suits.
The third court card may have had a special role to play since the Spanish, French, and Italians called the newly introduced cards &quot;naipe&quot;, &quot;nahipi&quot;, and &quot;naibi&quot; respectively as opposed to their Arabic name of Kanjifah. In a 1377 description of cards by John of Rheinfelden, the most common decks were structurally the same as the modern 52-card deck. Each suit contained a seated king and two marshals, one holding the suit symbol upwards while the other downwards. The marshals correspond to the &quot;Ober&quot; and &quot;Unter&quot; ranks in modern-day German and Swiss playing cards. As marshals were cavalry commanders, both ranks may have been mounted unlike their modern counterparts. Less popular decks included ones in which two kings were replaced with queens, all the kings replaced by queens, queens and maids added so as to make 15 cards per suit, and 5 or 6 suited decks with only the kings and two marshal ranks.

In Italy and Spain, the &quot;Unter&quot; and &quot;Ober&quot; were replaced by the standing Knave and the mounted Knight before 1390, perhaps to make them more visually distinguishable. The Spanish rank of &quot;Sota&quot; means &quot;under&quot;. In 15th-century France, the knight was dropped in favour of the queen. The 15th-century Italian game of trionfi, which later became known as tarot, also added queens and various subjects that would triumph over the other cards for the trick-taking games they were used for. These subjects would later become their own dedicated trump suit, and not considered as court cards though some of them do depict faces. The Cary-Yale deck had the most court cards with six ranks: king, queen, knight, mounted lady, knave, and damsel or maid for a total of 24. It is unlikely that the Cary-Yale deck was designed for a game in mind as it was an expensive wedding gift and was probably never played. Standing kings are a Spanish innovation which was copied by the French.

In the 1540s, Portuguese traders brought their Spanish-influenced playing cards to Japan. In 1633, however, the Tokugawa shogunate banned these cards as part of their Sakoku policy. To get around the ban, Japanese manufacturers radically redesigned their &quot;karuta&quot; (cards) and renamed them to &quot;fuda.&quot; The face cards became increasingly abstract and near indistinguishable since face cards have no value in games in the &quot;kabu&quot; family. Eventually, two face card ranks were dropped and only the Jacks were kept for the resulting kabufuda deck. Modern kabufuda is able to utilize a double-headed design influenced by western cards since the ban is no longer in effect.

There are two Japanese playing card decks that did not face the same restrictions as kabufuda: Uta-garuta and Unsun karuta. Uta-garuta was found to be of literary merit as the cards all feature waka poems. Half the deck is called yomifuda (&quot;reading cards&quot;) and often feature a portrait of the poet who wrote it. With 100 poems, this results in 100 face cards. Unsun karuta feature the face cards derived from Portuguese-suited playing cards: female knaves, knights, and kings. Portuguese cards featured dragons on their aces, which were separated into their own rank. Additionally, two more face cards were added: Un and Sun. This results in six face cards per suit.

The &#x27;Rubaiyat-e-Ganjifa&#x27; poem (circa 1535) by Ahli Shirazi is the earliest Persian reference to Ganjifa playing cards which describes a 96-card, 8-suited pack, and features two court cards per suit: the king and the vizier. The cards became popular throughout India where most variants follow the two court cards system, with few exceptions like the obscure Mysore Chad Ganjifa having six court cards: Raja (king) on elephant or throne, Rajni (queen) in a palanquin, Amatya or Mantri (vizier) in a ratha, Senani (general) on horseback, Padathi or Sevaka (foot-soldier or servant) and Dhwaja (flag or banner).

In 17th century Persia, there were accounts of 25-card As-Nas packs in use, with five colored suits, each suit having one court card and four numeral cards. The pack developed into having an ace and four court cards (Shah (شاه, King), Bibi (بی‌بی, Lady), Serbaz (سرباز, Soldier), and Lakat (لکات, Dancer)) per suit. In 1877, Robert Murdoch Smith wrote that these cards were &#x27;gradually falling into disuse, being replaced by European.&#x27;

Throughout most of their history, face cards were not reversible. Players may accidentally reveal that they hold a face card if they flip them right-side up. During the 18th century, Trappola and Tarocco Bolognese decks became the first to be reversible. The trend towards double-headed cards continued throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. Some patterns resisted the innovation, most notably Spanish-suited decks where full figured courts remain dominant.

==Cards==
Current playing cards are structured as follows:

*German and Swiss playing cards have three male face cards per suit, &quot;Unter/Under&quot; (a lower-class man or soldier), &quot;Ober&quot; (a higher ranking man), and &quot;König&quot; (a seated King).
*Italian and Spanish playing cards have the &quot;Fante&quot; or &quot;Sota&quot; (Knave, a younger man standing), &quot;Cavallo&quot; or &quot;Caballo&quot; (Knight or Cavalier, a man sitting on a horse) and &quot;Re&quot; or &quot;Rey&quot; (King, wearing a crown). Italian suited kings are seated while Spanish suited kings stand. A few Spanish suited patterns and Portuguese suited patterns replace male knaves with female counterparts. The specific Unsun karuta deck has three additional ranks: the &quot;Un&quot;, the &quot;Sun&quot;, and the &quot;Dragon&quot;.
*French playing cards replaced the middle male with the Queen so it became Knave or &quot;Jack&quot;, Queen, and King. French suited Kings stand.
*French and Latin tarot decks have four face cards per suit. Their order is Knave, Knight, Queen, and King for a total of 16 face cards. Figures appearing on tarot trumps are not considered to be face cards.
*Ganjifa playing cards have two face cards per suit: the king and the vizier.

While modern decks of playing cards may contain one or more Jokers depicting a person, such as a jester or clown, they are not normally considered face cards. The earliest Jokers, known as Best Bowers, did not depict people until the late 1860s.

==References== </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47883" start="13" end="25" title="playing card" label="playing card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071680" start="37" end="46" title="Face card" label="face card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071680" start="55" end="65" title="Face card" label="court card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071680" start="98" end="105" title="Face card" label="royalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197172" start="184" end="193" title="pip cards" label="pip cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419503" start="200" end="221" title="standard 52-card pack" label="standard 52-card pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177840" start="229" end="244" title="English pattern" label="English pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q516114" start="266" end="270" title="King (playing card)" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q505744" start="272" end="277" title="Queen (playing card)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q510474" start="283" end="287" title="Jack (playing card)" label="Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071680" start="298" end="310" title="Face card" label="picture card"/>
<link wikidata="Q378907" start="364" end="367" title="Ace" label="Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q13495004" start="837" end="845" title="Italian-suited cards" label="Italian-"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535048" start="850" end="870" title="Spanish-suited packs" label="Spanish-suited packs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943226" start="882" end="888" title="Knight (playing card)" label="Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943226" start="892" end="900" title="Cavalier (playing card)" label="Cavalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177840" start="924" end="937" title="French-suited" label="French-suited"/>
<link wikidata="Q583269" start="938" end="953" title="Tarot card pack" label="Tarot card pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424652" start="1006" end="1025" title="German-suited packs" label="German-suited packs"/>
<link wikidata="Q572267" start="1080" end="1084" title="Ober (playing card)" label="Ober"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497014" start="1125" end="1130" title="Unter (playing card)" label="Unter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071680" start="1172" end="1181" title="Face card" label="coat card"/>
<link wikidata="Q20646528" start="1255" end="1276" title="Chinese playing cards" label="Chinese playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="1515" end="1529" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="1540" end="1548" title="idolatry" label="idolatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q122375" start="2516" end="2535" title="John of Rheinfelden" label="John of Rheinfelden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419503" start="2600" end="2612" title="Standard 52-card deck" label="52-card deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q111837" start="2656" end="2663" title="marshal" label="marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q572267" start="2766" end="2770" title="Ober (playing card)" label="Ober"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497014" start="2787" end="2792" title="Unter (playing card)" label="Unter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424652" start="2819" end="2825" title="German playing cards" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660887" start="2830" end="2849" title="Swiss playing cards" label="Swiss playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q505744" start="3026" end="3032" title="Queen (playing card)" label="queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q510474" start="3285" end="3290" title="Jack (playing card)" label="Knave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943226" start="3307" end="3313" title="Knight (playing card)" label="Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843150" start="3545" end="3552" title="trionfi (cards)" label="trionfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q583269" start="3582" end="3587" title="tarot" label="tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q727407" start="3769" end="3779" title="trump suit" label="trump suit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3856" end="3865" title="Visconti-Sforza tarot deck#Cary-Yale" label="Cary-Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="4315" end="4333" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q332075" start="4370" end="4376" title="Sakoku" label="Sakoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616724" start="4464" end="4470" title="karuta" label="karuta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4628" end="4664" title="Kabufuda#Games" label="games in the &amp;quot;kabu&amp;quot; family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639025" start="4758" end="4766" title="kabufuda" label="kabufuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430569" start="4993" end="5003" title="Uta-garuta" label="Uta-garuta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5008" end="5020" title="Karuta#Unsun karuta" label="Unsun karuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q737148" start="5092" end="5096" title="Waka (poetry)" label="waka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5201" end="5205" title="Ogura Hyakunin Isshu#Poets" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q122639493" start="5317" end="5348" title="Portuguese-suited playing cards" label="Portuguese-suited playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q378907" start="5428" end="5431" title="ace" label="ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417609" start="5632" end="5644" title="Ahli Shirazi" label="Ahli Shirazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788953" start="5682" end="5689" title="Ganjifa" label="Ganjifa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5802" end="5808" title="Vizier#Playing card rank" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5944" end="5963" title="Ganjifa#Variants" label="Mysore Chad Ganjifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q476850" start="6042" end="6051" title="palanquin" label="palanquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177336" start="6084" end="6089" title="ratha" label="ratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19963564" start="6251" end="6257" title="As-Nas" label="As-Nas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994753" start="6521" end="6541" title="Robert Murdoch Smith" label="Robert Murdoch Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397361" start="6825" end="6833" title="Trappola" label="Trappola"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906060" start="6838" end="6855" title="Tarocco Bolognese" label="Tarocco Bolognese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535048" start="7037" end="7057" title="Spanish-suited playing cards" label="Spanish-suited decks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424652" start="7163" end="7169" title="German playing cards" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660887" start="7174" end="7193" title="Swiss playing cards" label="Swiss playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497014" start="7237" end="7248" title="Unter (playing card)" label="Unter/Under"/>
<link wikidata="Q572267" start="7293" end="7297" title="Ober (playing card)" label="Ober"/>
<link wikidata="Q516114" start="7360" end="7364" title="King (playing card)" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q13495004" start="7368" end="7375" title="Italian playing cards" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535048" start="7380" end="7401" title="Spanish playing cards" label="Spanish playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q510474" start="7450" end="7455" title="Jack (playing card)" label="Knave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943226" start="7526" end="7532" title="Knight (playing card)" label="Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q122639493" start="7735" end="7761" title="Portuguese-suited playing cards" label="Portuguese suited patterns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7821" end="7833" title="Karuta#Unsun karuta" label="Unsun karuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177840" start="7937" end="7957" title="French playing cards" label="French playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q505744" start="7992" end="7997" title="Queen (playing card)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q583269" start="8100" end="8105" title="tarot" label="tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q727407" start="8246" end="8251" title="trump (card games)" label="trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788953" start="8291" end="8298" title="Ganjifa" label="Ganjifa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8360" end="8366" title="Vizier#Playing card rank" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q221783" start="8429" end="8435" title="Joker (Playing Card)" label="Jokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q215548" start="8466" end="8472" title="jester" label="jester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="8476" end="8481" title="clown" label="clown"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646993" wikidata="Q16804155" url="?curid=646993" title="Ridesharing">
<text>Ridesharing or rideshare may refer to:

* Carpool
* Vanpool
* Rideshare payload, a smaller-sized payload transported to orbit with a primary payload
* Ridesharing company, a company that matches passengers with drivers of vehicles for hire via websites and mobile apps; also known as &quot;peer-to-peer ridesharing&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q749649" start="42" end="49" title="Carpool" label="Carpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088425" start="52" end="59" title="Vanpool" label="Vanpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q11331418" start="62" end="79" title="Rideshare payload" label="Rideshare payload"/>
<link wikidata="Q27973" start="151" end="170" title="Ridesharing company" label="Ridesharing company"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="646995" wikidata="Q3472796" url="?curid=646995" title="Summerlin, Nevada">
<text>Summerlin is a community in the Las Vegas Valley of Southern Nevada. It lies at the edge of the Spring Mountains and Red Rock Canyon to the west; it includes the census-designated place of Summerlin South, is partly within the official city limits of Las Vegas and partly within unincorporated Clark County. This community occupies over 22,500 acres and holds over 230 parks, more than two dozen public and private schools, 14 houses of worship, ten golf courses, three resort hotels, recreational facilities, retail and entertainment centers, well-established office parks, a medical center, and more.

The community is divided into three associations (North, South, and West), which oversee two dozen commercial and residential villages.

At the time of the 2010 census, Summerlin&#x27;s population was nearly 100,000, having risen from 59,000 residents in the year 2000.

Summerlin was named after Jean Amelia Summerlin, the grandmother of billionaire land developer Howard Hughes. The Howard Hughes Corporation maintains ownership of the master-planned community, along with Downtown Summerlin (the community&#x27;s premier shopping, dining, and entertainment district) and the Las Vegas Ballpark (home of the Las Vegas Aviators minor league baseball team, which is named in Hughes&#x27; honor).

==History==
In 1952, the film director, aviator, and casino mogul Howard Hughes purchased of land in Southern Nevada, making him the Las Vegas Valley&#x27;s largest landowner. Despite his initial intentions, he ultimately chose not to relocate his company to Nevada, so the purchased land remained undeveloped and empty for decades. After Hughes died of kidney failure in 1976, the Summa Corporation was organized by his heirs to oversee his vast business empire and land holdings. In 1988, the corporation announced that they would be developing the empty acres of land into a master-planned commercial and residential community. They named the project &quot;Summerlin&quot;, after Hughes&#x27; paternal grandmother, Jean Amelia Summerlin.

In preparation for this large-scale development, Summa Corporation made a deal with the Bureau of Land Management in which they traded 5,000 acres of environmentally sensitive land for 3,000 acres of land better suited for development. After this environmental concern was addressed, development began. By the end of 1990, the construction of Summerlin&#x27;s first residential village, park, and school had been completed. In 1994, Summa Corporation rebranded itself as the Howard Hughes Corporation and continued to develop new Summerlin villages.

New home construction continued to boom through the turn of the century. From 1997 to 2007, Summerlin was consistently ranked as the #1 community in the nation for new home sales. The Great Recession caused a temporary slow-down in construction, but signs of revival became especially apparent in 2014, when Downtown Summerlin opened, bringing 106 acres of shopping, dining, and entertainment to Summerlin residents. Residential development also saw a great revival following the recession, and by 2016, Summerlin was once again one of the top communities in America for new home sales.

Summerlin is still a growing community. As of 2018, over two dozen commercial and residential villages have been constructed, with over 6,000 acres still available for future development.

==Geography==
===Climate===

Summerlin has a hot desert climate typical of the Mojave Desert in which it lies (Köppen climate classification: BWh).

Summers tend to be very hot and very dry, with daily highs often exceeding ; temperatures as high as 118 degrees have been observed. The spring and fall seasons are generally sunny, warm, and dry, with daily highs in the 70s and 80s. Winters tend to be cool and windy, with daily highs in the 50s; temperatures seldom drop below freezing, and snowfall is rare, but some rain is common (especially in January and February).

==Economy==
Allegiant Air has their corporate headquarters in Summerlin.

===Hotel and casinos===
The Summerlin area is home to three major resort casinos. 

*JW Marriott Las Vegas, which includes the attached Rampart Casino, both opened in 1999.
*Red Rock Casino, Resort &amp; Spa, opened in 2006.
*Suncoast Hotel and Casino, opened in 2000. Generally considered a Summerlin property, but actually located just outside the community.

Summerlin is also home to a non-gaming hotel known as Element Las Vegas, developed by Westin Hotels. It opened in 2008.

==Arts and culture==
===Downtown Summerlin===
Downtown Summerlin is a mixed-use district. It opened in 2014, and includes a shopping center with more than 125 shops, bars, and restaurants. It also features office and residential space. In addition, Downtown Summerlin also includes two sports facilities:

* City National Arena, opened in 2017. It serves as a practice facility for the Vegas Golden Knights NHL franchise and is also the home arena of the UNLV Rebels hockey program.
* Las Vegas Ballpark, opened in 2019 and home of the Las Vegas Aviators minor league baseball team.

Local events are held in Downtown Summerlin throughout the year, including an annual art festival, outdoor fitness classes, wine walks, holiday festivals, and visits from celebrity guest speakers.

===Library===
Summerlin has a public library, a branch of the Las Vegas-Clark County Library District.

==Sports==
The city&#x27;s NHL franchise, the Vegas Golden Knights, practice at City National Arena in Summerlin. The arena also offers skating lessons, hosts youth and adult amateur hockey leagues, and trains competitive figure skaters.

The UNLV Hockey team plays its home games at City National Arena in Summerlin.

The Las Vegas Aviators (a minor league baseball franchise) play at the Las Vegas Ballpark in Summerlin.

==Parks and recreation==
===Cycling===
Bicycle lanes are provided on most major roads in Summerlin, as well as in the adjacent Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area.

===Community parks===
Large community parks, which are available for free public use, are located throughout Summerlin. , there are 25 community parks that feature a variety of recreational amenities, which may include: community centers, barbecue areas, walking trails, playgrounds, swimming pools, interactive water features, soccer fields, baseball fields, football fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, volleyball courts, bocce ball and shuffleboard courts, and motorized toy areas. In addition, the parks with community centers typically offer special events, classes, and children&#x27;s camps.

===Walking trails===
As of 2018, the Summerlin Trail System is more than 150 miles long and connects local neighborhoods to various amenities throughout the community. The system includes five types of planned trails: street-side, village, bike, regional, and natural.

Upon completion, the trail system will be more than 200 miles long and will connect to more than 2,000 miles of regional trails, making it one of the most comprehensive and efficient trail systems in the southwestern United States.

In 2008, Summerlin and the Howard Hughes Corporation received the American Trails Developer Award, which is given to developers in recognition of &quot;quality, well designed multi-use trails systems that are integrated into private developments.&quot;

===Mountain recreation===
The adjacent Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area offers 26 hiking trails (ranging in difficulty from easy to strenuous). The canyon is also suitable for bouldering and rock climbing and has an overnight camp site.

==Government==

Summerlin lies partially within an incorporated municipality and partially within an unincorporated area. It is patrolled by the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department - Summerlin Area Command.
The area north of Charleston Boulevard is within the city of Las Vegas, while the area south of Charleston Boulevard is located in unincorporated Clark County. As a planned community, Summerlin is managed by three master associations (Summerlin North, Summerlin South, and Summerlin West). Summerlin is further developed into commercial and residential villages. Many individual subdivisions also have their own homeowners associations.

Summerlin has three age-restricted communities for senior citizens (Sun City Summerlin, The Regency, and Siena).

==Education==
===Public schools===
Public schools in Summerlin belong to the Clark County School District, which serves almost all of Southern Nevada.

===Elementary schools located in Summerlin===
*Shelley Berkley Elementary School
*John W. Bonner Elementary School
*Roger M. Bryan Elementary School
*Linda Rankin Givens Elementary School
*John &amp; Judy Goolsby Elementary School
*William R. Lummis Elementary School
*D’vorre &amp; Hal Ober Elementary School
*Ethel W. Staton Elementary School
*James B. McMillan Elementary
*Katz Elementary

===Middle schools located in Summerlin===
*Ernest Becker Middle School
*Victoria Fertitta Middle School
*Sig Rogich Middle School

===High schools located in Summerlin===
*Palo Verde High School
*Cimarron-Memorial High School
*West Career And Technical Academy (magnet school)

In addition to the above-listed public schools, some Summerlin residents may be zoned for schools located just outside of the Summerlin boundaries (many families in Summerlin South, for example, are zoned for Durango High School in nearby Spring Valley).

===Private schools===
Summerlin is also home to several private schools, including:

*The Adelson Educational Campus (K-12; Jewish)
*Alexander Dawson School (K-8; Secular)
*Bishop Gorman High School (9-12; Catholic)
*Faith Lutheran Academy (K-5; Lutheran)
*Faith Lutheran Jr/Sr High School (6-12; Lutheran)
*The Meadows School (K-12; Secular)
*Merryhill School (K-5; Secular)
*St. Elizabeth Ann Seton Catholic School (K-8; Catholic)
*The Shenker Academy (Kindergarten only; Jewish)
*Sholom Schechter Day School of Las Vegas (K-5; Jewish)

===Higher education===
Higher education within the community of Summerlin is mostly limited to small satellite campuses, including:

*The College of Southern Nevada (Summerlin Center Campus; Public)
*The Roseman University of Health Sciences (Summerlin Campus; Private)

However, Summerlin is also located within 10 miles of the College of Southern Nevada&#x27;s main campus (CSN - Charleston), within 20 miles of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV), and within 30 miles of Nevada State College (NSC).

==Infrastructure==
===Healthcare===
The Summerlin Hospital Medical Center, a private hospital operated by the Valley Health System, provides 485 beds to the local community. It is an accredited Chest Pain Center and Primary Stroke Center. Other features include: the Children&#x27;s Medical Center, the Breast Care Center, the Cancer Center, the Rehab Center, and the Robotic Surgery Center. Its 40-acre campus is located in The Crossings village of Summerlin North.

==Notable people==

*Sheldon Adelson: Chairman and CEO of Las Vegas Sands
*Andre Agassi and Steffi Graf: Retired professional tennis players
*Eugenie Bouchard: Professional tennis player
*David Copperfield: Magician and TV personality
*Frank Fertitta III: CEO of Station Casinos
*Lorenzo Fertitta: Former CEO of Ultimate Fighting Championship
*Russ Freeman (pianist): Bebop jazz pianist and composer
*Joey Gallo: MLB player for the New York Yankees
*Rick Harrison: Owner of World Famous Gold &amp; Silver Pawn Shop and Pawn Stars Reality TV Star
*Penn Jillette: Magician and member of Penn &amp; Teller
*Brandon Marshall: Former NFL wide receiver for the Denver Broncos and Oakland Raiders
*Bob Miller: Former Nevada Governor
*Ross Miller: Former Nevada Secretary of State
*Michael Morton: Founder of the Morton Group of restaurants
*Asia Muhammad: ATP Tennis player
*Shabazz Muhammad: NBA player for the Minnesota Timberwolves
*DeMarco Murray: Former NFL running back for the Tennessee Titans and Dallas Cowboys
*Joey Rickard: MLB player for the San Francisco Giants
*Carlos Santana: Professional Musician 
*Julian Serrano: Michelin-starred celebrity chef
*O. J. Simpson: Former NFL player, convicted felon, actor, and sportscaster
*Ronnie Stanley: NFL Offensive Tackle for the Baltimore Ravens
*Brendon Urie: Vocalist for Panic! at the Disco
*Mark Wahlberg: Actor and entrepreneur 
*C.J. Watson: NBA basketball player for the Orlando Magic
*Dana White: President of Ultimate Fighting Championship
*Wayne McCullough: Olympic Games Silver Medalist and World Boxing Council Champion 
*Steve Wynn: Founder of Wynn Entertainment
*Pia Zadora: Actress and singer 
*Stephen Zimmerman: NBA player for the Orlando Magic

==References==
==External links==

* Summerlin web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3472796" start="0" end="9" title="Summerlin, Nevada" label="Summerlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="15" end="24" title="planned community" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="32" end="48" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="61" end="67" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088333" start="96" end="112" title="Spring Mountains" label="Spring Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143382" start="117" end="132" title="Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area" label="Red Rock Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112096" start="189" end="204" title="Summerlin South" label="Summerlin South"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="251" end="260" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403" start="294" end="306" title="Clark County, Nevada" label="Clark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112096" start="661" end="666" title="Summerlin South, Nevada" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="970" end="983" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12521253" start="989" end="1014" title="Howard Hughes Corporation" label="Howard Hughes Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763956" start="1079" end="1097" title="Downtown Summerlin (shopping center)" label="Downtown Summerlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43083097" start="1182" end="1200" title="Las Vegas Ballpark" label="Las Vegas Ballpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q583259" start="1214" end="1232" title="Las Vegas Aviators" label="Las Vegas Aviators"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="1233" end="1254" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="1367" end="1380" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12521253" start="1683" end="1700" title="Howard Hughes Corporation" label="Summa Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="2131" end="2156" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q12521253" start="2518" end="2543" title="Howard Hughes Corporation" label="Howard Hughes Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="2778" end="2793" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763956" start="2902" end="2920" title="Downtown Summerlin (shopping center)" label="Downtown Summerlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="3450" end="3463" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3482" end="3511" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319601" start="3956" end="3969" title="Allegiant Air" label="Allegiant Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109264" start="4103" end="4124" title="JW Marriott Las Vegas" label="JW Marriott Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304924" start="4192" end="4225" title="Red Rock Casino, Resort &amp;amp; Spa" label="Red Rock Casino, Resort &amp;amp; Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261374" start="4244" end="4269" title="Suncoast Hotel and Casino" label="Suncoast Hotel and Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969162" start="4466" end="4479" title="Westin Hotels" label="Westin Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880345" start="4547" end="4565" title="Downtown Summerlin" label="Downtown Summerlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298922" start="4571" end="4580" title="mixed-use" label="mixed-use"/>
<link wikidata="Q54868111" start="4809" end="4828" title="City National Arena" label="City National Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="4887" end="4907" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421770" start="4956" end="4967" title="UNLV Rebels" label="UNLV Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q43083097" start="4986" end="5004" title="Las Vegas Ballpark" label="Las Vegas Ballpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q583259" start="5037" end="5055" title="Las Vegas Aviators" label="Las Vegas Aviators"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="5313" end="5327" title="public library" label="public library"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="5433" end="5453" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302311" start="5630" end="5634" title="University of Nevada, Las Vegas" label="UNLV"/>
<link wikidata="Q583259" start="5710" end="5728" title="Las Vegas Aviators" label="Las Vegas Aviators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="5732" end="5744" title="minor league" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q43083097" start="5777" end="5795" title="Las Vegas Ballpark" label="Las Vegas Ballpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143382" start="5938" end="5980" title="Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area" label="Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q12521253" start="7119" end="7144" title="Howard Hughes Corporation" label="Howard Hughes Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143382" start="7385" end="7427" title="Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area" label="Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q886745" start="7824" end="7844" title="Charleston Boulevard" label="Charleston Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="7867" end="7876" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403" start="7952" end="7964" title="Clark County, Nevada" label="Clark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112096" start="8058" end="8073" title="Summerlin South, Nevada" label="Summerlin South"/>
<link wikidata="Q706636" start="8218" end="8240" title="homeowners association" label="homeowners association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691828" start="8264" end="8290" title="age-restricted communities" label="age-restricted communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472796" start="8312" end="8330" title="Sun City Summerlin, Nevada" label="Sun City Summerlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261591" start="8435" end="8463" title="Clark County School District" label="Clark County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570176" start="8492" end="8507" title="Southern Nevada" label="Southern Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128542" start="9075" end="9097" title="Palo Verde High School" label="Palo Verde High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120081" start="9099" end="9128" title="Cimarron-Memorial High School" label="Cimarron-Memorial High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984655" start="9130" end="9163" title="West Career And Technical Academy" label="West Career And Technical Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703577" start="9165" end="9178" title="magnet school" label="magnet school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316217" start="9390" end="9409" title="Durango High School (Nevada)" label="Durango High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712379" start="9523" end="9553" title="The Adelson Educational Campus" label="The Adelson Educational Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713073" start="9570" end="9593" title="The Alexander Dawson School at Rainbow Mountain" label="Alexander Dawson School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917567" start="9610" end="9635" title="Bishop Gorman High School" label="Bishop Gorman High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431206" start="9694" end="9726" title="Faith Lutheran Middle School &amp;amp; High School" label="Faith Lutheran Jr/Sr High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750798" start="9745" end="9763" title="The Meadows School" label="The Meadows School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146840" start="10114" end="10140" title="College of Southern Nevada" label="College of Southern Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368264" start="10180" end="10217" title="Roseman University of Health Sciences" label="Roseman University of Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146840" start="10305" end="10331" title="College of Southern Nevada" label="College of Southern Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302311" start="10394" end="10425" title="University of Nevada, Las Vegas" label="University of Nevada, Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658675" start="10457" end="10477" title="Nevada State College" label="Nevada State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637626" start="10526" end="10544" title="Summerlin Hospital" label="Summerlin Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q319137" start="10975" end="10990" title="Sheldon Adelson" label="Sheldon Adelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506045" start="11012" end="11027" title="Las Vegas Sands" label="Las Vegas Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="11029" end="11041" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11662" start="11046" end="11057" title="Steffi Graf" label="Steffi Graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q439032" start="11096" end="11112" title="Eugenie Bouchard" label="Eugenie Bouchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q139637" start="11142" end="11159" title="David Copperfield (magician)" label="David Copperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486603" start="11190" end="11208" title="Frank Fertitta III" label="Frank Fertitta III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604227" start="11217" end="11232" title="Station Casinos" label="Station Casinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680711" start="11234" end="11250" title="Lorenzo Fertitta" label="Lorenzo Fertitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="11266" end="11296" title="Ultimate Fighting Championship" label="Ultimate Fighting Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q484697" start="11298" end="11320" title="Russ Freeman (pianist)" label="Russ Freeman (pianist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235385" start="11355" end="11365" title="Joey Gallo (baseball)" label="Joey Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="11386" end="11402" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331444" start="11404" end="11417" title="Rick Harrison" label="Rick Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q794145" start="11428" end="11468" title="World Famous Gold &amp;amp; Silver Pawn Shop" label="World Famous Gold &amp;amp; Silver Pawn Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q794145" start="11473" end="11483" title="Pawn Stars" label="Pawn Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129653" start="11501" end="11514" title="Penn Jillette" label="Penn Jillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q130317" start="11539" end="11556" title="Penn &amp;amp; Teller" label="Penn &amp;amp; Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q898156" start="11558" end="11574" title="Brandon Marshall" label="Brandon Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="11609" end="11623" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870124" start="11628" end="11643" title="Oakland Raiders" label="Oakland Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q733724" start="11645" end="11655" title="Bob Miller (Nevada governor)" label="Bob Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369525" start="11681" end="11692" title="Ross Miller" label="Ross Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832930" start="11728" end="11742" title="Michael Morton (restaurateur)" label="Michael Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806395" start="11788" end="11801" title="Asia Muhammad" label="Asia Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340561" start="11822" end="11838" title="Shabazz Muhammad" label="Shabazz Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q170558" start="11859" end="11881" title="Minnesota Timberwolves" label="Minnesota Timberwolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703887" start="11883" end="11897" title="DeMarco Murray" label="DeMarco Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q320484" start="11931" end="11947" title="Tennessee Titans" label="Tennessee Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="11952" end="11966" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q23724882" start="11968" end="11980" title="Joey Rickard" label="Joey Rickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="12001" end="12021" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054291" start="12063" end="12077" title="Julian Serrano" label="Julian Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="12112" end="12125" title="O. J. Simpson" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="12134" end="12137" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631758" start="12188" end="12202" title="Ronnie Stanley" label="Ronnie Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="12233" end="12249" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047474" start="12251" end="12263" title="Brendon Urie" label="Brendon Urie"/>
<link wikidata="Q277551" start="12278" end="12297" title="Panic! at the Disco" label="Panic! at the Disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q164119" start="12299" end="12312" title="Mark Wahlberg" label="Mark Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q918643" start="12339" end="12350" title="C.J. Watson" label="C.J. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161337" start="12382" end="12395" title="Orlando Magic" label="Orlando Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q660297" start="12397" end="12407" title="Dana White" label="Dana White"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="12422" end="12452" title="Ultimate Fighting Championship" label="Ultimate Fighting Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337729" start="12454" end="12470" title="Wayne McCullough" label="Wayne McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="12472" end="12485" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="12506" end="12526" title="World Boxing Council" label="World Boxing Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q437039" start="12581" end="12591" title="Pia Zadora" label="Pia Zadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665350" start="12614" end="12631" title="Stephen Zimmerman" label="Stephen Zimmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q161337" start="12652" end="12665" title="Orlando Magic" label="Orlando Magic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647003" wikidata="Q1848510" url="?curid=647003" title="Tasman Council">
<text>Tasman Council is a local government body in Tasmania, situated in the south-east of the state. Tasman is classified as a rural local government area and has a population of 2,404, the region covers both the Tasman and Forestier peninsulas, with Nubeena the principal town.

==History and attributes==
The Tasman municipality was established on 1 January 1907. Tasman is classified as rural, agricultural and medium (RAM) under the Australian Classification of Local Governments.

Port Arthur, Nubeena and Koonya are the main towns. The local government area contains the Tasman National Park and a large range of tourism sites including the former penal settlement of Port Arthur, now one of the eleven Australian Convict Sites listed on the World Heritage Register; Eaglehawk Neck and the Tessellated Pavement amongst many others.

==Localities==
• Cape Pillar
• Cape Raoul
• 
• 
• 
• 
• Premaydena
• 
• 

==Council==
===Current composition and election method===
Tasman Council is composed of seven councillors elected using the Hare-Clark system of proportional representation as a single ward. All councillors are elected for a fixed four-year term of office. The mayor and deputy mayor are each directly elected for a four-year term. The mayor and deputy mayor must also be elected as councillors in order to hold office. Elections are normally held in October, with the next election due to be held in October 2018. Neither the Labor Party nor the Liberal Party endorse local government candidates in Tasmania.

The most recent election of councillors was held in October 2022, and the makeup of the council is as follows:

The current Council, elected in 2022, is:

==See also==

*Local government areas of Tasmania

==References==
==External links==
*Tasman Council official website
*Local Government Association Tasmania
*Tasmanian Electoral Commission – local government</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1848510" start="0" end="14" title="Tasman Council" label="Tasman Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="20" end="36" title="Local government in Australia" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="45" end="53" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848510" start="96" end="102" title="Tasman Council" label="Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417350" start="208" end="214" title="Tasman Peninsula" label="Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337520" start="219" end="228" title="Forestier Peninsula" label="Forestier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879191" start="246" end="253" title="Nubeena" label="Nubeena"/>
<link wikidata="Q999109" start="481" end="492" title="Port Arthur, Tasmania" label="Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879191" start="494" end="501" title="Nubeena" label="Nubeena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430700" start="506" end="512" title="Koonya, Tasmania" label="Koonya"/>
<link wikidata="Q925214" start="572" end="592" title="Tasman National Park" label="Tasman National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q391496" start="704" end="728" title="Australian Convict Sites" label="Australian Convict Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="743" end="766" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q960332" start="768" end="782" title="Eaglehawk Neck" label="Eaglehawk Neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985001" start="791" end="811" title="Tessellated Pavement" label="Tessellated Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21904221" start="851" end="862" title="Cape Pillar" label="Cape Pillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600661" start="865" end="875" title="Cape Raoul" label="Cape Raoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q21904615" start="890" end="900" title="Premaydena" label="Premaydena"/>
<link wikidata="Q40890183" start="1032" end="1042" title="Hare-Clark" label="Hare-Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="1053" end="1065" title="Single transferable vote" label="proportional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="1093" end="1097" title="Ward (country subdivision)" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604513" start="1435" end="1446" title="Tasmanian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q30668457" start="1455" end="1468" title="Tasmanian Liberal Party" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317103" start="1689" end="1723" title="Local government areas of Tasmania" label="Local government areas of Tasmania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647006" wikidata="Q350952" url="?curid=647006" title="Furth">
<text>Furth or Fürth may refer to:

*Fürth (surname)
*Fürth, northern Bavaria, Germany
*Fürth (district), Bavaria, Germany
*Fürth (electoral district). Bavaria, Germany
*Furth, Lower Bavaria, Bavaria, Germany
*Fürth, Hesse, Germany
*Furth, part of Gloggnitz, Lower Austria
*Furth, part of Maria Anzbach, Lower Austria
*Furth (mountain), a British classification of hills
*Furth im Wald, Bavaria, near the Czech Republic
*SpVgg Greuther Fürth, a German football club based in Fürth, Bavaria

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350952" start="0" end="5" title="Furth" label="Furth"/>
<link wikidata="Q350952" start="9" end="14" title="Furth" label="Fürth"/>
<link wikidata="Q62934805" start="31" end="46" title="Fürth (surname)" label="Fürth (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075" start="48" end="53" title="Fürth" label="Fürth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10455" start="82" end="98" title="Fürth (district)" label="Fürth (district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008199" start="118" end="144" title="Fürth (electoral district)" label="Fürth (electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q537414" start="164" end="184" title="Furth, Lower Bavaria" label="Furth, Lower Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483706" start="204" end="216" title="Fürth, Hesse" label="Fürth, Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q679328" start="242" end="251" title="Gloggnitz" label="Gloggnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q675263" start="283" end="296" title="Maria Anzbach" label="Maria Anzbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571505" start="313" end="329" title="Furth (mountain)" label="Furth (mountain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q502370" start="366" end="379" title="Furth im Wald" label="Furth im Wald"/>
<link wikidata="Q153539" start="415" end="435" title="SpVgg Greuther Fürth" label="SpVgg Greuther Fürth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647018" wikidata="Q1973122" url="?curid=647018" title="Tartan Day">
<text>Tartan Day is celebration of Scottish heritage and the cultural contributions of Scottish and Scottish-diaspora figures of history. The name refers to tartan, a patterned woollen cloth associated with Scotland. The event originated in Nova Scotia, Canada, in 1987. It spread to other communities of the Scottish diaspora and Scotland itself in the 1990s to 2000s.

Tartan Day is held on April 6, the date on which the Declaration of Arbroath was signed in 1320. It is celebrated in Canada (since 1987, officially and nationally since 2010), the United States (since 1997, with increasing recognition in 1998, 2005, and 2008 as National Tartan Day), and Argentina (unofficially from 2006). 

The same date is used for locally official Tartan Days in Angus and Aberdeen, Scotland (from 2004); in the latter, it has since shifted into the charity fundraiser [[Kilt]]walk, now running in four Scottish cities. International Tartan Day is held in various states of Australia (from 1989, with varying levels of official recognition) and in New Zealand (unofficially since 2008) on July 1, the anniversary of the repeal of the Dress Act 1746, which had banned the male wearing of Highland dress in much of Scotland. Related unofficial events in France (since 2002) have been held on varying days of the year, often also celebrating Breton culture. Tartan Day has expanded into an entire Tartan Week in New York City and Angus, and into multi-day events in some other locations, including Washington, DC. The name Scotland Week has also been promoted in both Scotland and Australia.

The events typically have parades of pipe bands, Highland dancing, and other Scottish-themed activities.

==Origins==
On March 9, 1986, a &quot;Tartan Day&quot; to promote Scottish heritage in Canada was proposed at a meeting of the Federation of Scottish Clans in Nova Scotia (the name of which is Latin for &#x27;New Scotland&#x27;); the first event was held April 6, 1987. After a period of adoption by provinces and territories of Canada, a National Tartan Day of April 6 was declared in 2010.

In Australia, wearing tartan on July 1 has been encouraged since 1989. The day has been promoted as International Tartan Day in Australia since 1996 and has been formally recognized by some states, but not at a national level.

The first (unofficial) national-level Tartan Day in the US was observed an April 6, 1997, growing from county- and state-level observance inspired by Canadian events. The holiday was approved by the US Senate in 1998, the House of Representatives in 2005, and the President in 2008.

Similar events in other countries appear to have been inspired by those in Canada, Australia, and the US, and date from the 2000s or later.

== Participating countries ==
=== Argentina ===
Argentina has around 100,000 people of Scottish descent, the largest such community outside the English-speaking world. The Tartan Day parade of Scottish was inaugurated in Buenos Aires on 6 April 2006 and is organized by the Scottish Argentine Society every year. A symbolic key to the gate of Arbroath&#x27;s Abbey is carried to mark the date in 1320 that inspired this celebration.

=== Australia ===
Three million Australians are either Scottish or of Scottish descent. International Tartan Day in Australia is celebrated on a regional basis in most states on 1 July (or by some community organizations on the nearest Sunday), the anniversary of the Repeal Proclamation of 1782 annulling the Act of Proscription 1746 and its Dress Act, which had made wearing Highland dress (by males) an offense in the Highlands, punishable by up to seven years&#x27; penal transportation. According to Scottish House secretary Moyna Scotland, the tendency to disguise Scottish associations was mirrored in Australia: &quot;Scots did what they were told to do when they came to Australia, assimilate and integrate, and they almost disappeared&quot;; consequently, one aim of Tartan Day is to help Australians reconnect with their Scottish ancestry. A tartan revival started in Scotland in 1822, and now many of the Australian states, and the Commonwealth of Australia itself, have their own tartans.

In 1989, the Scottish Australian Heritage Council began to encourage Australians to wear tartan on July 1, when more than half a million Australians gather for a celebration of Scottish heritage, combining nostalgia with Australian citizenship ceremonies, and fund-raising for charitable causes such as drought assistance. Australians without a family tartan are invited to wear the royal Stewart tartan or the military tartan of the Black Watch. Tartan articles worn on the day include hats, ties, and socks. There are many pipe band associations in both Australia and New Zealand, some originating in disbanded Second World War army battalions, and almost 30 heritage events in Australia alone. Some clans, notably the McLeods of South Australia, come together in private events to honor their chief, recite Robert Burns, consume haggis, and take part in Highland dancing. A butcher in Maclean, New South Wales, &quot;the Scottish town in Australia&quot;, reportedly celebrates the day by selling haggisburgers.

Since 2001, the Scottish Australian Heritage Council and Australian branch of the Scottish National Party have petitioned the Government of Australia in the capital, Canberra, for federal recognition of International Tartan Day to celebrate the Scottish contribution to Australian history, including the influence of Scottish radicalism on the trade-union movement and the Labor Party, and Australia&#x27;s allegedly &quot;egalitarian and meritocratic&quot; society. In 2008, Scottish culture minister Linda Fabiani floated a proposal to expand the Australian event into an official Scotland Week as part of the Scottish government&#x27;s international business strategy.

=== Canada ===
About 15.1% or 4.7 million Canadians claim Scottish descent.
Tartan Day () in Canada, first held in Nova Scotia in 1987, originated with a proposal by Bill Crowell and Jean MacKeracher-Watson at a meeting of the Federation of Scottish Clans in Nova Scotia on March 9, 1986.

MacKeracher-Watson, president of the Clan Lamont Society of Canada, petitioned provincial legislatures to recognize April 6 as Tartan Day. The first such proclamation was by Nova Scotia in April 1987. On December 19, 1991, in response to action initiated by the Clans &amp; Scottish Societies of Canada, the Ontario Legislature passed a resolution proclaiming 6 April as Tartan Day, following the example of some other Canadian provinces. Tartan Day has since been proclaimed by all the provincial legislatures. In 2007, Peter Stoffer introduced a private member&#x27;s bill for &quot;An Act respecting a Tartan Day&quot;. Progress of the bill was interrupted by the 2008 election; resubmitted after the election, it was unsuccessful.

Canada declared National Tartan Day in October 2010, the first official national event being held in 2011. In the national capital, Ottawa, Ontario, an annual Gathering of the Clans takes place each year, usually on April 6 or the Sunday nearest to it, on Parliament Hill at noon with pipes, drums, and dancing hosted by the Sons of Scotland Pipe Band, Canada&#x27;s oldest civilian pipe band. The 2023 celebrations were on April 23, and were the 15th year that the pipe band has hosted the event. Canada&#x27;s official tartan is the Maple Leaf tartan, designed in 1964 became an official national symbol in March 2011 ahead of Tartan Day.

In 2015, Minister of Canadian Heritage Shelly Glover issued a statement in support of National Tartan Day and the Maple Leaf tartan, and tied the event to celebration that year of the 200th anniversary of the birth of the first prime minister of Canada, Sir John A. Macdonald (born in Scotland), and the 50th anniversary of the current flag of Canada, among other events. Glover wrote of &quot;the contributions of the Scots and their descendants to the social fabric of our country&quot; and &quot;the historical links between Scotland and Canada&quot;.

=== France ===
Starting in 2002, the France Celtic Tartan Day ( or &quot;Le Tartan Day&quot;), also called Day of the Kilt () and Festival of Scotland and the Kilt (), was held in France. Originally founded by Richard and Marie Laure, the event developed into a collaboration between L’Équipe du France Celtic Tartan Day (a not-for-profit organization formed for the purpose by its president Jean-François Rebiffé) and Jeux Ecossais de Luzarches (the Highland games association in Luzarches). The locations have varied by year, and have sometimes been spread over three days instead of a single Tartan Day; e.g., the 7th annual event of 2009 was organized for the &quot;sister&quot; cities of Eu, Mers-les-Bains, and Le Tréport on the borders of Normandy and Picardy; the 2007 edition also included Criel-sur-Mer. Events included a beachfront parade, musical concerts, piping competitions, Highland games, kilt fashion show, and a Franco-Scottish economic roundtable. Organizers claimed attendance from Brittany, Normandy and elsewhere in France, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and the Isle of Man. This particular series of Tartan Day events appears to have ended in 2009.

Tartan day has also been celebrated in Paris for several years, organized by the Kilt Society de France. A one-off event was held in Brocéliande (Paimpont) forest before 2015. Starting in 2015, there had also been an annual event in Brittany, called (&#x27;Breton Tartan Day&#x27; in the Breton language); this event was organized by an association named Hentou Breizh (&#x27;Breton Paths&#x27;) along with l’Association Château Essor Blinois. Held at the castle Château de la Groulais in Blain (though not always on April 6), it featured a parade through that city, music and dancing, and a crafts fair. The event celebrated Breton culture as well as Scottish, and the links between the two Celtic nations. Richard Duclos, designer of the first Breton national tartan, originated both the Paris and Brittany events. The Breton event seems to have last been held in 2018, and to have been subsumed into a broader Festival Celtique in Plessé (along with another Festival Celtique in Gévaudan), and a Breton and Celtic event named Festiv&#x27;Arz in Arzal.

=== New Zealand === 

With high Scottish ancestry, New Zealand unofficially celebrates International Tartan Day on 1 July each year, since 2008.

=== Scotland ===
Angus, a region that includes Arbroath, established the first Tartan Day festival in Scotland on April 6, 2004, and has since joined other regional councils in attempting to develop its potential as a global celebration. The Angus event, like that in New York, has developed into a full Tartan Week, and has included activities such as exhibitions of local arts and crafts, a farmer&#x27;s market, local food vendors and formal dinners, a gathering of clans, a golf tournament, archery competition, literary and storytelling events, medieval reenactments, traditional piping and other music, dance (competitive and participatory), regional history exhibitions and presentations, and craft workshops.

From 2004 through 2013, the city of Aberdeen also organized a Tartan Day, though in 2016 it changed into a charity walkathon fundraiser named the Kiltwalk (run by a registered charitable organization), which has since spread to Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Dundee in Scotland (held at different dates throughout the year so as not to conflict), and, for a one-off event, to New York City in the US.

From 2017 through 2022, the Scottish Government&#x27;s official Scotland.org portal site had re-branded Tartan Day/Week as &quot;Scotland Week&quot; for marketing the events to native Scots, but seems to have given up on this effort and reverted to &quot;Tartan Day&quot;.

=== United States ===
There are an estimated 25 million people in the US who are of Scottish descent. Observing various Tartan Day activities in Canada and in the US at the state and county level, a March 8–10, 1996, meeting of Scottish-heritage organization leaders chaired by John H. Napier III, which included Duncan MacDonald of the Caledonian Foundation, and Neil Fraser of the Clans and Scottish Societies of Canada, among others, proposed nationalizing the idea in the US, to unanimous approval of the attendees. After promotional advertisements were placed in heritage and genealogy publications including &quot;The Highlander&quot;, &quot;Scottish Life&quot;, and &quot;Family Tree&quot;, the first (unofficial) Tartan Day in the United States observed at the national level was on April 6, 1997. Wanting to make the holiday official, the Scottish Coalition USA (comprising the American-Scottish Foundation, the Association of Scottish Games and Festivals, the Council of Scottish Clans &amp; Associations, Living Legacy of Scotland, the Scottish-American Military Society, and Scottish Heritage USA, and at that time also including the now-defunct Tartan Educational and Cultural Association) held a second Sarasota meeting in 1997 to more formally establish a National Tartan Day.

In 1998, the efforts of the coalition and the Caledonian Foundation (led then by JoAnne Phipps), with the legislative sponsorship of Senator Trent Lott, resulted in United States Senate Resolution No. 155 (introduced March 6, 1998) to adopt April 6 as National Tartan Day. The resolution passed March 20, 1998, &quot;to recognize the outstanding achievements and contributions made by Scottish Americans to the United States&quot;; it also referred to the predominance of Scots among the Founding Fathers of the United States and claimed that the American Declaration of Independence was &quot;modelled on&quot; the Scottish Declaration of Arbroath. The now quasi-official National Tartan Day was held annually thereafter; &quot;The Washington Times&quot; reported in 2000 on the event, by which time it was already growing into a three-day affair in Washington, DC.

This led in turn, through the advocacy of the National Capital Tartan Committee (led by James Morrison), to unanimous adoption of US House of Representatives Resolution 41 passing on March 9, 2005, in favor of a US National Tartan Day on April 6, and mirroring most of the wording of the Senate resolution. The House resolution&#x27;s chief sponsors were Representative Mike McIntyre from North Carolina and Rep. Jimmy Duncan from Tennessee, who were the founding co-chairs of the Friends of Scotland Caucus in the House. Finally, President George W. Bush signed a presidential proclamation on April 4, 2008, of a fully official US National Tartan Day observance on April 6 each year.

The largest of the US events is New York City Tartan Week. Another major one is that held in Washington, DC, which includes a National Tartan Day Symposium featuring notable Scottish and Scottish-American speakers.

====New York City Tartan Week====
1n 1999, the first Tartan Day parade in New York City consisted of just two pipe bands and &quot;a small but enthusiastic group of Scottish Americans&quot;, with American actor Cliff Robertson in the role of grand marshall. By 2002, the &quot;Tunes of Glory&quot; parade, organized by American piper Magnus Orr, Scottish piper (living in Canada) Thomas Grotrian, and the newly formed National Tartan Day New York Committee, included 8,250 pipers and drummers marching through the streets of New York, led by Scottish actor Sir Sean Connery and New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg. Other organizers of the annual affair include the Saint Andrews Society of the State of New York, the New York Caledonian Club, and the American Scottish Foundation.

The event has since grown into a Tartan Week beginning with Tartan Day (the parade is held on the week&#x27;s Saturday). The grand marshall each year is usually a Scotland-native celebrity (actor Gail Porter in 2023), but has occasionally been a Scottish American. The parade includes pipe bands (typically around 3,000 bagpipers in total), and contingents from clan societies, Highland games organizers, Scottish-American societies, the New York Mounted Police, alumni clubs of Scottish universities, and Scotland&#x27;s tourism board, VisitScotland. Activities and events other than the parade include literary, theatrical, and musical performances; receptions; art exhibits of Scottish and Scottish-American works; music concerts and pipe band competitions; , Highland, and Scottish country dances; since 2004, the &quot;Scotland Run&quot;, a 10K run (sponsored by the Scottish Government with New York Road Runners, and a pre-qualifying race for the New York City Marathon); displays of Scottish artifacts; exhibitions of Scottish dog breeds; and &quot;Dressed to Kilt&quot;, a fashion show and charity ball organized by Friends of Scotland, featuring tartaned and kilted celebrities.

The event has not been without some criticism. Susan McIntosh, a former president of the Council of Scottish Clans &amp; Associations (based in North Carolina) said in 2015 that the event was too thinly attended and media-covered, given its potential, compared to other ethnic celebrations, and an &quot;unfortunate mongrel of a commemoration&quot; because the dates of the parade (on a Saturday nearest April 6 but rarely April 6 itself) are not meaningful to Scots, and because, she stated, the connection between the Declaration of Arbroath and the Declaration of Independence &quot;is faint at best&quot;. McIntosh recommended starting over to create a new, grassroots and international, diaspora-driven holiday. &quot;The Scotsman&quot; also that year quoted an anonymous promoter in Edinburgh saying that Tartan Day &quot;doesn&#x27;t resonate with young Scots&quot;, including designers who will not attend the events because they don&#x27;t find them &quot;relevant&quot;. Alan Bain of the American Scottish Foundation, at Tartan Day organizer, disagreed because Scottish universities were sending parade contingents, indicating contemporary interest in Scotland.

==Scottish governmental and business involvement in diasporic events==
The Scottish Government (sometimes the broader Government of the UK), along with regional Scottish governmental bodies (including city councils of Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Aberdeen) and industry organisations, have capitalised on opportunities to promote Scottish tourism and business interests by directly participating in Tartan Day/Week activities among the disaspora, especially in the United States, since the 2000s. The US is Scotland&#x27;s top destination for exports, which amounted to £6 billion, 17% of Scotland&#x27;s total international trade.

Scottish officials have participated in Tartan Day activities, e.g. as grand marshals of the New York parade, including presiding officers of Scottish Parliament (George Reid in 2007, Alex Fergusson in 2010, and Tricia Marwick in 2015), and Lord Provost of Glasgow Bob Winter in 2011. The Scottish Parliament sent a delegation to the 2023 New York event, including Alison Johnstone (the presiding officer), Finlay Carson, and Collette Stevenson, who also visited the Canadian Parliament in Ottawa and the National Assembly of Québec. Scottish First Minister Jack McConnell attended the New York event in 2002 &quot;to make sure that Scotland is promoted at the highest level during a time when the world will be watching.&quot; Also in New York, First Min. Alex Salmond in 2013 cross-promoted events in Scotland, especially the year-long Homecoming Scotland 2014, a followup to the 2009 event series. Former First Min. Henry McLeish gave a Scotland post-Brexit presentation at Tartan Day in Washington, DC, in 2021. Angus Robertson, the Scottish culture secretary, attended 2022 Tartan Day in Ontario, Canada, and Tartan Week in New York and Washington, DC, in the US, meeting also with political bodies, business leaders, and cultural organizations, with a goal of bolstering &quot;cultural, historical, educational and economic links between Scotland, Canada and the United States&quot;. Robertson wrote April 2023 editorials in &quot;The Scotsman&quot; and the &quot;Edinburgh Evening News&quot; on Tartan Day abroad leading to job creation in Scotland, and called the holiday &quot;an opportunity to promote enduring connections with Scotland, including trade, investment, tourism and culture&quot; and &quot;a platform ... to promote Scotland in some of our most important markets&quot;. The 2023 National Tartan Day Symposium in Washington, DC, included a presentation from Chris Thomson, head of the Scottish Government USA consular team. The UK Government&#x27;s parliamentary under-secretary of state for Scotland, John Lamont, also attended the New York Tartan Day events of 2023, including a roundtable organized by the UK Department for Business and Trade.

The Scottish Government has promoted Scottish culture and talent at foreign Tartan Days/Weeks, including the National Theatre of Scotland, the National Trust for Scotland, the National Galleries Scotland, and Scottish universities. The government has also sponsored the annual 10K Scotland Run (with a trip to Edinburgh as the prize) during Tartan Week in New York City since 2004. In 2005, the government lent the Wallace Sword – an artifact purported to have been wielded by Scottish hero William Wallace in the 13th to early 14th centuries – for Tartan Week display at Grand Central Terminal in New York City. The sword had never before left Scotland in modern times. VisitScotland, the Scottish tourism board, has a contingent in the annual New York Tartan Day parade, and also hosts side events sponsored by and featuring Scottish brands. Scotland.org, variously branded &quot;Gateway to Scotland&quot; and &quot;Scotland Is Now&quot;, a tourism, study-abroad, and immigration website partnership between various departments of the government and industry associations, has publicized diasporic Tartan Day events, including 23 across the US, though the website no longer provides a detailed catalog of events and just has general information about Canadian Tartan Day and New York Tartan Week.

The Scotlish Government&#x27;s involvement in Tartan Day/Week is connected with other governmental works, including GlobalScot (founded 2001), an international business network to help Scottish businesses and entrepreneurs with worldwide business connections; and Scottish Connections Framework, (since 2023), a program for outreach to members of the diaspora who want &quot;to live, work, study, visit, or do business in Scotland&quot;. The Tartan Day/Week activities also interrelate with Scotland&#x27;s &quot;US Engagement Strategy&quot; of 2017, and a &quot;Diaspora Engagement Plan&quot; published in 2010 which includes other countries.

Scottish businesses have integrated Tartan Day/Week into their marketing efforts, both online and at the events. A few examples include: the tartan weaver and women&#x27;s clothier Prickly Thistle, of Evanton and Edinburgh; the Gin Bothy distillery in Glamis; Harris Tweed Textiles on the Isle of Lewis; the Johnnie Walker distillery (Kilmarnock / London); Walker&#x27;s Shortbread (Aberlour); the Salmon Scotland trade association (Edinburgh); and Scotch Whisky Association (Edinburgh). For 2022, the Stirling-based Forth Valley Chamber of Commerce alone sent 13 Scottish businesses to the New York parade, including Angels&#x27; Share Glass, Ardgowan Distillery, Ochil Fudge Pantry, and Quirky Chocolate. Ian Houston, president of the trade association Scottish Business Network (SBN); John Bleed, US director of the Confederation of British Industry; and Peter Wilson, president of Great Scot International, a wholesale supplier of Scottish goods to US retailers, were all presenters at the Washington, DC, Tartan Day Sympoisum in 2023. SBN, Scottish Development International, and British–American Business Network have all been directly involved in Tartan Day activities in Texas. SNB&#x27;s &quot;The New York Scottish Challenge&quot; business seminar for Scottish entrepreneurs includes representation in the Tartan Day parade.

== See also ==

* Kirkin&#x27; o&#x27; the Tartan, a ceremony involving the blessing of family tartans

==References==
==External links==
*National Tartan Day USA
*The Scottish Coalition USA 
*New York Tartan Week Site
*National Capital Tartan Day Committee
*National New York Tartan Day Committee 
*American-Scottish Foundation
*Minnesota Tartan Day Cooperative Committee
*Official Scotland Week website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1973122" start="0" end="10" title="Tartan Day" label="Tartan Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007259" start="29" end="46" title="Culture of Scotland" label="Scottish heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="81" end="89" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003960" start="94" end="111" title="Scottish diaspora" label="Scottish-diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="151" end="157" title="tartan" label="tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="235" end="246" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q598496" start="418" end="441" title="Declaration of Arbroath" label="Declaration of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973122" start="855" end="867" title="Tartan Day" label="[[Kilt]]walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973122" start="906" end="930" title="Tartan Day" label="International Tartan Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307035" start="1120" end="1134" title="Dress Act 1746" label="Dress Act 1746"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998487" start="1173" end="1187" title="Highland dress" label="Highland dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007179" start="1325" end="1339" title="Culture of Brittany" label="Breton culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973122" start="1380" end="1391" title="Tartan Day" label="Tartan Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973122" start="1506" end="1519" title="Tartan Day" label="Scotland Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085519" start="1613" end="1622" title="pipe band" label="pipe band"/>
<link wikidata="Q842835" start="1625" end="1641" title="Highland dance" label="Highland dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="1823" end="1837" title="Scottish clan" label="Scottish Clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1875" end="1880" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="1982" end="2017" title="provinces and territories of Canada" label="provinces and territories of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="2776" end="2785" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437621" start="2797" end="2831" title="Scottish Argentines" label="100,000 people of Scottish descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="2949" end="2961" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158024" start="3472" end="3496" title="Act of Proscription 1746" label="Act of Proscription 1746"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770529" start="3632" end="3652" title="penal transportation" label="penal transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374878" start="4548" end="4568" title="royal Stewart tartan" label="royal Stewart tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568897" start="4599" end="4610" title="Black Watch" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4778" end="4794" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="4897" end="4912" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="4975" end="4987" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q209500" start="4997" end="5003" title="haggis" label="haggis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021276" start="5053" end="5077" title="Maclean, New South Wales" label="Maclean, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="5262" end="5285" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="5306" end="5329" title="Government of Australia" label="Government of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="5346" end="5354" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="5553" end="5564" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q467097" start="5682" end="5695" title="Linda Fabiani" label="Linda Fabiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437641" start="5911" end="5927" title="Scottish Canadian" label="Scottish descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="5968" end="5979" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964454" start="6180" end="6191" title="Clan Lamont" label="Clan Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="6222" end="6232" title="Provinces of Canada" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376896" start="6664" end="6677" title="Peter Stoffer" label="Peter Stoffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587581" start="6691" end="6717" title="private member&amp;#x27;s bill" label="private member&amp;#x27;s bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466815" start="6810" end="6823" title="2008 Canadian federal election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="7011" end="7017" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251837" start="7530" end="7559" title="Minister of Canadian Heritage" label="Minister of Canadian Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q588361" start="7560" end="7573" title="Shelly Glover" label="Shelly Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="7749" end="7773" title="prime minister of Canada" label="prime minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="7779" end="7796" title="John A. Macdonald" label="John A. Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q80110" start="7857" end="7871" title="flag of Canada" label="flag of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q151948" start="8195" end="8199" title="Kilt" label="Kilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q429399" start="8528" end="8542" title="Highland games" label="Highland games"/>
<link wikidata="Q145382" start="8558" end="8567" title="Luzarches" label="Luzarches"/>
<link wikidata="Q211593" start="8770" end="8772" title="Eu, Seine-Maritime" label="Eu"/>
<link wikidata="Q377932" start="8774" end="8788" title="Mers-les-Bains" label="Mers-les-Bains"/>
<link wikidata="Q473875" start="8794" end="8804" title="Le Tréport" label="Le Tréport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="8823" end="8831" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="8836" end="8843" title="Picardy" label="Picardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q670675" start="8876" end="8889" title="Criel-sur-Mer" label="Criel-sur-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="9080" end="9088" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="9134" end="9141" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="9143" end="9148" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="9158" end="9169" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="9286" end="9291" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q924045" start="9380" end="9409" title="Paimpont forest" label="Brocéliande (Paimpont) forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="9535" end="9550" title="Breton language" label="Breton language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749729" start="9710" end="9732" title="Château de la Groulais" label="Château de la Groulais"/>
<link wikidata="Q134204" start="9736" end="9741" title="Blain, Loire-Atlantique" label="Blain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007179" start="9873" end="9887" title="Culture of Brittany" label="Breton culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q236626" start="9939" end="9953" title="Celtic nations" label="Celtic nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164976" start="10181" end="10187" title="Plessé" label="Plessé"/>
<link wikidata="Q514081" start="10229" end="10237" title="Gévaudan" label="Gévaudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63034" start="10295" end="10300" title="Arzal" label="Arzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437878" start="10335" end="10352" title="Scottish New Zealanders" label="Scottish ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="10466" end="10471" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q630668" start="10496" end="10504" title="Arbroath" label="Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="10918" end="10923" title="Scottish clan" label="clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="11203" end="11211" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312082" start="11282" end="11291" title="walkathon" label="walkathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151948" start="11313" end="11317" title="Kilt" label="Kilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="11395" end="11404" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="11406" end="11413" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="11419" end="11425" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="11892" end="11936" title="Scottish Americans" label="people in the US who are of Scottish descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="12994" end="13037" title="Tartan Educational and Cultural Association" label="Tartan Educational and Cultural Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q50608" start="13270" end="13280" title="Trent Lott" label="Trent Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="13294" end="13314" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="13617" end="13654" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="13676" end="13712" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="American Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q598496" start="13754" end="13777" title="Declaration of Arbroath" label="Declaration of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q494170" start="13858" end="13878" title="The Washington Times" label="The Washington Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="13980" end="13994" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="14127" end="14154" title="US House of Representatives" label="US House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q976487" start="14367" end="14380" title="Mike McIntyre" label="Mike McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="14386" end="14400" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q653994" start="14410" end="14422" title="Jimmy Duncan (politician)" label="Jimmy Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="14428" end="14437" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="14538" end="14552" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020153" start="14829" end="14838" title="Academic conference" label="Symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164192" start="15009" end="15013" title="Great Highland bagpipe" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181899" start="15110" end="15125" title="Cliff Robertson" label="Cliff Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="15460" end="15472" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="15477" end="15496" title="Mayor of New York City" label="New York City Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="15497" end="15514" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379785" start="15879" end="15890" title="Gail Porter" label="Gail Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936279" start="16220" end="16233" title="VisitScotland" label="VisitScotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q842835" start="16446" end="16454" title="Highland dance" label="Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430164" start="16460" end="16482" title="Scottish country dance" label="Scottish country dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2774730" start="16529" end="16536" title="10K run" label="10K run"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021623" start="16580" end="16601" title="New York Road Runners" label="New York Road Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q752138" start="16637" end="16659" title="New York City Marathon" label="New York City Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16709" end="16728" title=":Category:Dog breeds originating in Scotland" label="Scottish dog breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="17535" end="17545" title="grassroots" label="grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049657" start="17596" end="17608" title="The Scotsman" label="The Scotsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="18121" end="18140" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="18164" end="18184" title="Government of the UK" label="Government of the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="18611" end="18612" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567536" start="18794" end="18835" title="Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament" label="presiding officers of Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q334480" start="18837" end="18848" title="George Reid (Scottish politician)" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q559046" start="18858" end="18872" title="Alex Fergusson (politician)" label="Alex Fergusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q540435" start="18886" end="18900" title="Tricia Marwick" label="Tricia Marwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679884" start="18915" end="18938" title="List of provosts of Glasgow" label="Lord Provost of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934425" start="18939" end="18949" title="Bob Winter" label="Bob Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="18963" end="18982" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647232" start="19039" end="19055" title="Alison Johnstone" label="Alison Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q24034357" start="19081" end="19094" title="Finlay Carson" label="Finlay Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q106758077" start="19100" end="19118" title="Collette Stevenson" label="Collette Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="19141" end="19160" title="Canadian Parliament" label="Canadian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="19164" end="19170" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="19179" end="19206" title="National Assembly of Québec" label="National Assembly of Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="19208" end="19231" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="Scottish First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q132040" start="19232" end="19246" title="Jack McConnell" label="Jack McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="19431" end="19443" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19512" end="19536" title="Homecoming Scotland 2014" label="Homecoming Scotland 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889388" start="19556" end="19573" title="Homecoming Scotland 2009" label="2009 event series"/>
<link wikidata="Q333820" start="19593" end="19606" title="Henry McLeish" label="Henry McLeish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="19628" end="19634" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="19665" end="19679" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q480184" start="19690" end="19705" title="Angus Robertson" label="Angus Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619348" start="19711" end="19737" title="Cabinet Secretary for the Constitution, External Affairs and Culture" label="Scottish culture secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049657" start="20111" end="20123" title="The Scotsman" label="The Scotsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047597" start="20144" end="20166" title="Edinburgh Evening News" label="Edinburgh Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="20605" end="20613" title="Consul (representative)" label="consular"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="20624" end="20637" title="UK Government" label="UK Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883048" start="20645" end="20696" title="parliamentary under-secretary of state for Scotland" label="parliamentary under-secretary of state for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700778" start="20698" end="20709" title="John Lamont" label="John Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q116726347" start="20808" end="20841" title="Department for Business and Trade" label="Department for Business and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932368" start="20953" end="20981" title="National Theatre of Scotland" label="National Theatre of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q599997" start="20987" end="21014" title="National Trust for Scotland" label="National Trust for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051997" start="21020" end="21047" title="National Galleries Scotland" label="National Galleries Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962910" start="21259" end="21272" title="Wallace Sword" label="Wallace Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="21335" end="21350" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11290" start="21416" end="21438" title="Grand Central Terminal" label="Grand Central Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936279" start="21515" end="21528" title="VisitScotland" label="VisitScotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22260" end="22270" title="GlobalScot" label="GlobalScot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22408" end="22438" title="Scottish Connections Framework" label="Scottish Connections Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010142" start="22990" end="22997" title="Evanton" label="Evanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026782" start="23041" end="23047" title="Glamis" label="Glamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306943" start="23049" end="23061" title="Harris Tweed" label="Harris Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="23078" end="23091" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Isle of Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q502268" start="23097" end="23111" title="Johnnie Walker" label="Johnnie Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q576562" start="23124" end="23134" title="Kilmarnock" label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962374" start="23146" end="23170" title="Walker&amp;#x27;s Shortbread" label="Walker&amp;#x27;s Shortbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010405" start="23172" end="23180" title="Aberlour" label="Aberlour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="23187" end="23193" title="Salmon" label="Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435535" start="23238" end="23263" title="Scotch Whisky Association" label="Scotch Whisky Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="23291" end="23299" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="23306" end="23318" title="Forth Valley" label="Forth Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123526" start="23319" end="23338" title="Chamber of Commerce" label="Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992409" start="23608" end="23641" title="Confederation of British Industry" label="Confederation of British Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q123877181" start="24143" end="24174" title="Kirkin&amp;#x27; o&amp;#x27; the Tartan" label="Kirkin&amp;#x27; o&amp;#x27; the Tartan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647039" wikidata="Q1966945" url="?curid=647039" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players">
<text>The National Association of Professional Base Ball Players (NAPBBP), often known simply as the National Association (NA), was the first fully-professional sports league in baseball. The NA was founded in 1871 and continued through the 1875 season. It succeeded and incorporated several professional clubs from the previous National Association of Base Ball Players (NABBP) of 1857–1870, sometimes called &quot;the amateur Association&quot;. In turn, several NA clubs created the succeeding National League of Professional Baseball Clubs (the National League, founded 1876), which joined with the American League of Professional Base Ball Clubs (the American League, founded 1901) to form Major League Baseball (MLB) in 1903.

== History ==
In 1869, the previously amateur National Association of Base Ball Players, in response to concerns that some teams were paying players, established a professional category. The Cincinnati Red Stockings were the first team to declare their desire to become fully professional. Other teams quickly followed suit. By 1871, several clubs, wanting to separate fully from the amateur association, broke away to found the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players. (The remaining amateur clubs founded the National Association of Amateur Base Ball Players, which only lasted two years). In 1876, wanting an even stronger central organization, six clubs from the NA and two independents established the National League: Boston Red Stockings, Hartford, Mutual, Athletic, Chicago, and the St. Louis Brown Stockings from the NA plus independent clubs Louisville and Cincinnati.

Several factors limited the lifespan of the National Association including dominance by a single team (Boston) for most of the league&#x27;s existence, instability of franchises as several were placed in cities too small to financially support professional baseball, lack of central authority, and suspicions of the influence of gamblers.

=== Major league status question ===
Whether to cover the NA as a major league is a recurring matter of difference in historical work on American baseball among historians, encyclopedists, database builders, and others. Major League Baseball and the National Baseball Hall of Fame do not recognize it as a major league, but the NA comprised most of the professional clubs and the highest caliber of play then in existence. Its players, managers, and umpires are included among the &quot;major leaguers&quot; who define the scope within baseball references such as Retrosheet.

==== MLB ruling ====
In 1969, Major League Baseball&#x27;s newly formed Special Baseball Records Committee decided that the National Association should be excluded from major league status, citing the association&#x27;s &quot;erratic schedule and procedures&quot; as well as a history of gambling and &quot;poor newspaper coverage&quot;. Thus, when the landmark 1969 &quot;Macmillan Baseball Encyclopedia&quot; was published, National Association records were not included in totals for such early stars as Cap Anson. Arguments against including the NA as a major league generally revolve around the league&#x27;s quality of play, significant differences in the sport&#x27;s rules during the era, and the instability of the league (as many teams lasted only one season or part of a season), and the poor state of the NA records.

The Special Baseball Records Committee&#x27;s decision has faced continuing criticism. Oft-cited arguments in favor of the National Association are its status as the first fully professional baseball league, the fact that several of its teams continued on as part of the National League when it was founded in 1876, and the much more complete state of National Association records today than they were in 1969, thanks to research efforts by a number of baseball historians. In 1982, &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; writer Marc Onigman argued that the NA should be included in the major leagues, despite its acknowledged flaws, pointing out the same flaws existed in other leagues as well, and called the Committee&#x27;s decision &quot;a modern-day value judgment that doesn&#x27;t hold up&quot;. The committee&#x27;s decision has been criticized for favoring the owner-run National League over the player-dominated National Association. David Nemec&#x27;s &quot;The Great Encyclopedia of Nineteenth-Century Major League Baseball&quot; includes players&#x27; National Association statistics in their major league totals; Nemec states that his compendium &quot;is not bound by major league baseball&#x27;s decision to treat its statistics separately&quot;, points out that &quot;the National Association contained most of the best professional players of its time&quot;, and also argues that the National Association is more entitled to major league status than the 1884 Union Association (which has been officially recognized as a major league by Major League Baseball). The editors of &quot;The 2007 ESPN Baseball Encyclopedia&quot; also registered their disagreement with the NA&#x27;s exclusion, arguing that the NA &quot;was indisputably the Major League Baseball of its day&quot;, but they nevertheless decided not to combine their NA records with later leagues, to avoid confusing conflicts with totals shown in the &quot;official records&quot;.

==Member clubs==
Professional baseball clubs in the 19th century were often known by what is now regarded as a &quot;nickname&quot;, although it was actually the club&#x27;s name. This was a practice carried over from the amateur days. The singular form of a &quot;nickname&quot; was often the team name itself, with its base city &quot;understood&quot; and was so listed in the standings; for example the Atlantic Base Ball Club, which was located in Brooklyn. Rather than &quot;Brooklyn Atlantics&quot;, the team was simply called &quot;Atlantic&quot;, or &quot;Atlantic of Brooklyn&quot; if deemed necessary by the writer. Another common practice was to refer to the team in the plural, hence the &quot;Bostons&quot; the &quot;Chicagos&quot; or the &quot;Mutuals&quot;. Frequently sportswriters would apply a creative pseudonym to call the team by in newspaper articles, often using one with something to do with the team colors, such as the Red Stockings or Red Caps (Boston), White Stockings (Chicago), Green Stockings (Mutual of New York), and Canaries (the yellow-uniformed Lord Baltimore).

This practice of using the singular form of the &quot;nickname&quot; as the team name faded with time, although as recently as the early 1900s the team generally known as &quot;Philadelphia Athletics&quot; was shown in the American League standings as the traditional way of &quot;Athletic&quot;. That team sported an old-English &quot;A&quot; on its jerseys, as had its nominative predecessors.

Later, the &quot;Encyclopedia of Baseball&quot; attempted to retrofit the names into a modern context. In the following list, the bold names are the names most often used by contemporary newspapers in league standings, and the linked names after them are those typically ascribed to the teams now, using the &quot;Encyclopedia of Baseball&quot; standard.
* Boston – Boston Red Stockings (1871–1875) 
* Chicago – Chicago White Stockings (1871, 1874–1875)
* Forest City – Cleveland Forest Citys (1871–1872) 
* Kekionga – Fort Wayne Kekiongas (1871) 
* Mutual – New York Mutuals (1871–1875) 
* Athletic – Philadelphia Athletics (1871–1875)
* Forest City – Rockford Forest Citys (1871) (A second league club with the same name as the Cleveland entry) 
* Troy or Union – Troy Haymakers (1871–1872) 
* Olympic – Washington Olympics (1871–1872; 1875) 
* Atlantic – Brooklyn Atlantics (1872–1875)
* Eckford – Brooklyn Eckfords (1872) 
* Lord Baltimore – Baltimore Canaries (1872–1874) 
* Mansfield – Middletown Mansfields (1872) 
* National – Washington Nationals (1872; 1875) Washington Blue Legs (1873)
* Maryland – Baltimore Marylands (1873) (played at Madison Avenue Grounds)
* Philadelphia – Philadelphia White Stockings (1873–1875) (also sometimes called &quot;Pearls&quot; or &quot;Phillies&quot;)
* Resolute – Elizabeth Resolutes (1873) 
* Hartford – Hartford Dark Blues (1874–1875) 
* Centennial – Philadelphia Centennials (1875) 
* Elm City – New Haven Elm Citys (1875) 
* St. Louis – St. Louis Brown Stockings (1875)
* St. Louis Reds – St. Louis Red Stockings (1875) (this club&#x27;s jerseys featured an actual image of a red stocking, making this an &quot;official&quot; name).
* Western – Keokuk Westerns (1875)

== Champions ==
Before 1883, team order in baseball standings was determined by the number of games a team won, not by winning percentage. For each of the five NA seasons, the league champion had both the most games won and the best winning percentage. The placement of other clubs may vary—for example, the 1872 Philadelphia Athletics finished in fourth place (based on their win total), while recording the second-best winning percentage. The NA did not have a postseason; champions were determined by final standings at the end of the season.
 Individual statistics from tie games count towards players&#x27; career totals, but tie games are excluded when computing winning percentage and games behind.

== Presidents ==
* James W. Kerns 1871 
* Robert V. Ferguson 1872–1875

== Players in the Hall of Fame==
Eight people who played in the NA have been inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame:
* Cap Anson
* Candy Cummings
* Pud Galvin
* Jim O&#x27;Rourke
* Albert Spalding
* Deacon White
* George Wright
* Harry Wright
George Wright was the first NA inductee () and Deacon White is the most recent (). Four of the eight had significant playing careers in the National League or other major leagues after their time in the NA: Anson, Galvin, O&#x27;Rourke, and White, each of whom was inducted into the Hall of Fame as a player. The other four—Cummings, Spalding, and brothers George and Harry Wright—were each inducted into the Hall as an &quot;executive&quot;, a Hall of Fame category that includes pioneers of the game. Cummings is notable for being the pitcher credited with inventing the curveball.

== Lifetime leaders ==

== Notes ==
== Sources ==
* David Pietrusza &quot;Major Leagues: The Formation, Sometimes Absorption and Mostly Inevitable Demise of 18 Professional Baseball Organizations, 1871 to Present&quot; Jefferson (NC): McFarland &amp; Company, 1991. 
* William J. Ryczek &quot;Blackguards and Red Stockings: A History of Baseball&#x27;s National Association&quot; Jefferson (NC): McFarland &amp; Company, 1999. 

== References ==
== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="4" end="58" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="60" end="66" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="NAPBBP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="95" end="115" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="117" end="119" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="NA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991290" start="142" end="168" title="Professional sports league organization" label="professional sports league"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="172" end="180" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566374" start="323" end="364" title="National Association of Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="542" end="557" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="649" end="664" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="688" end="709" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074399" start="917" end="941" title="Cincinnati Red Stockings" label="Cincinnati Red Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="1448" end="1463" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="1465" end="1485" title="History of the Boston Braves" label="Boston Red Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264153" start="1487" end="1495" title="Hartford Dark Blues" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264147" start="1497" end="1503" title="New York Mutuals" label="Mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264750" start="1505" end="1513" title="Athletic of Philadelphia" label="Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="1515" end="1522" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252814" start="1532" end="1557" title="St. Louis Brown Stockings" label="St. Louis Brown Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564809" start="1593" end="1603" title="Louisville Grays" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="2181" end="2202" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="2211" end="2241" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317054" start="2525" end="2535" title="Retrosheet" label="Retrosheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028466" start="3045" end="3054" title="Cap Anson" label="Cap Anson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3169" end="3218" title="Baseball rules#Differences and evolution" label="significant differences in the sport&amp;#x27;s rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="3639" end="3654" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="3857" end="3875" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="4241" end="4256" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237970" start="4305" end="4316" title="David Nemec" label="David Nemec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276659" start="4837" end="4854" title="Union Association" label="Union Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870201" start="6596" end="6618" title="Philadelphia Athletics" label="Philadelphia Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="6642" end="6657" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q85806460" start="6833" end="6857" title="Encyclopedia of Baseball" label="Encyclopedia of Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="7182" end="7202" title="Boston Braves" label="Boston Red Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="7228" end="7251" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago White Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264779" start="7286" end="7308" title="Cleveland Forest Citys" label="Cleveland Forest Citys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558019" start="7335" end="7355" title="Fort Wayne Kekiongas" label="Fort Wayne Kekiongas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264147" start="7375" end="7391" title="New York Mutuals" label="New York Mutuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264750" start="7418" end="7440" title="Philadelphia Athletics (1860–1876)" label="Philadelphia Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250036" start="7469" end="7490" title="Rockford Forest Citys" label="Rockford Forest Citys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250043" start="7582" end="7596" title="Troy Haymakers" label="Troy Haymakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250041" start="7622" end="7641" title="Washington Olympics" label="Washington Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q956715" start="7674" end="7692" title="Brooklyn Atlantics" label="Brooklyn Atlantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264797" start="7717" end="7734" title="Eckford of Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn Eckfords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251702" start="7762" end="7780" title="Baltimore Canaries" label="Baltimore Canaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846153" start="7808" end="7829" title="Middletown Mansfields" label="Middletown Mansfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251964" start="7851" end="7871" title="Washington Nationals (National Association)" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7885" end="7905" title="Washington Nationals (National Association)#1873" label="Washington Blue Legs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251714" start="7926" end="7945" title="Baltimore Marylands" label="Baltimore Marylands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727873" start="7964" end="7986" title="Madison Avenue Grounds" label="Madison Avenue Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562677" start="8005" end="8033" title="Philadelphia White Stockings" label="Philadelphia White Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251712" start="8126" end="8145" title="Elizabeth Resolutes" label="Elizabeth Resolutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264153" start="8167" end="8186" title="Hartford Dark Blues" label="Hartford Dark Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564520" start="8215" end="8239" title="Philadelphia Centennials" label="Philadelphia Centennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564514" start="8261" end="8280" title="New Haven Elm Citys" label="New Haven Elm Citys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252814" start="8303" end="8328" title="St. Louis Brown Stockings" label="St. Louis Brown Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351411" start="8355" end="8378" title="St. Louis Red Stockings" label="St. Louis Red Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564558" start="8511" end="8526" title="Keokuk Westerns" label="Keokuk Westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025711" start="8654" end="8672" title="winning percentage" label="winning percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555369" start="8843" end="8870" title="1872 Philadelphia Athletics season" label="1872 Philadelphia Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025711" start="9204" end="9222" title="winning percentage" label="winning percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323121" start="9227" end="9239" title="games behind" label="games behind"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9261" end="9275" title="James W. Kerns" label="James W. Kerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566779" start="9284" end="9302" title="Bob Ferguson (infielder)" label="Robert V. Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="9409" end="9439" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028466" start="9443" end="9452" title="Cap Anson" label="Cap Anson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251998" start="9455" end="9469" title="Candy Cummings" label="Candy Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183314" start="9472" end="9482" title="Pud Galvin" label="Pud Galvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562589" start="9485" end="9502" title="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke (baseball)" label="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272299" start="9505" end="9520" title="Albert Spalding" label="Albert Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566790" start="9523" end="9535" title="Deacon White" label="Deacon White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252827" start="9538" end="9551" title="George Wright (sportsman)" label="George Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251693" start="9554" end="9566" title="Harry Wright" label="Harry Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710733" start="10140" end="10149" title="curveball" label="curveball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303647" start="10387" end="10410" title="McFarland &amp;amp; Company" label="McFarland &amp;amp; Company"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647054" wikidata="Q6970543" url="?curid=647054" title="National Association">
<text>National Association may refer to:
==Politics==
* National Association (South Korea), a political party 1946–1960
* Kokumin Kyōkai (&#x27;National Association&#x27;), a Japanese political party 1892–1899

==United States baseball==
* National Association of Base Ball Players (1857–1870), the first organization governing American baseball
* National Association of Professional Base Ball Players (1871–1875)
* National Association (1879–1880)

==Other uses==
* National Association, or &quot;N.A.&quot;, the official designation of federally chartered banks in the United States

==See also==
*
*American Association (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6970543" start="0" end="20" title="National Association" label="National Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047910" start="50" end="84" title="National Association (South Korea)" label="National Association (South Korea)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421100" start="116" end="130" title="Kokumin Kyōkai" label="Kokumin Kyōkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566374" start="234" end="275" title="National Association of Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="342" end="396" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970546" start="411" end="443" title="National Association (1879–1880)" label="National Association (1879–1880)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124803020" start="533" end="579" title="National bank (United States)" label="federally chartered banks in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q345287" start="597" end="634" title="American Association (disambiguation)" label="American Association (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647069" wikidata="Q207972" url="?curid=647069" title="Tepic">
<text>Tepic () is the capital and largest city of the western Mexican state of Nayarit, as well as the seat of the Tepic Municipality.

Located in the central part of the state, it stands at an altitude of above sea level, on the banks of the Río Mololoa and the Río Tepic, approximately north-west of Guadalajara, Jalisco. Nearby are the volcanoes of San Juan, Las Navajas, and Sangangüey. Tepic is the primary urban center of this rich agricultural region; major crops include sugarcane, tobacco and citrus fruits.

The city was founded in 1531 as &quot;Villa del Espíritu Santo de la Mayor España&quot;.

== Population ==

=== Indigenous population ===
Tepic has the second-largest indigenous population in the State of Nayarit, 4,375. The most prominent groups among them are the Huichol or Wixárika (3,276), Cora (527) and Purépecha (101).

=== Religion ===

Catholicism is the most prominent religion in Tepic with 94.2% of the population. Its Catedral de la Purísima Concepción, dedicated to the Immaculate Conception, is the cathedral episcopal see of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tepic, a suffragan see in the ecclesiastical province of the Archdiocese of Guadalajara.

== Notable people ==
* Juan Escutia, Boy hero of the Battle of Chapultepec. Born in Tepic, between 1828 and 1832, on the morning of 13 September 1847, he fought to prevent invading U.S. forces from capturing Chapultepec Castle in Mexico City. After a brave defense, he is reported to have wrapped himself in the national flag and leaped to his death.
* Luis E. Miramontes, chemist, co-inventor of the first contraceptive pill
* Amado Nervo, poet and diplomat.
* Antonio Rivas Mercado, architect
* Emilia Ortiz, contemporary painter, caricaturist and poet, after whom the major downtown &quot;Centro de Arte Contemporaneo Emilia Ortiz&quot; has been named.
* Gustavo Ayón, NBA basketball player
* Francisco Guerrero, Mayor of San Francisco, 1836-1842.
* Luis Ernesto Franco, actor
* Joaquín Cosío, actor
* Tito Double P, singer-songwriter 
* Manuel Lozada, caudillo

== Sports ==
Nayarit had small stadiums built for football and baseball. Both now demolished, there are plans to construct new, modern, and bigger stadiums; the state has three sport private clubs. There are multiple football fields and places to play &quot;cascaritas&quot; (pick-up games), indoor football courts, a basketball center and gym (with wooden flooring), several volleyball courts, and a bowling alley. In addition to common sports, in the city&#x27;s main park there is an olympic swimming pool and a squash field.
In Tepic, tennis is a popular sport, but the most popular is football (soccer). Futsal is also commonly played in the city. The city also has a bullring, as do most Mexican cities. Tepic has several state teams, one or more for each sport. Both the football and the basketball teams are named &quot;Coras&quot;.

== Geography ==
Located in the central part of the state, it stands at an altitude of 915 metres (3,002 ft) above sea level, on the banks of the Río Mololoa and the Río Tepic, approximately 225 kilometres (140 mi) north-west of Guadalajara, Jalisco. Nearby are the extinct Sangangüey volcano and its crater lake.
=== Climate ===
Tepic has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Cwa&quot;), with most rain falling in the wet season from April to November, sometimes in December.

==Transport==
Tepic is served by Tepic International Airport, with two commercial passenger airlines flying to it.

==Twin towns – sister cities==
* Havana, Cuba
* Paramount, California, United States
* Caborca, Sonora, Mexico
* Compostela, Nayarit, Mexico

== See also ==
* Tepic Territory

== References ==
== Sources and external links ==
* Link to tables of population data from Census of 2005 INEGI: Instituto Nacional de Estadística, Geografía e Informática
* Nayarit Enciclopedia de los Municipios de México
* (Ayuntamiento de Tepic)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207972" start="0" end="5" title="Tepic" label="Tepic"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="56" end="63" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q112865" start="64" end="69" title="Political divisions of Mexico" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q79920" start="73" end="80" title="Nayarit" label="Nayarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001115" start="109" end="127" title="Tepic Municipality" label="Tepic Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896783" start="237" end="248" title="Río Mololoa" label="Río Mololoa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="257" end="266" title="Río Tepic" label="Río Tepic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="296" end="316" title="Guadalajara, Jalisco" label="Guadalajara, Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8538561" start="373" end="383" title="Sangangüey" label="Sangangüey"/>
<link wikidata="Q79920" start="717" end="724" title="Nayarit" label="Nayarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162132" start="778" end="785" title="Huichol people" label="Huichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131790" start="807" end="811" title="Cora people" label="Cora"/>
<link wikidata="Q45009" start="822" end="831" title="Purépecha" label="Purépecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="858" end="869" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758606" start="944" end="978" title="Immaculate Conception Cathedral, Tepic" label="Catedral de la Purísima Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="997" end="1018" title="Immaculate Conception" label="Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="1027" end="1036" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q877208" start="1058" end="1089" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Tepic" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Tepic"/>
<link wikidata="Q373074" start="1093" end="1102" title="suffragan diocese" label="suffragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364555" start="1145" end="1171" title="Archdiocese of Guadalajara" label="Archdiocese of Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q367972" start="1197" end="1209" title="Juan Escutia" label="Juan Escutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q367972" start="1211" end="1219" title="Niños Héroes" label="Boy hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536618" start="1227" end="1248" title="Battle of Chapultepec" label="Battle of Chapultepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072510" start="1382" end="1400" title="Chapultepec Castle" label="Chapultepec Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="1404" end="1415" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q122462" start="1486" end="1499" title="Flag of Mexico" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q535388" start="1527" end="1545" title="Luis E. Miramontes" label="Luis E. Miramontes"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="1575" end="1599" title="combined oral contraceptive pill" label="first contraceptive pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q452130" start="1602" end="1613" title="Amado Nervo" label="Amado Nervo"/>
<link wikidata="Q604608" start="1636" end="1657" title="Antonio Rivas Mercado" label="Antonio Rivas Mercado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488313" start="1671" end="1683" title="Emilia Ortiz" label="Emilia Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q580031" start="1832" end="1844" title="Gustavo Ayón" label="Gustavo Ayón"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483428" start="1870" end="1888" title="Francisco Guerrero (politician)" label="Francisco Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="1899" end="1912" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700515" start="1927" end="1946" title="Luis Ernesto Franco" label="Luis Ernesto Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690888" start="1956" end="1969" title="Joaquín Cosío" label="Joaquín Cosío"/>
<link wikidata="Q130272194" start="1979" end="1992" title="Tito Double P" label="Tito Double P"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752698" start="2015" end="2028" title="Manuel Lozada" label="Manuel Lozada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="2090" end="2098" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400554" start="2163" end="2195" title="Estadio del Bicentenario (Tepic)" label="new, modern, and bigger stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="2579" end="2585" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="2640" end="2646" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q171401" start="2649" end="2655" title="Futsal" label="Futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193438" start="2713" end="2721" title="bullring" label="bullring"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="3223" end="3248" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3250" end="3279" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231675" start="3420" end="3447" title="Tepic International Airport" label="Tepic International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="3536" end="3542" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q927134" start="3551" end="3560" title="Paramount, California" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3562" end="3572" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024929" start="3590" end="3597" title="Caborca" label="Caborca"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="3599" end="3605" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651919" start="3616" end="3626" title="Compostela, Nayarit" label="Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q79920" start="3628" end="3635" title="Nayarit" label="Nayarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143350" start="3662" end="3677" title="Tepic Territory" label="Tepic Territory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647079" wikidata="Q3247049" url="?curid=647079" title="Officer of arms">
<text>An officer of arms is a person appointed by a sovereign or state with authority to perform one or more of the following functions:
* to control and initiate armorial matters;
* to arrange and participate in ceremonies of state;
* to conserve and interpret heraldic and genealogical records.

==By country==
The medieval practice of appointing heralds or pursuivants to the establishment of a noble household is still common in European countries, particularly those in which there is no official heraldic control or authority. Such appointments are also still made in Scotland, where four private officers of arms exist. These appointments are all purely advisory.

===Canada===
Work completed by the Canadian Heraldic Authority is conducted by officers known as the herald of arms. The organization is led by the Herald Chancellor of Canada and the Chief Herald of Canada, the latter serving as the director for the heraldic authority. In addition to the Chief Herald, other herald of arms includes the Athabaska Herald, Assiniboine Herald, Coppermine Herald, Fraser Herald, Miramichi Herald, Saguenay Herald, and the Saint-Laurent Herald.

In addition to the herald in ordinary, several retired heralds and notable individuals were named to the honorary position of Herald Emeritus or Heralds Extraordinary. This includes the Albion Herald Extraordinary, Capilano Herald Extraordinary, Cowichan Herald Extraordinary, Dauphin Herald Extraordinary, Niagara Herald Extraordinary, Rouge Herald Extraordinary, Outaouais Herald Emeritus, and the Rideau Herald Emeritus.

===Ireland===
In the Republic of Ireland, matters armorial and genealogical come within the authority of an officer designated the Chief Herald of Ireland. The legal basis for Ireland&#x27;s heraldic authority, and therefore all grants since 1943, has been questioned by the Attorney General, therefore, on 8 May 2006, Senator Brendan Ryan introduced the Genealogy &amp; Heraldry Bill, 2006, in Seanad Éireann (Irish Senate) to remedy this situation and legitimise actions since the transfer of power from the Ulster King of Arms.

===Netherlands===
In the Netherlands, officers of arms do not exist as permanent functions. Private heraldry is not legislated, and state heraldry and the heraldry of the nobility is regulated by the private High Council of Nobility.

However, two kings of arms and two or four heralds of arms have figured during royal inauguration ceremonies. These were usually members of the High Council of Nobility. During the inaugurations of Wilhelmina and Juliana, the kings of arms wore nineteenth-century-style court dress, whereas the heralds wore tabards. All officers carried rods and wore chains of office. In the inauguration of Queen Beatrix in 1980, members of the resistance posed as the ceremonial officers of arms, with Erik Hazelhoff Roelfzema being the elder king of arms. Like most other participants in the pageant, the officers of arms were no longer wearing ceremonial dress, but white tie instead. The senior king of arms proclaims the king or queen to be inaugurated after he or she has sworn allegiance to the constitution. The heralds step outside the New Church in Amsterdam, where the inauguration ceremony is held, to announce this fact to the people gathered outside the church.

===United Kingdom===
In England, the authority of the thirteen officers of arms in ordinary, who form the corporation of the kings, heralds and pursuivants of arms (College of Arms), extends throughout the Commonwealth, with the exception of Scotland, Canada and South Africa.

Officers of arms are of three ranks: kings of arms, heralds of arms, and pursuivants of arms. Officers of arms whose appointments are of a permanent nature are known as &quot;officers of arms in ordinary&quot;; those whose appointments are of a temporary or occasional nature are known as &quot;officers of arms extraordinary&quot;. The officers of arms in ordinary who form the College of Arms are members of the royal household and receive a nominal salary.

In Scotland, the Lord Lyon King of Arms and the Lyon Clerk and Keeper of the Records control armorial matters within a strict legal framework not enjoyed by their fellow officers of arms in London, and the court which is a part of Scotland&#x27;s criminal jurisdiction has its own prosecutor, the court&#x27;s Procurator Fiscal, who is, however, not an officer of arms. Lord Lyon and the Lyon Clerk are appointed by the crown, and, with the Crown&#x27;s authority, Lyon appoints the other Scottish officers. The officers of arms in Scotland are also members of the royal household.

==See also==
* Heraldry
* King of Arms
* Herald
* Pursuivant
* Private officer of arms
* College of Arms
* Court of the Lord Lyon
* Canadian Heraldic Authority
* Genealogical Office
* Flemish Heraldic Council
* Imperial count palatine
* Cronista Rey de Armas
* Portugal Rei de Armas

== References ==
==External links==
* The College of Arms
* The Court of the Lord Lyon (archived)
* The Office of the Chief Herald of Ireland
* The Canadian Heraldic Authority (archived)
* The office of the Chief Herald of Sweden, Riksheraldikerämbetet (archived)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3247049" start="3" end="18" title="Officer of arms" label="officer of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304859" start="46" end="55" title="sovereign" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="59" end="64" title="Sovereign state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="157" end="165" title="coat of arms" label="armorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627975" start="207" end="217" title="ceremonies" label="ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="256" end="264" title="heraldry" label="heraldic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="269" end="281" title="genealogical" label="genealogical"/>
<link wikidata="Q696819" start="343" end="349" title="herald" label="herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q930086" start="354" end="364" title="pursuivant" label="pursuivant"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="392" end="397" title="Nobility" label="noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="427" end="433" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613815" start="516" end="525" title="Heraldic authority" label="authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="568" end="576" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246124" start="589" end="613" title="Private officer of arms" label="private officers of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="701" end="728" title="Canadian Heraldic Authority" label="Canadian Heraldic Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983896" start="814" end="841" title="Herald Chancellor of Canada" label="Herald Chancellor of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096751" start="850" end="872" title="Chief Herald of Canada" label="Chief Herald of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1004" end="1020" title="Athabaska Herald" label="Athabaska Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1022" end="1040" title="Assiniboine Herald" label="Assiniboine Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168835" start="1042" end="1059" title="Coppermine Herald" label="Coppermine Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981340" start="1061" end="1074" title="Fraser Herald" label="Fraser Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1076" end="1092" title="Miramichi Herald" label="Miramichi Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1094" end="1109" title="Saguenay Herald" label="Saguenay Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1119" end="1139" title="Saint-Laurent Herald" label="Saint-Laurent Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1328" end="1355" title="Albion Herald Extraordinary" label="Albion Herald Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1357" end="1386" title="Capilano Herald Extraordinary" label="Capilano Herald Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1388" end="1417" title="Cowichan Herald Extraordinary" label="Cowichan Herald Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1419" end="1447" title="Dauphin Herald Extraordinary" label="Dauphin Herald Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1449" end="1477" title="Niagara Herald Extraordinary" label="Niagara Herald Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1479" end="1505" title="Rouge Herald Extraordinary" label="Rouge Herald Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="1507" end="1532" title="Outaouais Herald Emeritus" label="Outaouais Herald Emeritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="1588" end="1607" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531582" start="1698" end="1721" title="Chief Herald of Ireland" label="Chief Herald of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="1962" end="1976" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q953355" start="2077" end="2096" title="Ulster King of Arms" label="Ulster King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2124" end="2135" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2307" end="2331" title="High Council of Nobility" label="High Council of Nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q150747" start="2532" end="2542" title="Wilhelmina of the Netherlands" label="Wilhelmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q154946" start="2547" end="2554" title="Juliana of the Netherlands" label="Juliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351030" start="2604" end="2615" title="court dress" label="court dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q535449" start="2642" end="2648" title="tabard" label="tabard"/>
<link wikidata="Q29574" start="2727" end="2740" title="Queen Beatrix" label="Queen Beatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474417" start="2765" end="2775" title="Dutch resistance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248705" start="2823" end="2847" title="Erik Hazelhoff Roelfzema" label="Erik Hazelhoff Roelfzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064153" start="2967" end="2983" title="ceremonial dress" label="ceremonial dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q29235661" start="2989" end="2998" title="white tie" label="white tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419675" start="3165" end="3175" title="Nieuwe Kerk, Amsterdam" label="New Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="3179" end="3188" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="3462" end="3477" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3503" end="3515" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3549" end="3555" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3560" end="3572" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q900575" start="3612" end="3625" title="King of Arms" label="kings of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="3954" end="3969" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q56877" start="3989" end="4004" title="Royal Households of the United Kingdom" label="royal household"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523599" start="4053" end="4075" title="Lord Lyon King of Arms" label="Lord Lyon King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709619" start="4084" end="4120" title="Lyon Clerk and Keeper of the Records" label="Lyon Clerk and Keeper of the Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420805" start="4346" end="4363" title="Procurator Fiscal" label="Procurator Fiscal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="4634" end="4642" title="Heraldry" label="Heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q900575" start="4645" end="4657" title="King of Arms" label="King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q696819" start="4660" end="4666" title="Herald" label="Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q930086" start="4669" end="4679" title="Pursuivant" label="Pursuivant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246124" start="4682" end="4705" title="Private officer of arms" label="Private officer of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="4708" end="4723" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="4726" end="4748" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="4751" end="4778" title="Canadian Heraldic Authority" label="Canadian Heraldic Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531582" start="4781" end="4800" title="Genealogical Office" label="Genealogical Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194060" start="4803" end="4827" title="Flemish Heraldic Council" label="Flemish Heraldic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623219" start="4830" end="4853" title="Imperial count palatine" label="Imperial count palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187716" start="4856" end="4877" title="Cronista Rey de Armas" label="Cronista Rey de Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17264838" start="4880" end="4901" title="Portugal Rei de Armas" label="Portugal Rei de Armas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647081" wikidata="Q227095" url="?curid=647081" title="Ultra">
<text>Ultra may refer to:
==Science and technology==
* Ultra (cryptography), the codename for cryptographic intelligence obtained from signal traffic in World War II
* Adobe Ultra, a vector-keying application
* Sun Ultra series, a brand of computer workstations and servers
* ULTRA (machine translation system), a machine translation system

==Music==
* Ultra (British band), an English pop band
* Ultra Music Festival, an annual electronic festival in Miami, Florida
* Ultra Worldwide, a series of annual electronic music festivals each called Ultra
* Ultra, a collaboration between two members of hip hop group Ultramagnetic MCs, who released the album &quot;Big Time&quot;
* Ultra (music), a post-punk movement in the Netherlands
* Ultra house, a music place in Handen, Sweden
* Ultra Records, a record label

===Albums and songs===
* &quot;Ultra&quot; (Depeche Mode album), 1997
* &quot;Ultra&quot; (Laura Põldvere album), 2009
* &quot;Ultra&quot; (Ultra album), 1999
* &quot;Ultra&quot; (Zomby album), 2016
* &quot;Ultra&quot;, by Mickey Kojak, 2022
* &quot;Ultra&quot;, by Schaft, 2016
* &quot;Ultra&quot;, a song by KMFDM, 1994
* &quot;Ultra&quot;, a song by Stray Kids from &quot;Hop&quot;, 2024

==Politics==
* Ultra (Malaysia), a Malaysian group of racial extremists
* ULTRA (UK agency), the Unrelated Live Transplant Regulatory Authority, a defunct UK government regulatory body
* Ultra-royalists or Ultras, a reactionary group after Napoleon&#x27;s defeat

==Sport==
* Ultras, football fans renowned for ultra-fanatical support, sometimes to the point of violence
* The ULTRA (University of Life Training and Recreational Arena), former name for the PhilSports Arena in Pasig, Philippines
* Ultra Motorsports, a NASCAR team that ran from 1995–2005
* Ultra running, endurance races at distances typically beyond marathon

==Fiction==
* &quot;Ultra&quot; (film), a 1991 Italian drama film
* &quot;Ultra&quot; (comics), a miniseries by Image Comics
* &quot;Ultra Series&quot;, the Ultraman franchise
* Ultra the Multi-Alien, a DC Comics superhero

==Other uses==
* &quot;Ultra&quot; (magazine), avant-garde Finnish-Swedish magazine in Finland
* &quot;Ultra&quot; (podcast), a 2022 Rachel Maddow podcast series chronicling U.S. right-wing extremism during the 1930s and 1940s
* ULTra (rapid transit), a personal rapid transit system deployed at London Heathrow airport
* Ultra (TV channel), a Serbian children&#x27;s channel
* Ultra Electronics, a British defence and aerospace company
* Ultra Games, a subsidiary of Konami of America
* Ultra-prominent peak, a mountain with a topographic prominence of at least 1,500 metres
* Ultra Food &amp; Drug, a defunct supermarket chain in Ontario, Canada
* Ultra Distributors, a home video distribution company in India
* Unmanned Long-endurance Tactical Reconnaissance Aircraft, a developmental unmanned aerial vehicle

==See also==
* Ultraa, a DC Comics character
* Ultras (disambiguation)
* MKULTRA (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q227095" start="0" end="5" title="Ultra" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="49" end="69" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra (cryptography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824690" start="162" end="173" title="Adobe Ultra" label="Adobe Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050384" start="205" end="221" title="Sun Ultra series" label="Sun Ultra series"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345973" start="270" end="304" title="ULTRA (machine translation system)" label="ULTRA (machine translation system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003251" start="348" end="368" title="Ultra (British band)" label="Ultra (British band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q957459" start="392" end="412" title="Ultra Music Festival" label="Ultra Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q957459" start="464" end="479" title="Ultra Worldwide" label="Ultra Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252866" start="607" end="624" title="Ultramagnetic MCs" label="Ultramagnetic MCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q260095" start="672" end="685" title="Ultra (music)" label="Ultra (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880498" start="729" end="740" title="Ultra house" label="Ultra house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573393" start="776" end="789" title="Ultra Records" label="Ultra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q724698" start="832" end="870" title="Ultra (Depeche Mode album)" label="&amp;quot;Ultra&amp;quot; (Depeche Mode album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q433029" start="879" end="919" title="Ultra (Laura Põldvere album)" label="&amp;quot;Ultra&amp;quot; (Laura Põldvere album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003250" start="928" end="959" title="Ultra (Ultra album)" label="&amp;quot;Ultra&amp;quot; (Ultra album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597822" start="968" end="999" title="Ultra (Zomby album)" label="&amp;quot;Ultra&amp;quot; (Zomby album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809709" start="1030" end="1042" title="Mickey Kojak" label="Mickey Kojak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430923" start="1073" end="1079" title="Schaft" label="Schaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351424" start="1117" end="1122" title="KMFDM" label="KMFDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q131380834" start="1182" end="1185" title="Hop (mixtape)" label="Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453642" start="1214" end="1230" title="Ultra (Malaysia)" label="Ultra (Malaysia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865063" start="1273" end="1290" title="ULTRA (UK agency)" label="ULTRA (UK agency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526084" start="1386" end="1400" title="Ultra-royalist" label="Ultra-royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q386636" start="1475" end="1481" title="Ultras" label="Ultras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616959" start="1572" end="1581" title="The ULTRA" label="The ULTRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880474" start="1697" end="1714" title="Ultra Motorsports" label="Ultra Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q26303" start="1756" end="1769" title="Ultra running" label="Ultra running"/>
<link wikidata="Q663601" start="1841" end="1865" title="Ultra (film)" label="&amp;quot;Ultra&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880424" start="1895" end="1921" title="Ultra (comics)" label="&amp;quot;Ultra&amp;quot; (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340870" start="1960" end="1972" title="Ultra Series" label="Ultra Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880502" start="2005" end="2026" title="Ultra the Multi-Alien" label="Ultra the Multi-Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q11899477" start="2068" end="2096" title="Ultra (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Ultra&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q555" start="2148" end="2175" title="Ultra (podcast)" label="&amp;quot;Ultra&amp;quot; (podcast)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547230" start="2280" end="2301" title="ULTra (rapid transit)" label="ULTra (rapid transit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12759867" start="2373" end="2391" title="Ultra (TV channel)" label="Ultra (TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880445" start="2429" end="2446" title="Ultra Electronics" label="Ultra Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492131" start="2490" end="2501" title="Ultra Games" label="Ultra Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116906" start="2539" end="2559" title="Ultra-prominent peak" label="Ultra-prominent peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958809" start="2629" end="2650" title="Ultra Food &amp;amp; Drug" label="Ultra Food &amp;amp; Drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880440" start="2701" end="2719" title="Ultra Distributors" label="Ultra Distributors"/>
<link wikidata="Q126193101" start="2766" end="2822" title="Unmanned Long-endurance Tactical Reconnaissance Aircraft" label="Unmanned Long-endurance Tactical Reconnaissance Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003265" start="2880" end="2886" title="Ultraa" label="Ultraa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880619" start="2912" end="2935" title="Ultras (disambiguation)" label="Ultras (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716479" start="2938" end="2962" title="MKULTRA (disambiguation)" label="MKULTRA (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647085" wikidata="Q255060" url="?curid=647085" title="Kelly Brook">
<text>Kelly Brook (born Kelly Anne Parsons, 23 November 1979) is an English model, actress, and media personality. She began her career modelling for a range of advertising campaigns, which led to her discovery by the editorial team of the &quot;Daily Star&quot; tabloid, where they began featuring her as a Page Three girl. She was crowned &quot;FHM&quot;″s Sexiest Woman in the World in 2005, and as of 2015 had featured in every &quot;FHM&quot; 100 Sexiest countdown since 1998.

As an actress, Brook has appeared in the films &quot;&quot;Ripper&quot;&quot; (2001), &quot;The Italian Job&quot; (2003), &quot;School for Seduction&quot; (2004), &quot;House of 9&quot; (2004), &quot;Survival Island&quot; (2005), &quot;Fishtales&quot; (2007), &quot;Piranha 3D&quot; (2010), and &quot;Taking Stock&quot; (2015). She has appeared on numerous British television shows, including &quot;The Big Breakfast&quot; (1999), &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot; (2007), &quot;Britain&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; (2009), &quot;Celebrity Juice&quot; (2012–2015), &quot;One Big Happy&quot; (2015), &quot;&quot;It&#x27;s Not Me, It&#x27;s You&quot;&quot; (2016), &quot;Loose Women&quot; (2018), and &quot;The Great Stand Up to Cancer Bake Off&quot; (2020). Since 2019, Brook has co-presented Heart London&#x27;s &quot;Drivetime Radio Show&quot; with Jason King.

==Early life==
Brook was born Kelly Anne Parsons in Rochester, Kent, the daughter of Sandra Kelly, a cook, and Kenneth Parsons, a scaffolder. She has a younger brother, Damian, and an older half-sister, Sasha. Kenneth Parsons died, aged 57, in Rochester from lung cancer, on 26 November 2007, during Brook&#x27;s time on &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;. Brook attended the Thomas Aveling School in Warren Wood, Rochester. In 1996, at the age of seventeen, she appeared in the second series of &quot;Fist of Fun&quot;, the BBC comedy show from Stewart Lee and Richard Herring as a schoolgirl in a series of sketches entitled &#x27;Teachers&#x27; (one of her co-stars was the young Daniel Mays). She studied at the Italia Conti Academy of Theatre Arts for three years, before becoming a professional model at the age of 16.

==Modelling career==
Brook&#x27;s modelling career began at 16 after she won a beauty competition, into which her mother had entered her. She later worked on a range of advertising campaigns, including Foster&#x27;s Lager, Renault Mégane, Walker&#x27;s crisps, Piz Buin and Bravissimo, a company that specialises in bras and lingerie for large-breasted women. Soon after, she caught the eye of the editorial team of the &quot;Daily Star&quot; tabloid, which began featuring her as a Page Three girl. Brook&#x27;s picture soon began appearing in other lads&#x27; mags such as &quot;GQ&quot;, &quot;Loaded&quot; and &quot;FHM&quot;. A poll of over 5,000 women for &quot;Grazia&quot; magazine considered her to have the best British female body. She also topped the &quot;FHM 100 Sexiest Women in the World&quot; list in 2005, which was said to have polled 15 million people. Appearing in this list every year since 1998, she ranked No. 34 in 2008, No. 67 in 2009, and No. 7 in 2010. She was the cover star of &quot;FHM&quot; World Cup 2010 special issue, and was on the cover of the magazine in April 2011.

In February 2007, it was announced that Brook had signed a contract, reported to be worth around £1m, to represent Unilever&#x27;s Lynx body spray, known as &quot;Axe&quot; in the US and in continental Europe. She has appeared on billboards, in newspapers and on-line as part of their advertising campaign. She also appeared in commercials for Sky+ and T-Mobile and modelled for Reebok. In 2010, she was chosen as the &quot;new face and body&quot; of lingerie maker Ultimo&#x27;s advertising campaign. In September 2010, Brook appeared in the American edition of &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine. In October 2010, Brook appeared live at Clapham Picture House to surprise cinemagoers as part of a promotion for Carlsberg and Sky 3D. In November 2010, Brook presented an award at MTV&#x27;s EMA&#x27;s in Madrid. Brook produced a line of swimwear with New Look, for which she has modelled. In September 2014, Brook launched a clothing line for Simply Be. The following year, she became a brand ambassador for Skechers.

== Acting career ==
In 2000, Brook made her full-screen debut with a minor role in the film &quot;Sorted&quot;. Shortly after that, she appeared in the film &quot;Ripper&quot;. She played the girlfriend of Clark Kent/Superman&#x27;s nemesis Lex Luthor in four episodes of the American science fiction drama &quot;Smallville&quot; during the show&#x27;s first season (2001–02). She has also completed assignments as a film actress in Canada and made a short appearance as Lyle&#x27;s girlfriend in the 2003 film &quot;The Italian Job&quot;. Her first starring role was in the 2004 film &quot;School for Seduction&quot;, for which she received positive reviews. In 2004, she played character Nikki Morris in the video game &quot;Need for Speed Underground 2&quot;, alongside Brooke Burke. In 2005, she appeared in the Philippe Vidal thriller &quot;House of 9&quot;, and starred opposite Billy Zane in the survival thriller &quot;Survival Island&quot;, also known as &quot;Three&quot;.

In 2006, she starred in an &quot;Agatha Christie&#x27;s Marple&quot; drama on ITV and appeared as herself throughout the second series of &quot;Moving Wallpaper&quot;, also for ITV, in 2009. She acted in the science fiction thriller &quot;Shadow Play&quot;, directed by Nick Simon. Brook had a leading role in the horror comedy remake &quot;Piranha 3D&quot;. The film received a worldwide theatrical release on 20 August 2010. &quot;Piranha 3D&quot; opened to generally positive reviews and commercial success, grossing $83.2 million on a budget of $24 million. 

Kelly played herself alongside Leigh Francis in the British comedy film &quot;Keith Lemon: The Film&quot; (2012). 
In 2013, Brook appeared in the video to Lawson&#x27;s song &quot;Juliet&quot;. In 2014 she was cast as Prudence in an NBC sitcom pilot called &quot;One Big Happy&quot;, which was subsequently picked up on 9 May.

===Theatre===
In December 2000, she played exotic dancer Anya in the play &quot;Eye Contact&quot; at the Riverside Studios in Hammersmith. In October 2008, she returned to the West End as Jeannie, in Neil LaBute&#x27;s &quot;Fat Pig&quot; at London&#x27;s Comedy Theatre. In November 2009, she began playing Celia in &quot;Calendar Girls&quot; at the Noël Coward Theatre. Brook made a cameo appearance in the cabaret show &quot;Forever Crazy&quot; by Crazy Horse London end of 2012.

==Other work==
===Music videos===
In 1997, at age 17, Brook appeared as a nurse in the music video for the KMFDM song &quot;Megalomaniac&quot;. That same year, Brook appeared in the video for Pulp&#x27;s &quot;Help the Aged&quot; with Huck Whitney of the band the Flaming Stars, in a slow dance sequence. In 2013, Brook appeared in the Lawson music video for their song &quot;Juliet&quot;, in the role of Juliet.

===Television presenting===
In 1997, aged 18, Brook started presenting youth television programmes on MTV UK &amp; Ireland, Granada Television and the Trouble TV channel. Brook had a breakthrough into mainstream presenting in January 1999, when she was chosen to replace Denise van Outen as the female half of &quot;The Big Breakfast&quot; hosting team, alongside Johnny Vaughan. She left the show in July 1999. In 2005, she hosted the reality television programme &quot;Celebrity Love Island&quot; for ITV.

===Reality television===

In 2007, Brook participated in the celebrity dancing competition &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot; on BBC1 with a dance partner Brendan Cole. During the TV series, her father, Kenneth Parsons, died of cancer. Although initially decided to continue dancing in his memory, she withdrew from the competition in week nine. She also competed in the &quot;Strictly Come Dancing Christmas Special 2008&quot;, dancing the Jive with Brian Fortuna, Brendan Cole having to compete with his later partner Lisa Snowdon. Brook and Fortuna were put into fourth place, but with the studio audience&#x27;s vote, they came second to Jill Halfpenny and Darren Bennett. In 2008, Brook took Jennifer Ellison&#x27;s place as one of the three judges on the second series of the reality TV programme &quot;Dirty Dancing: The Time of Your Life&quot;, broadcast between September and November 2008.

In January 2009, she joined the third series of &quot;Britain&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; as a fourth judge but was subsequently axed from the programme after less than a week on the panel, the producers having decided the four-judge format was &quot;too complicated&quot;. Brook was billed as a guest judge in the episode in which she appeared, taped in Manchester and aired on 16 May. In 2013, Brook became a temporary team captain on &quot;Celebrity Juice&quot; aired on ITV2. She appeared in Season 9, replacing Fearne Cotton while she was on maternity leave. In 2016, Brook served as a team captain on the Channel 5 panel show &quot;It&#x27;s Not Me, It&#x27;s You&quot;. In 2021, Brook appeared on &quot;The Masked Dancer&quot;, masked as a Frog. She was the eighth celebrity to be unmasked in the semi-final.

=== Books ===
In September 2014, Brook released her autobiography; it reached the &quot;Sunday Times&quot; Bestseller list on 21 September. Domestic violence groups criticised her during her promotional tour for laughing about punching ex-boyfriends Jason Statham and Danny Cipriani in the face.

=== Business ===
At end of 2013, Brook opened her bar Steam and Rye in London in partnership with Nick House. In June 2014, Steam and Rye won Bar of the Year at the London Club and Bar Awards.

=== Radio ===
Since January 2019, Brook has co-presented &quot;Heart London Drivetime&quot; and &quot;Saturday Breakfast with Jason King&quot;.

==Personal life==
In 2014, on an appearance on ITV&#x27;s &quot;This Morning&quot;, she admitted to punching previous boyfriends Jason Statham and Danny Cipriani in the face, with Men&#x27;s Domestic Abuse charity Menkind subsequently issuing a statement saying it was &quot;extremely disappointed&quot; by the segment. In July 2022, Brook married her longtime boyfriend Jeremy Parisi, whom she had dated since 2015.

==Filmography==

=== Film ===
=== Television ===
=== Television advertisements ===
=== Music videos ===
== Bibliography ==

* &quot;Close Up&quot; (2014) (autobiography)

==References==
==External links==
* JK and Kelly Brook on Heart Radio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q255060" start="0" end="11" title="Kelly Brook" label="Kelly Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q255060" start="18" end="36" title="Kelly Brook" label="Kelly Anne Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312950" start="240" end="250" title="Daily Star (United Kingdom)" label="Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674924" start="302" end="317" title="Page 3" label="Page Three girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q157015" start="341" end="344" title="FHM" label="FHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477823" start="530" end="548" title="Ripper (film)" label="&amp;quot;Ripper&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q648312" start="569" end="584" title="The Italian Job (2003 film)" label="The Italian Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q477377" start="605" end="625" title="School for Seduction" label="School for Seduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650277" start="646" end="656" title="House of 9" label="House of 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q692592" start="677" end="692" title="Survival Island" label="Survival Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455141" start="713" end="722" title="Fishtales" label="Fishtales"/>
<link wikidata="Q733995" start="743" end="753" title="Piranha 3D" label="Piranha 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q48672440" start="778" end="790" title="Taking Stock" label="Taking Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="876" end="893" title="The Big Breakfast" label="The Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="914" end="935" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q556444" start="956" end="981" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057743" start="1002" end="1017" title="Celebrity Juice" label="Celebrity Juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q18941856" start="1043" end="1056" title="One Big Happy (TV series)" label="One Big Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184656" start="1077" end="1120" title="It&amp;#x27;s Not Me, It&amp;#x27;s You (game show)" label="&amp;quot;It&amp;#x27;s Not Me, It&amp;#x27;s You&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451933" start="1141" end="1152" title="Loose Women" label="Loose Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737672" start="1177" end="1214" title="The Great Stand Up to Cancer Bake Off" label="The Great Stand Up to Cancer Bake Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934045" start="1264" end="1276" title="Heart London" label="Heart London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162865" start="1322" end="1332" title="Jason King (presenter)" label="Jason King"/>
<link wikidata="Q507517" start="1387" end="1402" title="Rochester, Kent" label="Rochester, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="1594" end="1605" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1662" end="1683" title="Strictly Come Dancing (Series 5)#Additional information" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768875" start="1710" end="1731" title="The Thomas Aveling School" label="Thomas Aveling School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455327" start="1836" end="1847" title="Fist of Fun" label="Fist of Fun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615848" start="1880" end="1891" title="Stewart Lee" label="Stewart Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718911" start="1896" end="1911" title="Richard Herring" label="Richard Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q579571" start="2017" end="2028" title="Daniel Mays" label="Daniel Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q348134" start="2050" end="2086" title="Italia Conti Academy of Theatre Arts" label="Italia Conti Academy of Theatre Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423785" start="2362" end="2381" title="Foster&amp;#x27;s Lager" label="Foster&amp;#x27;s Lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q222764" start="2383" end="2397" title="Renault Mégane" label="Renault Mégane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296097" start="2399" end="2419" title="Walkers (snack foods)" label="Walker&amp;#x27;s crisps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16588" start="2421" end="2429" title="Piz Buin" label="Piz Buin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958430" start="2434" end="2444" title="Bravissimo (company)" label="Bravissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312950" start="2586" end="2596" title="Daily Star (United Kingdom)" label="Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674924" start="2643" end="2658" title="Page 3" label="Page Three girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957360" start="2711" end="2726" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s magazines" label="lads&amp;#x27; mags"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="2741" end="2743" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663336" start="2757" end="2763" title="Loaded (magazine)" label="Loaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q157015" start="2780" end="2783" title="FHM" label="FHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544126" start="2828" end="2834" title="Grazia" label="Grazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27921999" start="2929" end="2963" title="FHM&amp;#x27;s 100 Sexiest Women (UK)" label="FHM 100 Sexiest Women in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q791930" start="3397" end="3412" title="Lynx (grooming product)" label="Lynx body spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="3456" end="3474" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962610" start="3610" end="3614" title="Sky+" label="Sky+"/>
<link wikidata="Q327634" start="3619" end="3627" title="T-Mobile International AG" label="T-Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="3645" end="3651" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880301" start="3732" end="3738" title="Ultimo (lingerie)" label="Ultimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="3835" end="3842" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q146659" start="3899" end="3906" title="Clapham" label="Clapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="4065" end="4071" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063852" start="4112" end="4120" title="New Look (company)" label="New Look"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956297" start="4204" end="4213" title="N Brown Group" label="Simply Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956562" start="4248" end="4264" title="brand ambassador" label="brand ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945643" start="4269" end="4277" title="Skechers" label="Skechers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303586" start="4378" end="4384" title="Sorted (film)" label="Sorted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477823" start="4443" end="4449" title="Ripper (film)" label="Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="4486" end="4496" title="Clark Kent" label="Clark Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="4497" end="4505" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q694790" start="4521" end="4531" title="Lex Luthor" label="Lex Luthor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180228" start="4593" end="4603" title="Smallville (TV series)" label="Smallville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4713" end="4719" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q648312" start="4797" end="4812" title="The Italian Job (2003 film)" label="The Italian Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q477377" start="4871" end="4891" title="School for Seduction" label="School for Seduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q726190" start="5007" end="5035" title="Need for Speed Underground 2" label="Need for Speed Underground 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q439927" start="5053" end="5065" title="Brooke Burke" label="Brooke Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650277" start="5126" end="5136" title="House of 9" label="House of 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q205435" start="5165" end="5175" title="Billy Zane" label="Billy Zane"/>
<link wikidata="Q692592" start="5207" end="5222" title="Survival Island" label="Survival Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q391056" start="5297" end="5326" title="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Marple" label="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Marple"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="5342" end="5345" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927123" start="5408" end="5424" title="Moving Wallpaper" label="Moving Wallpaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="5441" end="5444" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q733995" start="5605" end="5615" title="Piranha 3D" label="Piranha 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116190" start="5859" end="5872" title="Leigh Francis" label="Leigh Francis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5906" end="5927" title="Keith Lemon: The Film" label="Keith Lemon: The Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076" start="5983" end="5989" title="Lawson (band)" label="Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15427465" start="6008" end="6014" title="Juliet (Lawson song)" label="Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18941856" start="6091" end="6104" title="One Big Happy (TV series)" label="One Big Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338619" start="6261" end="6278" title="Riverside Studios" label="Riverside Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q277162" start="6282" end="6293" title="Hammersmith" label="Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="6332" end="6340" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q965498" start="6356" end="6367" title="Neil LaBute" label="Neil LaBute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489393" start="6381" end="6388" title="Fat Pig" label="Fat Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662026" start="6412" end="6426" title="Comedy Theatre" label="Comedy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019493" start="6479" end="6493" title="Calendar Girls (play)" label="Calendar Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067480" start="6507" end="6526" title="Noël Coward Theatre" label="Noël Coward Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351424" start="6747" end="6752" title="KMFDM" label="KMFDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808491" start="6764" end="6776" title="Megalomaniac (KMFDM song)" label="Megalomaniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q504464" start="6832" end="6836" title="Pulp (band)" label="Pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710157" start="6850" end="6863" title="Help the Aged (song)" label="Help the Aged"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734364" start="6875" end="6887" title="Huck Whitney" label="Huck Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734364" start="6900" end="6917" title="the Flaming Stars" label="the Flaming Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076" start="6976" end="6982" title="Lawson (band)" label="Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15427465" start="7016" end="7022" title="Juliet (Lawson song)" label="Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="7178" end="7196" title="Granada Television" label="Granada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846398" start="7205" end="7215" title="Trouble (channel)" label="Trouble TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257792" start="7325" end="7341" title="Denise van Outen" label="Denise van Outen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="7370" end="7387" title="The Big Breakfast" label="The Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196754" start="7418" end="7432" title="Johnny Vaughan" label="Johnny Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690861" start="7525" end="7546" title="Celebrity Love Island" label="Celebrity Love Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="7660" end="7681" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="7691" end="7695" title="BBC1" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q908654" start="7717" end="7729" title="Brendan Cole" label="Brendan Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="7939" end="7983" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing Christmas Special 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q17237" start="8003" end="8007" title="Jive (dance)" label="Jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q912178" start="8013" end="8026" title="Brian Fortuna" label="Brian Fortuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q530227" start="8082" end="8094" title="Lisa Snowdon" label="Lisa Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409080" start="8204" end="8218" title="Jill Halfpenny" label="Jill Halfpenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202378" start="8223" end="8237" title="Darren Bennett (dancer)" label="Darren Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q269749" start="8259" end="8275" title="Jennifer Ellison" label="Jennifer Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8371" end="8407" title="Dirty Dancing: The Time of Your Life" label="Dirty Dancing: The Time of Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969216" start="8495" end="8507" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent (series 3)" label="third series"/>
<link wikidata="Q556444" start="8517" end="8542" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="8814" end="8824" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057743" start="8902" end="8917" title="Celebrity Juice" label="Celebrity Juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715155" start="8933" end="8937" title="ITV2" label="ITV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q542860" start="8975" end="8988" title="Fearne Cotton" label="Fearne Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="9070" end="9079" title="Channel 5 (UK)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184656" start="9097" end="9128" title="It&amp;#x27;s Not Me, It&amp;#x27;s You (game show)" label="It&amp;#x27;s Not Me, It&amp;#x27;s You"/>
<link wikidata="Q106153528" start="9169" end="9186" title="The Masked Dancer (British TV series)" label="The Masked Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="9364" end="9376" title="Sunday Times" label="Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="9416" end="9433" title="Domestic violence" label="Domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q169963" start="9526" end="9539" title="Jason Statham" label="Jason Statham"/>
<link wikidata="Q433797" start="9544" end="9558" title="Danny Cipriani" label="Danny Cipriani"/>
<link wikidata="Q125935854" start="9671" end="9681" title="Nick House" label="Nick House"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934045" start="9830" end="9842" title="Heart London" label="Heart London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162865" start="9893" end="9903" title="Jason King (presenter)" label="Jason King"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="9959" end="9969" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786162" start="9976" end="9988" title="This Morning (TV programme)" label="This Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q169963" start="10041" end="10054" title="Jason Statham" label="Jason Statham"/>
<link wikidata="Q433797" start="10059" end="10073" title="Danny Cipriani" label="Danny Cipriani"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647088" wikidata="Q3131309" url="?curid=647088" title="Henry IX">
<text>Henry IX may refer to:

==People==
* Henry IX, Duke of Bavaria (1075–1126), also called &quot;the Black&quot;
* Henry IX of Lubin (1369 – between 1419 and 1420)
* Henryk IX Starszy (c. 1389 – 1467), Duke of Żagań-Głogó
* Heinrich IX, Count Reuss of Köstritz (1711–1780)
* Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales (1594–1612), the &quot;would-be&quot; King Henry IX
* Henry Benedict Stuart (1725–1807), Jacobite claimant to the throne of England, Scotland and Ireland
* Henry Dundas, 1st Viscount Melville (1742–1811), nicknamed &quot;Henry IX&quot; for his personal power in Scotland

==Fictional characters==
* Ruler of the United Kingdom in the 2003 Martin Amis novel &quot;Yellow Dog&quot;
* Son of Henry VIII and king of England in the 1976 Kingsley Amis novel &quot;The Alteration&quot;
* Ruling monarch of a Nazi-occupied Britain in the 2003 Harry Turtledove novel &quot;In the Presence of Mine Enemies&quot;
* An illegitimate son of Queen Elizabeth I in the Japanese anime television series &quot;Code Geass&quot;

==Other uses==
* &quot;Henry IX&quot; (TV series), British television sitcom

== See also ==
* Henry, Duke of Cornwall, who would have been Henry IX</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3131309" start="0" end="8" title="Henry IX" label="Henry IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q60171" start="37" end="62" title="Henry IX, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry IX, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q442060" start="112" end="129" title="Henry IX of Lubin" label="Henry IX of Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q481444" start="163" end="180" title="Henryk IX Starszy" label="Henryk IX Starszy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597845" start="221" end="257" title="Heinrich IX, Count Reuss of Köstritz" label="Heinrich IX, Count Reuss of Köstritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q82631" start="272" end="304" title="Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q318219" start="359" end="380" title="Henry Benedict Stuart" label="Henry Benedict Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q335351" start="461" end="496" title="Henry Dundas, 1st Viscount Melville" label="Henry Dundas, 1st Viscount Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051717" start="668" end="678" title="Yellow Dog (novel)" label="Yellow Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713244" start="763" end="777" title="The Alteration" label="The Alteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q371116" start="869" end="900" title="In the Presence of Mine Enemies" label="In the Presence of Mine Enemies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207981" start="996" end="1006" title="Code Geass" label="Code Geass"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608146" start="1031" end="1063" title="Henry IX (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Henry IX&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q928719" start="1109" end="1132" title="Henry, Duke of Cornwall" label="Henry, Duke of Cornwall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647092" wikidata="Q930086" url="?curid=647092" title="Pursuivant">
<text>A pursuivant or, more correctly, pursuivant of arms, is a junior officer of arms. Most pursuivants are attached to official heraldic authorities, such as the College of Arms in London or the Court of the Lord Lyon in Edinburgh. In the mediaeval era, many great nobles employed their own officers of arms. Today, there still exist some private pursuivants that are not employed by a government authority. In Scotland, for example, several pursuivants of arms have been appointed by Clan Chiefs. These pursuivants of arms look after matters of heraldic and genealogical importance for clan members.

==Nationally appointed pursuivants==
===English Pursuivants of Arms in Ordinary===

* Bluemantle Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary
* Portcullis Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary
* Rouge Croix Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary
* Rouge Dragon Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary

===English Pursuivants of Arms Extraordinary===
* Fitzalan Pursuivant of Arms Extraordinary
* Howard Pursuivant of Arms Extraordinary

===Scottish Pursuivants of Arms in Ordinary===
* Bute Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary
* Carrick Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary
* Dingwall Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary
* Kintyre Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary
* Ormond Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary
* Unicorn Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary

===Scottish Pursuivants of Arms Extraordinary===
* Linlithgow Pursuivant of Arms Extraordinary
* Falkland Pursuivant of Arms Extraordinary
* March Pursuivant of Arms Extraordinary

===Irish Pursuivant of Arms===
* Athlone Pursuivant

==Privately appointed pursuivants==
* Slains Pursuivant of Arms
* Garioch Pursuivant of Arms
* Endure Pursuivant of Arms
* Finlaggan Pursuivant of Arms
* Persevante León Blanco de Armas

==Role with the same name in Freemasonry==
Some Masonic Grand Lodges have an office known as the Grand Pursuivant. It is the Grand Pursuivant&#x27;s duty to announce all applicants for admission into the Grand Lodge by their names and Masonic titles; to take charge of the jewels and regalia of the Grand Lodge; to attend all meetings of the Grand Lodge, and to perform such other duties as may be required by the Grand Master or presiding officer. The office is also at the local Masonic lodge level in the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. In that jurisdiction it is the Pursuivant&#x27;s duty to guard the door of the lodge, and announce and escort applicants for admission into the lodge. The office is generally unknown at the local level in Masonic jurisdictions outside Pennsylvania, where these duties are performed by the Junior Deacon and Senior Deacon, or the Inner Guard in UGLE.

==See also==
* Heraldry
* Officer of Arms
* Private Officer of Arms
* Sergeant at arms 
* The College of Arms
* The Court of the Lord Lyon
* The Canadian Heraldic Authority

==References==
==External links==

*The Court of the Lord Lyon
*The College of Arms
*The Canadian Heraldic Authority
*The Office of the Chief Herald of Ireland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q930086" start="2" end="12" title="Pursuivant" label="pursuivant"/>
<link wikidata="Q930086" start="33" end="51" title="Pursuivant" label="pursuivant of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247049" start="65" end="80" title="officer of arms" label="officer of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="124" end="132" title="Heraldry" label="heraldic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="158" end="173" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="177" end="183" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="187" end="213" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="the Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="217" end="226" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="235" end="244" title="mediaeval" label="mediaeval"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="407" end="415" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="481" end="492" title="Scottish clan" label="Clan Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930377" start="684" end="725" title="Bluemantle Pursuivant" label="Bluemantle Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231536" start="728" end="769" title="Portcullis Pursuivant" label="Portcullis Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370771" start="772" end="814" title="Rouge Croix Pursuivant" label="Rouge Croix Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111477" start="817" end="860" title="Rouge Dragon Pursuivant" label="Rouge Dragon Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746213" start="912" end="953" title="Fitzalan Pursuivant Extraordinary" label="Fitzalan Pursuivant of Arms Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920660" start="956" end="995" title="Howard Pursuivant Extraordinary" label="Howard Pursuivant of Arms Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002481" start="1046" end="1081" title="Bute Pursuivant" label="Bute Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046147" start="1084" end="1122" title="Carrick Pursuivant" label="Carrick Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278285" start="1125" end="1164" title="Dingwall Pursuivant" label="Dingwall Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414415" start="1167" end="1205" title="Kintyre Pursuivant" label="Kintyre Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103449" start="1208" end="1245" title="Ormond Pursuivant" label="Ormond Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884781" start="1248" end="1286" title="Unicorn Pursuivant" label="Unicorn Pursuivant of Arms in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010145" start="1339" end="1382" title="Linlithgow Pursuivant Extraordinary" label="Linlithgow Pursuivant of Arms Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431975" start="1385" end="1426" title="Falkland Pursuivant Extraordinary" label="Falkland Pursuivant of Arms Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756860" start="1429" end="1467" title="March Pursuivant Extraordinary" label="March Pursuivant of Arms Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004653" start="1502" end="1520" title="Athlone Pursuivant" label="Athlone Pursuivant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538518" start="1560" end="1585" title="Slains Pursuivant" label="Slains Pursuivant of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523354" start="1588" end="1614" title="Garioch Pursuivant" label="Garioch Pursuivant of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094959" start="1617" end="1642" title="Endure Pursuivant" label="Endure Pursuivant of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450444" start="1645" end="1673" title="Finlaggan Pursuivant" label="Finlaggan Pursuivant of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187716" start="1676" end="1707" title="Cronista Rey de Armas" label="Persevante León Blanco de Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="1757" end="1764" title="Freemasonry" label="Masonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378781" start="1765" end="1776" title="Grand Lodge" label="Grand Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114965" start="2237" end="2264" title="Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania" label="Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2555" end="2568" title="Masonic_Lodge_Officers#Junior_Deacon" label="Junior Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2573" end="2586" title="Masonic_Lodge_Officers#Senior_Deacon" label="Senior Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="2610" end="2614" title="UGLE" label="UGLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="2632" end="2640" title="Heraldry" label="Heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247049" start="2643" end="2658" title="Officer of Arms" label="Officer of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246124" start="2661" end="2684" title="Private Officer of Arms" label="Private Officer of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611907" start="2687" end="2703" title="Sergeant at arms" label="Sergeant at arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="2707" end="2726" title="College of Arms" label="The College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="2729" end="2755" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="The Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="2758" end="2789" title="Canadian Heraldic Authority" label="The Canadian Heraldic Authority"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647095" wikidata="Q366336" url="?curid=647095" title="Ensoniq Mirage">
<text>The Ensoniq Mirage is one of the earliest affordable sampler-synths, introduced in 1984 as Ensoniq&#x27;s first product. Introduced at a list price of $1,695 with features previously only found on more expensive samplers like the Fairlight CMI, the Mirage sold nearly 8,000 units in its first year - more than the combined unit sales of all other samplers at that time. The Mirage sold over 30,000 units during its availability.

==History==
The Mirage is the brainchild of Robert Yannes, the man responsible for the MOS Technology SID (Sound Interface Device) chip in the Commodore 64. The Ensoniq Digital Oscillator Chip (Ensoniq ES5503 DOC – referred to the &quot;Q-chip&quot; in Ensoniq advertisements) that he designed was used in the Mirage, ESQ-1, SDP-1, and SQ-80 and the Apple IIGS personal computer.

The VLSI ES5503 allowed the Mirage to offer digital audio sampling technology at a dramatically lower price compared to existing competitors. In 1984, when the MSRP $1,695 Mirage debuted, the only other polyphonic digital audio samplers available were the E-mu Emulator II (MSRP $8,000 to $10,000) and the large Fairlight CMI Series II system (approximately $28,000 for a basic system). (The New England Digital Synclavier II system did not offer a polyphonic sampling option until later, in 1985.) The sampling resolution of the Mirage, Emulator II, and Fairlight CMI Series II was 8-bit. 

The Mirage was one of the first consumer products to utilize the then-new Microfloppy 3.5-inch floppy diskette format, and thereby early Mirage keyboards included the first Microfloppy drive shipped, the Shugart Venture model SA300.

In 1988, Ensoniq introduced a successor to the Mirage with the more advanced EPS (Ensoniq Performance Sampler), and later the EPS-16+ and finally, the ASR-10. After the launch of the EPS in 1988, Ensoniq cut the price of the Mirage to $899, making it by far the least-expensive sampler then available.

==Features and architecture==
The Mirage is an 8-bit sampler featuring eight voices of polyphony, 16 accessible oscillators (or 32-oscillator wavetable synthesis upon loading alternative operating system), analog resonant Curtis CEM3328 4-pole 24-dB/octave filters, a 61-key velocity-sensitive keyboard or else 2U rack-mount module case, multi-sampling (up to 16 samples across keyboard), multi-timbral operation, extensive MIDI implementation, a two-digit LED display, a 333-event sequencer. It has 128 KB of sample RAM (64 KB for each keyboard half), plus 16 KB system/sequencer RAM (totaling 144 KB), and it is not expandable. Sample rate is variable from 10 kHz to 33 kHz (up to 50 kHz with optional Ensoniq Input Sampling Filter) with available sample time ranging from 2 to 6.5 seconds accordingly (for each keyboard half).

It includes a built-in 3.5-inch SS/DD floppy disk drive, which is used to boot the operating system as well as to store samples and sequences. Each sample disk includes a copy of the operating system and can therefore be used as a boot disk (obviating dedicated boot disks).

Each disk stores six separate files of samples and up to eight sequences. The keyboard is pre-configured into two sections, each functioning as an independent instrument, with a movable split point. This makes it easy to have one sound for the right hand (an &quot;Upper&quot; sound) and another for the left (a &quot;Lower&quot; sound). However, the standard OS can not move samples between keyboard sections. Thus the diskette can save three Upper sounds and three Lower sounds. Ensoniq later released an alternative OS called MASOS (Mirage Advanced Sampling Operating System), which trades off performance features for editing features, including the ability to copy an Upper sound to a Lower sound, and vice versa.

Using a feature called multi-sampling, the Mirage is also capable of assigning multiple samples to different keys across its keyboard. Using this technique, the Mirage essentially turns into a polyphonic multi-timbral MIDI sound module complete with a velocity-sensitive keyboard that can be used to drive other MIDI sound modules as well its own sound engine.

Alternative 3rd-party operating systems which substantially change and expand the synthesis capability and utility of the Mirage were produced.

The Mirage sampler has a distinctive sound due its low-bitrate converters, analog CEM3328 filters. It can load alternative operating systems that expand its capabilities to a 32-digital-oscillator wavetable synthesizer with user-definable sampled wavetables.

==Models==
There are at least four keyboard versions of the Mirage.

The first Mirage (1984) had an all-metal case and endcaps, a keybed manufactured by Pratt-Reed, and large square black buttons.

Mirage DSK-8 (for Digital Sampling Keyboard, 8-voice) (1985) had small, gray, calculator-like buttons and a heavier-weighted-feel key-bed with polyphonic aftertouch. It also added the ability to send and receive MIDI program changes.

Mirage DSK-1 (1987) was shorter, housed in the same plastic case as later-produced Ensoniq ESQ-1 models, SQ-80, EPS, and other Ensoniq keyboards. The Mirage DSK-1 had a non-weighted keybed but added stereo outputs. The floppy disk drive, now with integrated recessed diskette holder, was repositioned above the modulation wheels. The DSK-1 did not include an expansion port, so the optional external Ensoniq Input Sampling Filter (and sequencer memory expansion) could not be installed. The Mirage DSK-1 sold for about $1300 USD.

A fourth concurrent version of the Mirage, also model DSK-8 but manufactured in Japan for the Asian and Australian markets, was similar to the original American DSK-8 except for its flat, seamless membrane panel over the front-panel switches (similar to an original Yamaha DX-7 and most microwave ovens) and the addition of a recessed diskette holder well in the right end of the front panel – the opposite side of the keyboard from the floppy disk drive (the disk drive being mounted exactly as the American DSK-8, at the front edge of the keyboard between the modulation wheels and the left end of the keybed). This Australasian DSK-8 variant included documentation in Japanese with English covers stating &quot;Distributed by Nihon Hammond, Ltd.&quot;

In addition to the above versions, a concurrent European variant Mirage was manufactured in Italy and featured a faster disk drive than the American version.

A 2U-size rack-mount module version of the Mirage, model DMS-8 (for Digital Sampling Module) and later DMS-1 were also produced. The case color of these rack-mount Mirage modules was either dark gray/black or light gray.

==Notable users==
Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis used the Mirage extensively on the Janet Jackson albums &quot;Janet Jackson&#x27;s Rhythm Nation 1814&quot; and &quot;Control&quot;.

The Bomb Squad used the Mirage on Public Enemy&#x27;s classic track &quot;Rebel Without a Pause&quot;.

Le Tigre used the Mirage on their debut album and their classic track &quot;Deceptacon&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*Mirage photo, history and info on VintageSynth.com
*Encyclopedic Site Devoted to the Mirage
*MirageNet user group and Mirage information
*Disks and manuals for the Mirage for sale online
*Archive of Mirage manuals at SynthManuals.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q366336" start="4" end="18" title="Ensoniq Mirage" label="Ensoniq Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q952362" start="91" end="98" title="Ensoniq" label="Ensoniq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144077" start="137" end="147" title="list price" label="list price"/>
<link wikidata="Q512222" start="230" end="243" title="Fairlight CMI" label="Fairlight CMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249074" start="474" end="487" title="Robert Yannes" label="Robert Yannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337888" start="517" end="535" title="MOS Technology SID" label="MOS Technology SID"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="573" end="585" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="632" end="638" title="ES5503" label="ES5503"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204572" start="748" end="753" title="Ensoniq ESQ-1" label="ESQ-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347326" start="755" end="760" title="Ensoniq SDP-1 Sampled Digital Piano" label="SDP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380049" start="766" end="771" title="Ensoniq SQ-80" label="SQ-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282269" start="780" end="790" title="Apple IIGS" label="Apple IIGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273181" start="1067" end="1071" title="E-mu Systems" label="E-mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273173" start="1072" end="1083" title="Emulator II" label="Emulator II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="1477" end="1488" title="Microfloppy" label="Microfloppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380044" start="1714" end="1717" title="Ensoniq EPS" label="EPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q126029312" start="1763" end="1770" title="Ensoniq EPS-16+" label="EPS-16+"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054957" start="1788" end="1794" title="Ensoniq ASR-10" label="ASR-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="1993" end="2000" title="sampler (musical instrument)" label="sampler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300395" start="2162" end="2168" title="Curtis Electromusic Specialties" label="Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="2364" end="2368" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q646683" start="2422" end="2431" title="Music sequencer" label="sequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="2809" end="2820" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="2954" end="2970" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4664" end="4670" title="Action_(piano)#Parts_of_the_keys_and_keybed" label="keybed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380049" start="5072" end="5077" title="Ensoniq SQ-80" label="SQ-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380044" start="5079" end="5082" title="Ensoniq EPS" label="EPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063111" start="6653" end="6678" title="Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis" label="Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="6714" end="6727" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q928863" start="6741" end="6780" title="Janet Jackson&amp;#x27;s Rhythm Nation 1814" label="Janet Jackson&amp;#x27;s Rhythm Nation 1814"/>
<link wikidata="Q530266" start="6797" end="6804" title="Control (Janet Jackson album)" label="Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q736338" start="6813" end="6827" title="The Bomb Squad" label="The Bomb Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="6847" end="6859" title="Public Enemy" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302069" start="6887" end="6908" title="Rebel Without a Pause" label="Rebel Without a Pause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431678" start="6917" end="6925" title="Le Tigre" label="Le Tigre"/>
<link wikidata="Q847634" start="6951" end="6962" title="Le Tigre (album)" label="debut album"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647096" wikidata="Q5123254" url="?curid=647096" title="City Journal">
<text>City Journal is a public policy magazine and website, published by the conservative Manhattan Institute for Policy Research think tank, that covers a range of topics on urban affairs, such as policing, education, housing, and other issues. The magazine also publishes articles on arts and culture, urban architecture, family culture, and other topics. The magazine began publishing in 1990.

==History==
&quot;City Journal&quot; was founded in 1990 by Richard Vigilante, editorial director of the Manhattan Institute, who also served as the magazine&#x27;s first editor. Vigilante originally sought to launch the magazine as a for profit venture but eventually persuaded William M. H. Hammett, head of the conservative Manhattan Institute. to adopt the project. Vigilante positioned &quot;City Journal&quot; as a more moderate and more cosmopolitan alternative to established right-wing institutions. The magazine initially published articles promoting privatization, fiscal discipline, government downsizing, and educational vouchers. Other New York-related topics covered in the magazine included criticisms of open admissions at CUNY, and the promotion of broken-windows policing.

=== 2020s ===
During the early 2020s, &quot;City Journal&quot; has attracted widespread national attention for its role in elevating debates on critical race theory, LGBTQ+ topics in education, and similar issues in the United States. Contributor Christopher Rufo, in particular, has drawn attention for writing numerous pieces in the magazine that often focus on these matters. In articles published by &quot;City Journal&quot;, Rufo has accused Seattle&#x27;s Office of Civil Rights of &quot;endorsing principles of segregationism, group-based guilt, and race essentialism&quot;; highlighted Disney and Twitter workers who have been convicted of child sexual abuse; suggested that there were significant levels of &#x27;grooming&#x27; in public schools&quot; while omitting that the study he cited concluded that the &quot;vast majority&quot; of American schools are safe; accused a California curriculum designer of wanting to make children &quot;chant to the gods Quetzalcoatl, Huitzilopochtli, and Xipe Totek&quot; —the State of California later paid $100,000 in legal fees and agreed to delete the Aztec god chants; and compared the diversity training conducted by the city of Seattle to &quot;cult programming&quot;.

==Publication==
The magazine is published by the conservative Manhattan Institute for Policy Research a national free-market think tank based in New York City. It was edited by Richard Vigilante and then Fred Siegel in the early 1990s. Myron Magnet, its editor from 1994 to 2006, is now editor-at-large. &quot;City Journal&quot;″s current editor is Brian C. Anderson, who was appointed in late 2006 after serving as senior editor for 10 years. The journal&#x27;s contributors include experts such as Senior Fellow Heather Mac Donald, Edward Glaeser, Steven Malanga, Nicole Gelinas, Kay Hymowitz, John Tierney, and Joel Kotkin. Although &quot;City Journal&quot; is based in New York City, its scope is national and often international, through the contributions of writers including Theodore Dalrymple from Britain, Claire Berlinski and Guy Sorman from France, and Bruce Bawer in Norway.

== Reception ==
Much of the reception of &quot;City Journal&quot; over the years has been divided along political lines.

Conservative commentator Jay Nordlinger, writing in &quot;National Review&quot;, called &quot;City Journal&quot; &quot;a beacon of civilization&quot;. In 2016, &quot;City Journal&quot; ranked second in &quot;The Global Grid&quot;″s &quot;Top 20 Urban Planning Websites&quot;, and again made the list in 2017, ranked fourth.

Alice O&#x27;Connor, a professor at the University of California, Santa Barbara, has written that &quot;City Journal&quot; is &quot;hardly a model of ideological moderation&quot;, and that its contributors are &quot;enmeshed in 1960s- and 1970s-era urbanology&quot;. She has criticized multiple writers for &quot;City Journal&quot; for reviving a &quot;relentlessly negative image of black cultural pathology to call for tougher measures to crack down on out-of-wedlock births&quot;, following articles praising Daniel P. Moynihan&#x27;s &quot;The Negro Family: The Case For National Action&quot;. Conservative author Sol Stern, a major contributor for the magazine since its inception, published a piece in liberal journal &quot;Democracy&quot; in 2020, accusing &quot;City Journal&quot; of removing contributors&#x27; editorial independence, and criticized the association of magazine trustee Rebekah Mercer with the alt-right outlet Breitbart.

==Notable contributors==

* Brian C. Anderson, editor of &quot;City Journal&quot;
* Steven Malanga, senior fellow and senior editor
* Claire Berlinski, contributor
* Coleman Hughes, contributing editor
* Theodore Dalrymple, contributing editor
* Edward Glaeser, senior fellow and contributing editor to &quot;City Journal&quot;
* Victor Davis Hanson, contributing editor
* Howard Husock, contributor
* Kay Hymowitz, senior fellow and contributing editor to &quot;City Journal&quot;
* Andrew Klavan, contributing editor
* Joel Kotkin, contributor
* John Leo, contributor
* Heather Mac Donald, senior fellow and contributing editor
* Myron Magnet, editor-at-large
* John O. McGinnis, contributor
* Judith Miller, adjunct fellow and contributing editor
* Lance Morrow, contributor
* Ian Penman, contributor
* Fred Siegel, senior fellow and contributing editor to &quot;City Journal&quot;
* Guy Sorman, contributing editor
* Harry Stein, contributing editor
* Sol Stern, adjunct fellow and contributing editor
* John Tierney, contributing editor
* Michael J. Totten, contributor
* John Stossel, video contributor
==See also==
*&quot;Economics Does Not Lie&quot;

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="18" end="31" title="public policy" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="32" end="40" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="71" end="83" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749265" start="84" end="123" title="Manhattan Institute for Policy Research" label="Manhattan Institute for Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="452" end="469" title="Richard Vigilante" label="Richard Vigilante"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749265" start="719" end="738" title="Manhattan Institute for Policy Research" label="Manhattan Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="953" end="966" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q173810" start="1014" end="1034" title="School voucher" label="educational vouchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1042" end="1050" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096312" start="1113" end="1128" title="open admissions" label="open admissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="1132" end="1136" title="City University of New York" label="CUNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q44028" start="1159" end="1173" title="Broken windows theory" label="broken-windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186753" start="1329" end="1349" title="critical race theory" label="critical race theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="1351" end="1357" title="LGBT" label="LGBTQ+"/>
<link wikidata="Q104783603" start="1432" end="1448" title="Christopher Rufo" label="Christopher Rufo"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="1703" end="1717" title="Racial segregation" label="segregationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q391156" start="1747" end="1759" title="essentialism" label="essentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="1779" end="1785" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="1790" end="1797" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="1833" end="1851" title="child sexual abuse" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147070" start="1907" end="1915" title="Child grooming" label="grooming"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2070" end="2080" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q207137" start="2081" end="2091" title="curriculum" label="curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q179818" start="2153" end="2165" title="Quetzalcoatl" label="Quetzalcoatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q219412" start="2167" end="2182" title="Huītzilōpōchtli" label="Huitzilopochtli"/>
<link wikidata="Q558970" start="2188" end="2198" title="Xipe Totec" label="Xipe Totek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749265" start="2472" end="2511" title="Manhattan Institute for Policy Research" label="Manhattan Institute for Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2555" end="2568" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948471" start="2646" end="2658" title="Myron Magnet" label="Myron Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963238" start="2759" end="2776" title="Brian C. Anderson" label="Brian C. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693963" start="2924" end="2942" title="Heather Mac Donald" label="Heather Mac Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292350" start="2944" end="2958" title="Edward Glaeser" label="Edward Glaeser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615017" start="2960" end="2974" title="Steven Malanga" label="Steven Malanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q121100251" start="2976" end="2990" title="Nicole Gelinas" label="Nicole Gelinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380277" start="2992" end="3004" title="Kay Hymowitz" label="Kay Hymowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15513491" start="3006" end="3018" title="John Tierney (journalist)" label="John Tierney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213649" start="3024" end="3035" title="Joel Kotkin" label="Joel Kotkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354751" start="3192" end="3210" title="Theodore Dalrymple" label="Theodore Dalrymple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122303" start="3225" end="3241" title="Claire Berlinski" label="Claire Berlinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122159" start="3246" end="3256" title="Guy Sorman" label="Guy Sorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3262" end="3268" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q991543" start="3274" end="3285" title="Bruce Bawer" label="Bruce Bawer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="3289" end="3295" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14401887" start="3445" end="3459" title="Jay Nordlinger" label="Jay Nordlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="3478" end="3493" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3628" end="3643" title="The Global Grid" label="The Global Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="3785" end="3824" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q713505" start="4257" end="4275" title="Daniel Patrick Moynihan" label="Daniel P. Moynihan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4289" end="4335" title="The Negro Family: The Case For National Action" label="The Negro Family: The Case For National Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555588" start="4363" end="4372" title="Sol Stern" label="Sol Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="4453" end="4460" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255481" start="4475" end="4484" title="Democracy (journal)" label="Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150645" start="4565" end="4587" title="editorial independence" label="editorial independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q27865661" start="4640" end="4654" title="Rebekah Mercer" label="Rebekah Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018230" start="4664" end="4673" title="alt-right" label="alt-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960434" start="4681" end="4690" title="Breitbart News" label="Breitbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963238" start="4721" end="4738" title="Brian C. Anderson" label="Brian C. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615017" start="4777" end="4791" title="Steven Malanga" label="Steven Malanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122303" start="4827" end="4843" title="Claire Berlinski" label="Claire Berlinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q62977947" start="4859" end="4873" title="Coleman Hughes" label="Coleman Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354751" start="4897" end="4915" title="Theodore Dalrymple" label="Theodore Dalrymple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292350" start="4939" end="4953" title="Edward Glaeser" label="Edward Glaeser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276395" start="5023" end="5042" title="Victor Davis Hanson" label="Victor Davis Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919939" start="5066" end="5079" title="Howard Husock" label="Howard Husock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380277" start="5095" end="5107" title="Kay Hymowitz" label="Kay Hymowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q505702" start="5177" end="5190" title="Andrew Klavan" label="Andrew Klavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213649" start="5214" end="5225" title="Joel Kotkin" label="Joel Kotkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244573" start="5241" end="5249" title="John Leo" label="John Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693963" start="5265" end="5283" title="Heather Mac Donald" label="Heather Mac Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948471" start="5325" end="5337" title="Myron Magnet" label="Myron Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247788" start="5357" end="5373" title="John O. McGinnis" label="John O. McGinnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q265810" start="5389" end="5402" title="Judith Miller" label="Judith Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483484" start="5445" end="5457" title="Lance Morrow" label="Lance Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982583" start="5473" end="5483" title="Ian Penman" label="Ian Penman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496268" start="5499" end="5510" title="Fred Siegel" label="Fred Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122159" start="5580" end="5590" title="Guy Sorman" label="Guy Sorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441678" start="5614" end="5625" title="Harry Stein (author)" label="Harry Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555588" start="5649" end="5658" title="Sol Stern" label="Sol Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q15513491" start="5701" end="5713" title="John Tierney (journalist)" label="John Tierney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834930" start="5737" end="5754" title="Michael J. Totten" label="Michael J. Totten"/>
<link wikidata="Q579324" start="5770" end="5782" title="John Stossel" label="John Stossel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333564" start="5822" end="5844" title="Economics Does Not Lie" label="Economics Does Not Lie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647097" wikidata="Q1276659" url="?curid=647097" title="Union Association">
<text>The Union Association was an American professional baseball league which competed with Major League Baseball, lasting for just the 1884 season. St. Louis won the pennant and joined the National League the following season. 

Seven of the twelve teams who were in the Association at some point during the season did not play a full schedule: four teams folded during the season and were replaced, while Chicago moved to Pittsburgh in late August.

==History==
The league was founded in September 1883 by the young St. Louis millionaire Henry Lucas, who was eventually named the league&#x27;s president, with owner Tom Pratt of the Philadelphia franchise serving as vice-president and Warren W. White of the Washington franchise as secretary.

After being appointed president, Lucas bought the best available players for his St. Louis franchise at the expense of the rest of the league, which represented an obvious conflict-of-interest situation: the Maroons subsequently opened the season with 20 straight wins, and finished with a record of 94–19 (.832 winning percentage), winning the pennant by 21 games after having clinched it with five weeks to play.

The league not only suffered from lopsided talent distribution, but also instability - four franchises folded during the season, forcing the league to scramble to replace them with three teams from lower leagues and one new team, while Chicago moved to Pittsburgh mid-season - and a poorly drafted schedule, which saw the league derisively dubbed &quot;The Onion League&quot; by its detractors in the two established leagues. The list of franchise movements is as follows:

* April 17: Season opens with the following franchises: Altoona Mountain Citys, Baltimore Monumentals, Boston Reds, Chicago Browns, Cincinnati Outlaw Reds, Philadelphia Keystones, St. Louis Maroons, and Washington Nationals
* May 31: Altoona Mountain Citys folded.
* June 7: Kansas City Cowboys were formed to take over Altoona&#x27;s games starting on this date.
* August 7: Philadelphia Keystones folded.
* August 18: Wilmington Quicksteps recruited from Eastern League to take over Philadelphia&#x27;s games, starting on this date.
* August 21: Chicago Browns played their last game before the franchise moved to Pittsburgh.
* September 15: Wilmington Quicksteps fold, having played their final game on September 12: at this point of the season, the St. Louis Maroons have already clinched the pennant, even though there are still five weeks of games left to play.
* September 18: Pittsburgh Stogies (formerly the Chicago Browns) folded.
* September 27: St. Paul Saints and Milwaukee Brewers were recruited from the Northwestern League to finish the Chicago/Pittsburgh and the Philadelphia/Wilmington schedules respectively. 
* October 19: Season concludes.

On January 15, 1885, at a scheduled UA meeting in Milwaukee, only the Milwaukee and Kansas City franchises showed up, and the league was promptly disbanded.

The St. Louis franchise itself was deemed to be strong enough to enter the National League in 1885, but it faced heavy competition within the city, as the St. Louis Browns were a power in the American Association. 

The lone survivor of the Union moved to Indianapolis and became the Hoosiers after 1886, having compiled records of 36–72 and 43–79 in St. Louis, and they played another three seasons before folding, with records of 37–89, 50–85 and 59–75 for a .360 win percentage in the NL, and an all-time franchise winning percentage of .432. These figures, perhaps, reveal the gulf in class between the UA and the established major leagues.

Perhaps the most obvious impact of the short-lived league was on the career of a player who did &quot;not&quot; jump to the new league: Charles Radbourn. With a schedule of a little over 100 games, most teams employed two regular pitchers, and the Providence Grays in the National League featured Radbourn and Charlie Sweeney. According to the 1991 book &quot;Glory Fades Away&quot; by Jerry Lansche, Sweeney fell out of grace with the Providence team in late July after he refused to be replaced in a game while drunk, and was expelled. Rather than come crawling back, Sweeney signed with Lucas&#x27; team, leaving Radbourn by himself. 

Leveraging his situation, Radbourn pledged to stay with the club and be the sole primary pitcher if he would be given a raise and granted free agency at season&#x27;s end. Radbourn, who already had 24 wins at that point to Sweeney&#x27;s 17, pitched nearly every game after that, and went on to win an astounding 59 games (a record) during the regular season; he has since been credited with another win for 60 that season. For an encore, he also won all three games of 1884&#x27;s version of the World Series, pitching every inning of a sweep of the New York Metropolitans of the American Association. His performance in 1884, along with a generally strong career and an overall record of 309-194 (.614), assured Radbourn his place in the Baseball Hall of Fame.

===Timeline===
==Notable players==
The best hitter of the 1884 Union Association was Fred Dunlap of the Maroons, while star pitchers for the UA included Jim McCormick, Charlie Sweeney, Dupee Shaw and Hugh Daily.

Notable players that made their debut in the Union Association included Tommy McCarthy, who was elected to the Hall of Fame in 1946, and Jack Clements, the only man in baseball history to play a full career as a left-handed catcher. Switch-pitcher Tony Mullane attempted to sign with the Maroons, but the Browns had a reserve clause on Mullane, and he relented after he was threatened with banishment from the NL if he signed.

==Highlights==
The Union Association saw two no-hitters in its brief existence: one by Dick Burns of the Outlaw Reds on August 26 and one by Ed Cushman of the Brewers on September 28. On July 7, Hugh Daily struck out 19 Boston Reds in a nine-inning game, a major league record that would stand for 102 years, until Roger Clemens struck out 20 batters in a game in 1986. Henry Porter and Dupee Shaw got 18-strikeout games. The Chicago Browns executed a triple play on June 19.

==Standings==

As teams dissolved and were replaced by others, taking over their games on the schedule, Union Association standings were printed in contemporary newspapers with a total of eight teams. 

Under this system, Altoona and Kansas City were counted as one team, as were Chicago/Pittsburgh/St. Paul and Philadelphia/Wilmington/Milwaukee. In fact, the Chicago team had moved to Pittsburgh mid-way through the season, maintaining the same team ownership and player roster; the league&#x27;s other team changes involved entirely new teams taking over the scheduled games for a team that folded. 

The final standings for the Union Association&#x27;s 1884 season, when regarded as an eight-team league, were:

When each individual team is considered separately (a situation that was not in force in 1884), the Union Association standings look like this:
==Status as a major league==
Although the league is conventionally listed as a major league, this status has been questioned by a number of modern baseball historians, most notably Bill James in &quot;The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract&quot;, who found that the contemporary baseball guides did not consider the Union Association to be a major league: the earliest record James found of the Union Association being referred to as a major league was Ernest Lanigan&#x27;s &quot;The Baseball Cyclopedia&quot;, published in 1922.

While the league had a number of major league players (on the St. Louis franchise, at least), the league&#x27;s overall talent and organization was notably inferior to that of the two established major leagues. Of the 272 players in the Association, 107 (39.34%) never played in another major league, while 72 (26.47%) played very briefly (less than 300 at bats and/or 50 hits) in other major leagues, and 79 (29.04%) had longer careers but little success in other major leagues.

The league&#x27;s only star player, Fred Dunlap, led the league in batting average with .412 (86 points higher than his second-best season, and 120 points higher than his career average), and also led the league in on-base percentage, slugging percentage, runs scored, hits, total bases, and home runs (with 13, typical for the era). 

After the Association folded, Dunlap never hit higher than .274 or more than seven home runs in a season until he retired in 1891, another measure of the inferior quality of the Union Association. In point of fact, if the 1884 UA season is excluded from his career totals, Dunlap&#x27;s career batting average was .276 (a drop of sixteen points), and he hit 28 career home runs (a loss of nearly one-third of his career total).

However, Richard Hershberger, responding to James in the &quot;Baseball Research Journal&quot;, has argued that the UA should be considered a major league because the then-existing major leagues, the National League (NL) and the American Association (AA), treated it as a significant competitor: &quot;The AA added teams to block the UA. The established leagues changed their own rules via the Day resolutions [to enforce the reserve clause to ban players who played in the UA]. They were forced to pay higher salaries. The AA Washingtons were run out of town by the UA. The NL Clevelands were brought to the brink and forced to sell out. Finally, the NL paid Lucas off by bringing him into the league, risking renewed war with the AA. In short, we should regard the Union Association as a major league because the National League and American Association regarded it as a major threat. They were in a position to know.&quot;

==Further reading==
*David Pietrusza. &quot;Major Leagues: The Formation, Sometimes Absorption and Mostly Inevitable Demise of 18 Professional Baseball Organizations, 1871 to Present&quot;. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland &amp; Company, 1991. 

==References==
==External links==
*Union Association at baseball-reference.com.
*1884 in baseball at baseballlibrary.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1276659" start="4" end="21" title="Union Association" label="Union Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="51" end="59" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="87" end="108" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="185" end="200" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725140" start="535" end="546" title="Henry Lucas (baseball)" label="Henry Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817273" start="613" end="622" title="Tom Pratt (baseball)" label="Tom Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566932" start="630" end="652" title="Philadelphia Keystones" label="Philadelphia franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970581" start="683" end="698" title="Warren White (baseball)" label="Warren W. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562595" start="706" end="726" title="Washington Nationals (UA)" label="Washington franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562667" start="823" end="842" title="St. Louis Maroons" label="St. Louis franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568246" start="1688" end="1710" title="Altoona Mountain Citys" label="Altoona Mountain Citys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251724" start="1712" end="1733" title="Baltimore Monumentals" label="Baltimore Monumentals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562619" start="1735" end="1746" title="Boston Reds (1884)" label="Boston Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566743" start="1748" end="1762" title="Chicago Browns/Pittsburgh Stogies" label="Chicago Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562564" start="1764" end="1786" title="Cincinnati Outlaw Reds" label="Cincinnati Outlaw Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566932" start="1788" end="1810" title="Philadelphia Keystones" label="Philadelphia Keystones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562667" start="1812" end="1829" title="St. Louis Maroons" label="St. Louis Maroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562595" start="1835" end="1855" title="Washington Nationals (Union Association)" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568246" start="1866" end="1888" title="Altoona Mountain Citys" label="Altoona Mountain Citys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568264" start="1907" end="1926" title="Kansas City Cowboys (Union Association)" label="Kansas City Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566932" start="2008" end="2030" title="Philadelphia Keystones" label="Philadelphia Keystones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254511" start="2052" end="2073" title="Wilmington Quicksteps" label="Wilmington Quicksteps"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457693" start="2089" end="2103" title="Eastern League (1884–1887)" label="Eastern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566774" start="2589" end="2604" title="St. Paul Saints (Union Association)" label="St. Paul Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q117421771" start="2609" end="2626" title="Milwaukee Brewers (1884–1885)" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144532" start="2651" end="2670" title="Northwestern League" label="Northwestern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980314" start="3107" end="3123" title="St. Louis Browns (NL)" label="St. Louis Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="3144" end="3164" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028712" start="3734" end="3750" title="Charles Radbourn" label="Charles Radbourn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276616" start="3846" end="3862" title="Providence Grays" label="Providence Grays"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="3870" end="3885" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085589" start="3908" end="3923" title="Charlie Sweeney" label="Charlie Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="4734" end="4746" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252365" start="4788" end="4810" title="New York Metropolitans" label="New York Metropolitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="4818" end="4838" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="4977" end="4998" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095292" start="5086" end="5097" title="Fred Dunlap" label="Fred Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562660" start="5154" end="5167" title="Jim McCormick (pitcher)" label="Jim McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085589" start="5169" end="5184" title="Charlie Sweeney" label="Charlie Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315920" start="5186" end="5196" title="Dupee Shaw" label="Dupee Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562652" start="5201" end="5211" title="Hugh Daily" label="Hugh Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819667" start="5286" end="5300" title="Tommy McCarthy (baseball)" label="Tommy McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11309843" start="5351" end="5364" title="Jack Clements" label="Jack Clements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564515" start="5462" end="5474" title="Tony Mullane" label="Tony Mullane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="5532" end="5546" title="reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149636" start="5604" end="5626" title="List of people banned from Major League Baseball" label="banishment from the NL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272729" start="5729" end="5739" title="Dick Burns" label="Dick Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334721" start="5783" end="5793" title="Ed Cushman" label="Ed Cushman"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="5957" end="5970" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q12957406" start="6012" end="6024" title="Henry Porter (baseball)" label="Henry Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q963555" start="6094" end="6105" title="triple play" label="triple play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037014" start="7159" end="7169" title="Bill James" label="Bill James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717988" start="7179" end="7226" title="The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract" label="The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866449" start="7266" end="7281" title="baseball guides" label="baseball guides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393436" start="7440" end="7454" title="Ernest Lanigan" label="Ernest Lanigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385110" start="7468" end="7491" title="The Baseball Cyclopedia" label="The Baseball Cyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194420" start="7845" end="7857" title="cup of coffee" label="very briefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095292" start="8036" end="8047" title="Fred Dunlap" label="Fred Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="8965" end="8980" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="8994" end="9014" title="American Association (1882–1891)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="9191" end="9205" title="reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562644" start="9289" end="9303" title="Washington Nationals (American Association)" label="AA Washingtons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276608" start="9340" end="9353" title="Cleveland Blues (National League)" label="NL Clevelands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647098" wikidata="Q6542983" url="?curid=647098" title="Lib–Lab pact">
<text>In British politics, a Lib–Lab pact is a working arrangement between the Liberal Democrats (in previous times, the Liberal Party) and the Labour Party.

There have been four such arrangements, and one alleged proposal, at the national level. In many local councils in the UK there are similar arrangements, although there are also arrangements where the Lib Dems and Labour oppose each other and instead form a local alliance with another party or with independent councillors.

==19th century==

Before the Labour Party had been formed, various candidates stood for Parliament with backing from both the Liberal Party and the Labour Representation League; these included Thomas Burt, Harry Broadhurst and Alexander Macdonald. These MPs were referred to as &quot;Lib–Lab&quot;, although there was not a formal pact.

This agreement eventually fell apart with the formation of the Independent Labour Party and the Labour Representation Committee.

==20th century==

===1903===

In 1903, an agreement was made between Herbert Gladstone (then Chief Whip of the Liberal Party) and Ramsay MacDonald (Secretary of the Labour Representation Committee) that, in thirty constituencies, the Labour Party and the Liberal Party would not stand against each other, and thus would avoid the risk of splitting their vote. As a result of this agreement, in contests against the Conservative Party, 29 Labour MPs were returned at the 1906 general election.

===1924===
At the 1923 general election, both parties campaigned on the issue of free trade. The Conservative Party, which had campaigned to introduce protective tariffs, lost its parliamentary majority but remained the largest party in the House of Commons. The Liberals agreed to enable the formation of the first Labour minority government in 1924, under the leadership of Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald. The minority government lasted a little over nine months; Conservative Stanley Baldwin succeeded MacDonald as Prime Minister.

===1929===
At the 1929 general election, Labour won the greatest number of seats, but did not have a parliamentary majority. The now-much-weakened Liberals allowed the formation of the second Labour government by not aligning with the Conservatives to defeat the new government.

===1977===

In March 1977, the Labour government – lacking a majority following a by-election defeat – faced a motion of no confidence. In order to remain in office, Prime Minister James Callaghan approached the Liberal Party, at the time led by David Steel. Former Foreign Secretary Callaghan had been Prime Minister for just one year, having succeeded Harold Wilson who had led Labour to a three-seat majority at the October 1974 general election.

An agreement was negotiated, under the terms of which the Labour Party accepted a limited number of Liberal Party policy proposals and in exchange, the Liberal Party agreed to vote with the government in any subsequent motion of no confidence. This &quot;pact&quot; was the first official bi-party agreement since the Second World War (there would be a Conservative–Lib Dem coalition following the 2010 general election), though it was far short of a coalition. The Lib–Lab Pact&#x27;s end was confirmed on 7 September 1978, by which time Callaghan was expected to call a general election, but instead he decided to remain as leader of a minority government. This government fell after a vote of no confidence was passed by one vote in March 1979, whereby Callaghan was forced to hold a general election in May, in which Margaret Thatcher led the Conservatives into power.

===Proposed coalition of 1997===
In the lead-up to the 1997 general election, a coalition government was discussed by Tony Blair and the Lib Dems, according to Paddy Ashdown&#x27;s &quot;The Ashdown Diaries&quot;. Ashdown, a strong proponent of a Lib–Lab coalition, said that from Blair&#x27;s point of view, in order to get the Conservatives out of power and because he wanted to move his party towards the New Labour ideal, a coalition would strengthen his majority in the likely event of a victory. To get the Liberal Democrats into his Cabinet, he allegedly agreed on their terms of electoral reform. Blair was still considering attempting to form a coalition government with the Liberal Democrats on the day of the general election, until the full scale of his Labour Party&#x27;s majority became clear at 03:05 on the morning of 2 May 1997; ending eighteen years of Conservative rule. Encouraged by former SDP leader Roy Jenkins, Blair still considered bringing the Lib Dems into the Cabinet after his election victory, as he believed this would help to create a political realignment on the centre-left and usher in a period of left-wing unity, and only reneged after Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott threatened to resign over the issue in 1998.

==21st century==

===Proposed coalition of 2010===
After the hung parliament resulting from the 2010 general election, the Liberal Democrats, as they had indicated they would do so prior to the election, first began negotiations with the Conservatives—the party that had won the most votes and seats—about the possibility of forming a government; but, after talks appeared to have stalled, complementary negotiations were undertaken with Labour.

Labour&#x27;s delegation for negotiations included: Peter Mandelson, Andrew Adonis, Ed Miliband and Ed Balls. Press rumours of a possible Lib Dem–Labour deal were publicised, with Prime Minister Gordon Brown alleged to be willing to offer to legislate for a change to the alternative vote system, followed by a referendum on proportional representation, if an arrangement that would keep him in government could be agreed.

A Lib–Lab coalition would, however, have been eight seats short of a majority. A coalition of Labour, the Liberal Democrats, the SDLP, Plaid Cymru, the Alliance Party of Northern Ireland and the Green Party—a &quot;rainbow&quot; or &quot;traffic light&quot; coalition—would have been needed to give a working majority of one. For this, amongst other reasons, the talks failed. On the collapse of talks with Labour, a deal between the Liberal Democrats and the Conservative Party was reached (subsequently being approved by Liberal Democrats members at a special party conference).

There was a significant level of hostility to such a deal within the Labour Party, with coalition proposals being opposed by, among others, former Cabinet ministers John Reid and David Blunkett. John Reid said that such a coalition would be &quot;bad for the country&quot;.

David Laws, chief negotiator for the Liberal Democrats in coalition negotiations, subsequently commented on Labour&#x27;s preparation and conduct in negotiations; his main areas of criticism centred on Labour&#x27;s lack of contrition about their record over the previous thirteen years, inadequate preparation for discussions, their unwillingness to accommodate Liberal Democrat policy proposals in the potential programme for government, and the arrogant and patronising attitude of specific key Labour figures. He said that whilst he felt Gordon Brown was quite serious about pursuing talks, he believed former minister Ed Balls was deliberately &quot;sabotaging&quot; them.

===Possible coalition after 2015 general election===
Nick Clegg stated his opinion prior to the 2010 general election that the party which wins the most seats but fails to get an absolute majority in the house has the right to attempt to form a government first, either on their own or in a coalition. He stated his willingness to work with the Labour Party if it won a plurality of the votes in 2015. However, some reports said it was unlikely that this would happen under the leadership of Nick Clegg, as both Ed Miliband and Ed Balls voiced discontent with Nick Clegg over his partnership with David Cameron. Later reports indicated that Miliband and Balls were more relaxed with the thought of a Lib–Lab government after the 2015 election. According to an article in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, a shadow Cabinet minister who was close to Miliband said: &quot;Our activists really hate Clegg. But if having him as Deputy Prime Minister was the price of getting Ed into Number 10 then they would have to stick it.&quot; For years, Miliband is said to have refused to speak to Clegg, although relations thawed as the 2015 election grew closer. A senior party figure said, &quot;The contact is there and the leaders&#x27; offices are now in touch.&quot; Senior members of Miliband&#x27;s team, including Lord Adonis, the former Cabinet minister, had been urging him privately to prepare for fresh coalition negotiations after the 2015 general election because opinion polls suggested no party would win an outright majority in 2015.

In 2014, Lib Dem minister Norman Lamb warned that &quot;it could be enormously damaging for [the Lib Dems]&quot; if the party went into coalition with Miliband&#x27;s Labour. However, neither a coalition nor a pact between the Lib Dems and Labour was possible, following the Conservatives winning a majority at the 2015 general election and the loss of 49 Liberal Democrat seats. The scale of victory was unexpected by all major polls, and this was the first time a Conservative majority government had been formed in 23 years.

===Possible coalition after 2019 general election===
Jo Swinson, the Liberal Democrat leader, hinted at a possible alliance after the 2019 general election in the event that Jeremy Corbyn resigned as Labour leader. Once again, this was not possible, because the Conservatives received a majority of seats at the election, meaning that a Lib–Lab pact would be below the majority mark.

===Possible coalition after the 2024 general election===
After the 2023 local elections, in which both Labour and Liberal Democrats made gains. Both Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, and Ed Davey, the Liberal Democrat leader, refused to rule out a possible alliance after the 2024 general election. On 13 June 2023, Labour Party National Campaign Coordinator Shabana Mahmood ruled out a Lib–Lab pact in the by-elections in Mid Bedfordshire, Uxbridge and South Ruislip and Selby and Ainsty.

==Welsh Parliament==
When the first elections to the new Welsh Assembly took place in 1999 no one party had an absolute majority, and initially Labour sought to run a minority administration. Following a series of close votes and much criticism of the weakness of the Assembly administration, Labour and the Liberal Democrats formed a coalition in October 2000 with the two parties sharing power, including ministerial appointments, with Labour the majority party. The agreement ended at the elections of 2003 when Labour won 50% of the seats and decided to form a minority government.

On 11 May 2016, following the 2016 election six days earlier, when the governing Labour Party had 29 AMs elected, one fewer than in 2011 and two short of an overall majority, Welsh Assembly members failed to elect a new First Minister on their return to the Senedd, after the roll-call tied the vote at 29–29; Plaid Cymru nominated its leader Leanne Wood, and won the backing of the Conservatives and UKIP, while Labour&#x27;s incumbent First Minister Carwyn Jones won the support of sole Liberal Democrat Kirsty Williams, the only non-Labour member to back Jones in the tied vote for First Minister (and who, up until the day after the election, had been the leader of the Welsh Liberal Democrats), and his own party. On 19 May 2016, after Jones was reinstalled unopposed as First Minister, following a deal with Plaid Cymru, Williams was named Cabinet Secretary for Education in Jones&#x27;s new Welsh Government; her appointment as Education Secretary was subject to ratification by Liberal Democrat members at a special conference in Newtown, Powys, on 21 May 2016 and was overwhelmingly approved.

==Scottish Parliament==

After the first general election to the reconvened Scottish Parliament in 1999, the Scottish Liberal Democrats signed up to what was termed a &quot;partnership government&quot; with Labour, with both parties providing ministers in a shared government.

Although standing on separate manifestos in the succeeding 2003 Scottish Parliament election the joint working continued, with Labour&#x27;s Jack McConnell serving as First Minister, and the Lib Dems&#x27; Jim Wallace serving under him as Deputy First Minister (and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning) who was then succeeded by Nicol Stephen of the same party as Deputy First Minister.

The Scottish Parliament general election of 2007 saw the Scottish National Party (SNP) surpass Labour as the largest party by one seat. The Scottish Liberal Democrats decided against coalition with either the SNP or Labour, and abstained in the vote for First Minister, won by SNP leader Alex Salmond.

==Gibraltarian Parliament==
The major UK political parties do not stand candidates for election in the Gibraltar Parliament, but form affiliations with the local Gibraltarian parties, with the Liberal Democrats affiliating with the Liberal Party of Gibraltar (LPG) and Labour affiliating with the Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party (GSLP). The two parties formed the GSLP–Liberal Alliance in 2000 and together have been the government in power since 2011.

==Constitutional committee==
Whilst not a pact, ahead of the 1997 election Labour Leader Tony Blair and Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown set up the &quot;Labour-Liberal Democrat joint committee on constitutional reform&quot; to discuss devolution in Wales and Scotland, and led to Prime Minister Tony Blair setting up a joint Lib–Lab cabinet committee. In part this led to the Scottish and Welsh alliances noted above. The committee was disbanded by Tony Blair and Charles Kennedy in September 2001.

==See also==

*Conservative–DUP agreement
*Lib–Con pact
*Progressive alliance (UK)
*Purple coalition &quot;(similar governing arrangement found in Belgium and the Netherlands)&quot;
*Lib-Lab-Con

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6542983" start="23" end="35" title="Lib–Lab pact" label="Lib–Lab pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="73" end="90" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="115" end="128" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="138" end="150" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q853171" start="250" end="274" title="Local government in the United Kingdom" label="local councils in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="508" end="520" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="567" end="577" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="605" end="618" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467522" start="627" end="655" title="Labour Representation League" label="Labour Representation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590656" start="672" end="683" title="Thomas Burt" label="Thomas Burt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586803" start="685" end="701" title="Henry Broadhurst" label="Harry Broadhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719491" start="706" end="725" title="Alexander Macdonald (Lib-Lab politician)" label="Alexander Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="880" end="904" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="913" end="944" title="British Labour Party#Labour Representation Committee (1900–1906)" label="Labour Representation Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347324" start="1016" end="1033" title="Herbert Gladstone" label="Herbert Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="1077" end="1093" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1112" end="1143" title="British Labour Party#Labour Representation Committee (1900–1906)" label="Labour Representation Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1362" end="1380" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076606" start="1417" end="1438" title="1906 United Kingdom general election" label="1906 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084294" start="1459" end="1480" title="1923 United Kingdom general election" label="1923 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="1522" end="1532" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660368" start="1592" end="1609" title="protective tariff" label="protective tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="1682" end="1698" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="1921" end="1936" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q517639" start="1995" end="2016" title="1929 United Kingdom general election" label="1929 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014425" start="2368" end="2391" title="Confidence motions in the United Kingdom" label="motion of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="2438" end="2453" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333847" start="2503" end="2514" title="David Steel" label="David Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="2611" end="2624" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="2676" end="2705" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="October 1974 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3026" end="3042" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="3059" end="3091" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="a Conservative–Lib Dem coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="3346" end="3365" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="3495" end="3518" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="general election in May"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="3529" end="3546" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="3637" end="3658" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="3700" end="3710" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q333066" start="3742" end="3755" title="Paddy Ashdown" label="Paddy Ashdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="3990" end="4000" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356385" start="4169" end="4185" title="electoral reform" label="electoral reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q40052" start="4494" end="4497" title="Social Democratic Party (UK)" label="SDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="4505" end="4516" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306826" start="4651" end="4672" title="political realignment" label="political realignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q332393" start="4779" end="4792" title="John Prescott" label="John Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="4900" end="4915" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="4935" end="4956" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q310046" start="5338" end="5353" title="Peter Mandelson" label="Peter Mandelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q337156" start="5355" end="5368" title="Andrew Adonis, Baron Adonis" label="Andrew Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="5370" end="5381" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q260464" start="5386" end="5394" title="Ed Balls" label="Ed Balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="5481" end="5493" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="5558" end="5574" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="alternative vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q175443" start="5839" end="5843" title="Social Democratic and Labour Party" label="SDLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="5845" end="5856" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q244927" start="5862" end="5896" title="Alliance Party of Northern Ireland" label="Alliance Party of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="5905" end="5916" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q333461" start="6457" end="6466" title="John Reid, Baron Reid of Cardowan" label="John Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q264196" start="6471" end="6485" title="David Blunkett" label="David Blunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q333663" start="6567" end="6577" title="David Laws" label="David Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q189947" start="7299" end="7309" title="Nick Clegg" label="Nick Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="8023" end="8042" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q750179" start="8811" end="8822" title="Norman Lamb" label="Norman Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q327790" start="9367" end="9377" title="Jo Swinson" label="Jo Swinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="9448" end="9469" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="9488" end="9501" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q112136750" start="9766" end="9786" title="2023 United Kingdom local elections" label="2023 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="9848" end="9860" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q296689" start="9885" end="9893" title="Ed Davey" label="Ed Davey"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="9974" end="9995" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="10014" end="10056" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party National Campaign Coordinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q695007" start="10057" end="10072" title="Shabana Mahmood" label="Shabana Mahmood"/>
<link wikidata="Q119463834" start="10121" end="10137" title="2023 Mid Bedfordshire by-election" label="Mid Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q119463311" start="10139" end="10165" title="2023 Uxbridge and South Ruislip by-election" label="Uxbridge and South Ruislip"/>
<link wikidata="Q119463634" start="10170" end="10186" title="2023 Selby and Ainsty by-election" label="Selby and Ainsty"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="10246" end="10260" title="Senedd Cymru – Welsh Parliament" label="Welsh Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q842113" start="10275" end="10279" title="1999 National Assembly for Wales election" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655536" start="10681" end="10698" title="2003 National Assembly for Wales election" label="elections of 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258007" start="10806" end="10819" title="2016 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="10857" end="10869" title="Welsh Labour" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q111713" start="10908" end="10912" title="2011 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q18996" start="10996" end="11010" title="First Minister of Wales" label="First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="11034" end="11040" title="Senedd Cymru – Welsh Parliament" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="11086" end="11097" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q10694" start="11119" end="11130" title="Leanne Wood" label="Leanne Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="11159" end="11172" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="11177" end="11181" title="UK Independence Party" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q111840" start="11228" end="11240" title="Carwyn Jones" label="Carwyn Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660402" start="11282" end="11297" title="Kirsty Williams" label="Kirsty Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981939" start="11450" end="11473" title="Welsh Liberal Democrats" label="Welsh Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q33106246" start="11622" end="11653" title="Department for Education and Skills (Wales)" label="Cabinet Secretary for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="11674" end="11690" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q669171" start="11814" end="11828" title="Newtown, Powys" label="Newtown, Powys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269950" start="11914" end="11936" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election" label="first general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="11955" end="11974" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="11988" end="12014" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Scottish Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="12086" end="12092" title="Scottish Labour" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q683800" start="12216" end="12249" title="2003 Scottish Parliament election" label="2003 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q132040" start="12298" end="12312" title="Jack McConnell" label="Jack McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="12324" end="12338" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q333807" start="12363" end="12374" title="Jim Wallace, Baron Wallace of Tankerness" label="Jim Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="12396" end="12417" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="Deputy First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865814" start="12423" end="12468" title="Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning" label="Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q333630" start="12496" end="12509" title="Nicol Stephen" label="Nicol Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="12559" end="12603" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="Scottish Parliament general election of 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="12612" end="12635" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="12843" end="12855" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q128852" start="12961" end="12981" title="Gibraltar Parliament" label="Gibraltar Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q152744" start="13090" end="13116" title="Liberal Party of Gibraltar" label="Liberal Party of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q53025" start="13155" end="13187" title="Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party" label="Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q22088817" start="13223" end="13244" title="GSLP–Liberal Alliance" label="GSLP–Liberal Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985656" start="13643" end="13660" title="United Kingdom cabinet committee" label="cabinet committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q332950" start="13774" end="13789" title="Charles Kennedy" label="Charles Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30326330" start="13825" end="13851" title="Conservative–DUP agreement" label="Conservative–DUP agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30681170" start="13853" end="13865" title="Lib–Con pact" label="Lib–Con pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687594" start="13867" end="13892" title="Progressive alliance (UK)" label="Progressive alliance (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13894" end="13910" title="Purple (government)#Belgium and the Netherlands" label="Purple coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="13957" end="13964" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="13973" end="13984" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314732" start="13993" end="14004" title="Lib-Lab-Con" label="Lib-Lab-Con"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647121" wikidata="Q1276641" url="?curid=647121" title="Players' League">
<text>The Players&#x27; National League of Professional Base Ball Clubs, popularly known as the Players&#x27; League (PL), was a short-lived but star-studded American professional baseball league of the 19th century. The PL was formed by the Brotherhood of Professional Base Ball Players in November 1889, after a dispute over pay with the National League (NL) and American Association (AA). The NL had implemented a reserve clause in 1879, which limited the ability of players to negotiate across teams for their salaries; both the AA and NL had passed a salary cap of US$2,000 per player in 1885, equivalent to $ in ; the owners of the NL had agreed to remove the salary cap in 1887 but failed to do so. Major League Baseball (MLB) considers the PL a &quot;major&quot; league for official statistical purposes.

The Brotherhood included most of the best players of the National League. Brotherhood members, led by John Montgomery Ward, left the National League and formed the Players&#x27; League after failing to change the lopsided player–management relationship of the National League.

The PL lasted just the one season of 1890, and the Boston franchise won the championship. Although known to historians as the Players&#x27; League, newspapers often reported the standings with the shorthand titles of &quot;League,&quot; &quot;Association,&quot; and &quot;Brotherhood.&quot; The PL was well-attended, at least in some cities, but was underfunded, and its owners lacked the confidence to continue beyond the one season.

==Background==
Professional baseball had existed in America since at least 1871, when the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players (NA) formed; two years earlier the Cincinnati Red Stockings of the NA paid salaries to ten of their players. In 1876, the National League (NL) was formed, absorbing six of the best teams from the NA, which then folded. In September 1879, in a secret meeting, the NL established a reserve clause by which teams could &quot;reserve&quot; five players per year that could not sign or negotiate with other teams without permission from the owner of the team on which the reserved player was signed. This was an effort to limit player&#x27;s salaries to reduce club losses. 

By the mid-1880s, the reserve clause had been expanded to eleven players per team, and after the 1885 season the NL and the American Association passed a salary limit of US$2,000 per player, equivalent to $ in . After the change, the Brotherhood of Professional Base Ball Players, an organization once focused on issues such as helping former players&#x27; widows, turned to labor issues. The club owners agreed to remove the salary cap in 1887, but reneged on their promise, and instead instituted a &quot;classification system&quot; which limited players&#x27; salaries based on their classification on a scale from A–E, &quot;A&quot; players being the highest-paid.

The Brotherhood, which had 107 players in 1886, announced its intention to leave the NL on November 4, 1889. After being advised by Brotherhood lawyers not to incorporate before each individual team incorporated, the PL was launched on December 16, 1889, with clubs from Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Brooklyn, Buffalo, Chicago, Cleveland, and Pittsburgh. Salary for the players for the 1890 season was set to the salary they had received in 1889, except that those affected by the classification system received their 1888 salary. The salaries were paid by gate receipts. In 1968, the MLB&#x27;s Special Baseball Records Committee determined the PL was a &quot;major league&quot; for official statistical purposes.

==Highlights==
The Players League Triple Crown leaders were Hall-of-Famer Roger Connor with 14 home runs, Pete Browning with a .373 batting average, and Hardy Richardson with 146 RBI. For pitchers, Mark Baldwin had 34 wins, Silver King had a 2.69 ERA, and Mark Baldwin struck out 211 batters.

On June 21, King threw an unofficial eight-inning no-hitter.

Oddly, in its one season of operation, the Players League saw seven triple plays: the Giants on June 14, the Red Stockings on June 30, the Pirates on July 15, the Pirates again on July 30, the Burghers on August 15, Ward&#x27;s Wonders on September 6, and the Bisons on September 29.

==Franchises and final standings==

==Legacy==

The Boston and Philadelphia franchises joined the American Association after the Players&#x27; League folded, and both folded together with the AA after the 1891 season. The PL franchises in Brooklyn, New York, Chicago and Pittsburgh each merged with their National League counterparts after the 1890 season.

Although the league was started by the players themselves, essentially as an elaborate job-action to improve their lot, the venture proved to be a setback for them in the longer term. The infamous reserve clause remained intact, and would remain thus for the next 85 years or so. The already-shaky AA had been further weakened by the presence of the PL. The Lou Bierbauer incident, in which the Pittsburgh Alleghenys signed Bierbauer over the objections of the AA&#x27;s Philadelphia Athletics, the team he had played with before joining the Players&#x27; League, caused a schism between the NL and the AA, and the AA failed a year later, reducing the total number of major league teams (and players), giving the remaining owners much greater leverage against the players.

One benefit of the league, from the management standpoint, was the construction of new facilities, several of which were used for a while by the established major league clubs. The most prominent of these was a new Polo Grounds, originally constructed as Brotherhood Park for the New York Giants of the Players League. Afterwards it became the home of the National League&#x27;s New York Giants from 1891 to 1957 (it was rebuilt in steel and concrete in 1911) and of the New York Mets in their first two seasons. It was also the site of many other famous sporting events through its 75 years of existence.

== See also ==
* Cuban Federation League, an independent league organized by the Cuban players&#x27; union in 1947

== References ==
== Sources ==
*David Pietrusza. &quot;Major Leagues: The Formation, Sometimes Absorption and Mostly Inevitable Demise of 18 Professional Baseball Organizations, 1871 to Present.&quot; Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Company, 1991 (hardcover, ) and 2005 (softcover, ).
*Ed Koszarek. &quot;The Players League: History Clubs, Ballplyers and Statistics&quot;. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland, 2006 (softcover, ).

==External links==
*Ethan Lewis, &quot;A Structure To Last Forever: The Players&#x27; League And The Brotherhood War of 1890&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1276641" start="4" end="65" title="Players&amp;#x27; League" label="Players&amp;#x27; National League of Professional Base Ball Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276641" start="90" end="110" title="Players&amp;#x27; League" label="Players&amp;#x27; League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="174" end="182" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="334" end="349" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="359" end="379" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="411" end="425" title="reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369344" start="660" end="670" title="salary cap" label="salary cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="700" end="721" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="865" end="880" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562672" start="910" end="930" title="John Montgomery Ward" label="John Montgomery Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q907328" start="1537" end="1558" title="Professional baseball" label="Professional baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="1612" end="1666" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074399" start="1702" end="1726" title="Cincinnati Red Stockings" label="Cincinnati Red Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="1789" end="1804" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="2362" end="2382" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q863826" start="3179" end="3185" title="Boston Reds (1890–91)" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339056" start="3187" end="3195" title="New York Giants (PL)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869071" start="3197" end="3209" title="Philadelphia Athletics (1890–91)" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705814" start="3211" end="3219" title="Brooklyn Ward&amp;#x27;s Wonders" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001950" start="3221" end="3228" title="Buffalo Bisons (PL)" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963325" start="3230" end="3237" title="Chicago Pirates" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150706" start="3239" end="3248" title="Cleveland Infants" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928456" start="3254" end="3264" title="Pittsburgh Burghers" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202041" start="3661" end="3673" title="Triple crown (baseball)" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q846872" start="3701" end="3713" title="Roger Connor" label="Roger Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171871" start="3733" end="3746" title="Pete Browning" label="Pete Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392623" start="3780" end="3796" title="Hardy Richardson" label="Hardy Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516099" start="3851" end="3862" title="Silver King (baseball)" label="Silver King"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766647" start="3883" end="3895" title="Mark Baldwin (baseball)" label="Mark Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q963555" start="4051" end="4062" title="triple play" label="triple play"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="4366" end="4386" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4517" end="4525" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="4823" end="4837" title="reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685386" start="4984" end="4997" title="Lou Bierbauer" label="Lou Bierbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870228" start="5021" end="5042" title="Pittsburgh Alleghenys" label="Pittsburgh Alleghenys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564551" start="5097" end="5119" title="Philadelphia Athletics (American Association)" label="Philadelphia Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="5615" end="5627" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="5779" end="5794" title="New York Giants (NL)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="5871" end="5884" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q127699479" start="6024" end="6047" title="Cuban Federation League" label="Cuban Federation League"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647131" wikidata="Q25355" url="?curid=647131" title="Greenlandic language">
<text>Greenlandic ( ; ) is an Eskimo–Aleut language with about speakers, mostly Greenlandic Inuit in Greenland. It is closely related to the Inuit languages in Canada such as Inuktitut. It is the most widely spoken Eskimo–Aleut language. In June 2009, the government of Greenland, the Naalakkersuisut, made Greenlandic the sole official language of the autonomous territory, to strengthen it in the face of competition from the colonial language, Danish. The main variety is Kalaallisut, or West Greenlandic. The second variety is , or East Greenlandic. The language of the Inughuit (Thule Inuit) of Greenland, Inuktun or Polar Eskimo, is a recent arrival and a dialect of Inuktitut.

Greenlandic is a polysynthetic language that allows the creation of long words by stringing together roots and suffixes. The language&#x27;s morphosyntactic alignment is ergative, treating both the argument (subject) of an intransitive verb and the &quot;object&quot; of a transitive verb in one way, but the &quot;subject&quot; of a transitive verb in another. For example, &quot;he plays the guitar&quot; would be in the ergative case as a transitive agent, whereas &quot;I bought a guitar&quot; and &quot;as the guitar plays&quot; (the latter being the intransitive sense of the same verb &quot;to play&quot;) would both be in the absolutive case.

Nouns are inflected by one of eight cases and for possession. Verbs are inflected for one of eight moods and for the number and person of its subject and object. Both nouns and verbs have complex derivational morphology. The basic word order in transitive clauses is subject–object–verb. The subordination of clauses uses special subordinate moods. A so-called fourth-person category enables switch-reference between main clauses and subordinate clauses with different subjects. Greenlandic is notable for its lack of grammatical tense; temporal relations are expressed normally by context but also by the use of temporal particles such as &quot;yesterday&quot; or &quot;now&quot; or sometimes by the use of derivational suffixes or the combination of affixes with aspectual meanings with the semantic lexical aspect of different verbs. However, some linguists have suggested that Greenlandic always marks future tense. Another question is whether the language has noun incorporation or whether the processes that create complex predicates that include nominal roots are derivational in nature.

When adopting new concepts or technologies, Greenlandic usually constructs new words made from Greenlandic roots, but modern Greenlandic has also taken many loans from Danish and English. The language has been written in Latin script since Danish colonization began in the 1700s. Greenlandic&#x27;s first orthography was developed by Samuel Kleinschmidt in 1851, but within 100 years, it already differed substantially from the spoken language because of a number of sound changes. An extensive orthographic reform was undertaken in 1973 and made the script much easier to learn. This resulted in a boost in Greenlandic literacy, which is now among the highest in the world.

== History ==

Greenlandic was brought to Greenland by the arrival of the Thule people in the 1200s. The languages that were spoken by the earlier Saqqaq and Dorset cultures in Greenland are unknown.

The first descriptions of Greenlandic date from the 1600s. With the arrival of Danish missionaries in the early 1700s and the beginning of Danish colonization of Greenland, the compilation of dictionaries and description of grammar began. The missionary Paul Egede wrote the first Greenlandic dictionary in 1750 and the first grammar in 1760.

From the Danish colonization in the 1700s to the beginning of Greenlandic home rule in 1979, Greenlandic experienced increasing pressure from the Danish language. In the 1950s, Denmark&#x27;s linguistic policies were directed at strengthening Danish. Of primary significance was the fact that post-primary education and official functions were conducted in Danish.

From 1851 to 1973, Greenlandic was written in a complicated orthography devised by the missionary linguist Samuel Kleinschmidt. In 1973, a new orthography was introduced, intended to bring the written language closer to the spoken standard, which had changed considerably since Kleinschmidt&#x27;s time. The reform was effective, and in the years following it, Greenlandic literacy has received a boost.

Another development that has strengthened Greenlandic language is the policy of &quot;Greenlandization&quot; of Greenlandic society that began with the home rule agreement of 1979. The policy has worked to reverse the former trend towards marginalization of the Greenlandic language by making it the official language of education. The fact that Greenlandic has become the only language used in primary schooling means that monolingual Danish-speaking parents in Greenland are now raising children bilingual in Danish and Greenlandic. Greenlandic now has several dedicated news media: the Greenlandic National Radio, Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa, which provides television and radio programming in Greenlandic. The newspaper &quot;Sermitsiaq&quot; has been published since 1958 and merged in 2010 with the other newspaper &quot;Atuagagdliutit/Grønlandsposten&quot;, which had been established in 1861 to form a single large Greenlandic language publishing house.

Before June 2009, Greenlandic shared its status as the official language in Greenland with Danish. Since then, Greenlandic has become the sole official language. That has made Greenlandic the unique case of an indigenous language of the Americas recognized by law as the only official language of a semi-independent country. Nevertheless, it is still considered to be in a &quot;vulnerable&quot; state by the UNESCO Red Book of Language Endangerment. The country has a 100% literacy rate. As the Western Greenlandic standard has become dominant, a UNESCO report has labelled the other dialects as endangered, and measures are now being considered to protect the Eastern Greenlandic dialect.

In November 2024, a mother residing in Denmark whose first language is Greenlandic had her newborn child taken away after she failed a parenting competency test, given in Danish. Critics say that these tests discriminate against Greenlandic parents, contributing to a forced adoption rate for children of Greenlandic parents in Denmark that is more than five times as a high as the rate for children of Danish background.

== Classification ==

*Inuit languages
**Greenlandic
***Kalaallisut (West Greenlandic)
***Tunumiisut (East Greenlandic)
**Inuktun
Kalaallisut and the other Greenlandic dialects belong to the Eskimo–Aleut family and are closely related to the Inuit languages of Canada and Alaska. Illustration 1 shows the locations of the different Inuit languages, among them the two main dialects of Greenlandic and the separate language Inuktun (&quot;Avanersuaq&quot;).
The most prominent Greenlandic dialect is Kalaallisut, which is the official language of Greenland. The name is often used as a cover term for all of Greenlandic. The eastern dialect (), spoken in the vicinity of Ammassalik Island and Ittoqqortoormiit, is the most innovative of the Greenlandic dialects since it has assimilated consonant clusters and vowel sequences more than West Greenlandic.

Kalaallisut is further divided into four subdialects. One that is spoken around Upernavik has certain similarities to East Greenlandic, possibly because of a previous migration from eastern Greenland. A second dialect is spoken in the region of Uummannaq and the Disko Bay. The standard language is based on the central Kalaallisut dialect spoken in Sisimiut in the north, around Nuuk and as far south as Maniitsoq. Southern Kalaallisut is spoken around Narsaq and Qaqortoq in the south. Table 1 shows the differences in the pronunciation of the word for &quot;humans&quot; in the two main dialects and Inuktun. It can be seen that Inuktun is the most conservative by maintaining , which has been elided in Kalaallisut, and Tunumiisut is the most innovative by further simplifying its structure by eliding .

== Phonology ==
===Vowels===
The Greenlandic three-vowel system, composed of , , and , is typical for an Eskimo–Aleut language. Double vowels are analyzed as two morae and so they are phonologically a vowel sequence and not a long vowel. They are also orthographically written as two vowels. There is only one diphthong, , which occurs only at the ends of words. Before a uvular consonant ( or ), is realized allophonically as , or , and is realized allophonically as or , and the two vowels are written respectively (as in some orthographies used for Quechua and Aymara). becomes retracted to in the same environment. is rounded to before labial consonants. is fronted to between two coronal consonants.

The allophonic lowering of and before uvular consonants is shown in the modern orthography by writing and as and respectively before and . For example:

* &quot;husband&quot; pronounced .
* &quot;(s)he has a husband&quot; pronounced and written .
* &quot;house&quot; pronounced .
* &quot;(s)he has a house&quot; pronounced and written .

===Consonants===

The palatal sibilant has merged with in all dialects except those of the Sisimiut–Maniitsoq–Nuuk–Paamiut area. The labiodental fricative is contrastive only in loanwords. The alveolar stop is pronounced as an affricate before the high front vowel . Often, Danish loanwords containing preserve these in writing, but that does not imply a change in pronunciation, for example &quot;beer&quot; and &quot;God&quot;; these are pronounced exactly as .

==Grammar==
===Morphology===
The broad outline of the Greenlandic grammar is similar to other Eskimo languages, on the morpholological and syntactic plan.

The morphology of Greenlandic is highly synthetic and exclusively suffixing (except for a single highly-limited and fossilized demonstrative prefix). The language creates very long words by means of adding strings of suffixes to a stem. In principle, there is no limit to the length of a Greenlandic word, but in practice, words with more than six derivational suffixes are not so frequent, and the average number of morphemes per word is three to five. The language has between 400 and 500 derivational suffixes and around 318 inflectional suffixes.

There are few compound words but many derivations. The grammar uses a mixture of head and dependent marking. Both agent and patient are marked on the predicate, and the possessor is marked on nouns, with dependent noun phrases inflecting for case. The primary morphosyntactic alignment of full noun phrases in Kalaallisut is ergative-absolutive, but verbal morphology follows a nominative-accusative pattern and pronouns are syntactically neutral.

The language distinguishes four persons (1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th or 3rd reflexive (see Obviation and switch-reference); two numbers (singular and plural but no dual, unlike Inuktitut); eight moods (indicative, interrogative, imperative, optative, conditional, causative, contemporative and participial) and eight cases (absolutive, ergative, equative, instrumental, locative, allative, ablative and prolative). Greenlandic (including the eastern Tunumiisut variety) is the only Eskimo language having lost its dual.

==== Declension ====
Verbs carry a bipersonal inflection for subject and object. Possessive noun phrases inflect for both possessor and case.

In this section, the examples are written in Greenlandic standard orthography except that morpheme boundaries are indicated by a hyphen.

=== Syntax ===
Greenlandic distinguishes three open word classes: nouns, verbs and particles. Verbs inflect for person and number of subject and object as well as for mood. Nouns inflect for possession and for case. Particles do not inflect.

The verb is the only word that is required in a sentence. Since verbs inflect for number and person of both subject and object, the verb is in fact a clause itself. Therefore, clauses in which all participants are expressed as free-standing noun phrases are rather rare. The following examples show the possibilities of leaving out the verbal arguments:



==== Morphosyntactic alignment ====
The Greenlandic language uses case to express grammatical relations between participants in a sentence. Nouns are inflected with one of the two core cases or one of the six oblique cases.

Greenlandic is an ergative–absolutive language and so instead of treating the grammatical relations, as in English and most other Indo-European languages, whose grammatical subjects are marked with the nominative case and objects with the accusative case, Greenlandic grammatical roles are defined differently. Its ergative case is used for agents of transitive verbs and for possessors. The absolutive case is used for patients of transitive verbs and subjects of intransitive verbs. Research into Greenlandic as used by the younger generation has shown that the use of ergative alignment in Kalaallisut may be becoming obsolete, which would convert the language into a nominative–accusative language.

====Word order====
In transitive clauses whose object and subject are expressed as free noun phrases, the basic pragmatically-neutral word order is SOV / SOXV in which X is a noun phrase in one of the oblique cases. However, word order is fairly free. Topical noun phrases occur at the beginning of a clause. New or emphasized information generally come last, which is usually the verb but can also be a focal subject or object. As well, in the spoken language, &quot;afterthought&quot; material or clarifications may follow the verb, usually in a lowered pitch.

On the other hand, the noun phrase is characterized by a rigid order in which the head of the phrase precedes any modifiers and the possessor precedes the possessed.

In copula clauses, the word order is usually subject-copula-complement.

An attribute appears after its head noun.

An attribute of an incorporated noun appears after the verb:

==== Coordination and subordination ====
Syntactic coordination and subordination is built by combining predicates in the superordinate moods (indicative, interrogative, imperative and optative) with predicates in the subordinate moods (conditional, causative, contemporative and participial). The contemporative has both coordinative and subordinative functions, depending on the context. The relative order of the main clause and its coordinate or subordinate clauses is relatively free and is subject mostly to pragmatic concerns.

====Obviation and switch-reference====
The Greenlandic pronominal system includes a distinction known as obviation or switch-reference. There is a special so-called fourth person to denote a third person subject of a subordinate verb or the possessor of a noun that is coreferent with the third person subject of the matrix clause. Here are examples of the difference between third and the fourth persons:


;third person


;fourth person


====Indefiniteness construction====
There is no category of definiteness in Greenlandic and so information on whether participants are already known to the listener or they are new to the discourse is encoded by other means. According to some authors, morphology related to transitivity such as the use of the construction sometimes called antipassive or intransitive object conveys such meaning, along with strategies of noun incorporation of non-topical noun phrases. That view, however, is controversial.

=== Verbs ===
The morphology of Greenlandic verbs is enormously complex. The main processes are inflection and derivation. Inflectional morphology includes the processes of obligatory inflection for mood, person and voice (tense and aspect are not inflectional categories in Kalaallisut). Derivational morphology modifies the meaning of verbs similarly to English adverbs. There are hundreds of such derivational suffixes. Many of them are so semantically salient and so they are often referred to as postbases, rather than suffixes, particularly in the American tradition of Eskimo grammar. Such semantically &quot;heavy&quot; suffixes may express concepts such as &quot;to have&quot;, &quot;to be&quot;, &quot;to say&quot; or &quot;to think&quot;. The Greenlandic verb word consists of a root, followed by derivational suffixes/postbases and then inflectional suffixes. Tense and aspect are marked by optional suffixes between the derivational and the inflectional suffixes.

==== Inflection ====
Greenlandic verbs inflect for agreement with agent and patient and for mood and for voice. There are eight moods, four of which are used in independent clauses the others in subordinate clauses. The four independent moods are indicative, interrogative, imperative and optative. The four dependent moods are causative, conditional, contemporative and participial. Verbal roots can take transitive, intransitive or negative inflections and so all eight mood suffixes have those three forms. The inflectional system is even more complex since transitive suffixes encode both agent and patient in a single morpheme, with up to 48 different suffixes covering all possible combinations of agent and patient for each of the eight transitive paradigms. As some moods do not have forms for all persons (imperative has only 2nd person, optative has only 1st and 3rd person, participial mood has no 4th person and contemporative has no 3rd person), the total number of verbal inflectional suffixes is about 318.

===== Indicative and interrogative moods =====
The indicative mood is used in all independent expository clauses. The interrogative mood is used for questions that do not have the question particle &quot;immaqa&quot; &quot;maybe&quot;.

The table below shows the intransitive inflection of the verb &quot;neri-&quot; &quot;to eat&quot; in the indicative and interrogative moods (question marks mark interrogative intonation; questions have falling intonation on the last syllable, unlike English and most other Indo-European languages, whose questions are marked by rising intonation). Both the indicative and the interrogative mood have a transitive and an intransitive inflection, but only the intransitive inflection is given here. Consonant gradation like in Finnish appears to occur in the verb conjugation (with strengthening to &quot;pp&quot; in the 3rd person plural and weakening to &quot;v&quot; elsewhere).

The table below shows the transitive indicative inflection for 1st, 2nd, and 3rd person singular subjects of the verb &quot;asa-&quot; &quot;to love&quot; (an asterisk means that the form does not occur as such but uses a different reflexive inflection).

The table below gives the basic form of all the inflexional suffixes in the indicative and interrogative moods. Where the indicative and interrogative forms differ, the interrogative form is given second in brackets. Suffixes used with intransitive verbs are in &quot;italics&quot;, while suffixes used with transitive verbs are unmarked.

Apart from the similarities between forms highlighted in bold,

* all basic forms start with &quot;v-&quot; except for the 3rd person plural intransitive forms;
* all basic &quot;transitive&quot; indicative forms have as their first vowel;
* all basic &quot;intransitive&quot; indicative forms have as their first vowel (&quot;voq&quot; is phonemically ); and
* all basic forms unique to the interrogative mood have as their first vowel except for the 3rd person intransitive forms.

Furthermore, if the subject of a transitive verb is 3rd person, the suffix will start with &quot;vaa-&quot; (with one exception).

When the object is 1st or 2nd person singular, the forms with a 3rd person &quot;singular&quot; subject are turned into forms with a (3rd person) &quot;plural&quot; subject by lengthening the second consonant: → , → . If the subject or object is 2nd person plural, the suffix will include &quot;-si(-)&quot;. If the subject or object is 1st person plural, the suffix will end in &quot;-t&quot; except when the object is 2nd person plural.

The interrogative mood has separate forms only when the subject is 2nd person or intransitive 3rd person; otherwise, the interrogative forms are identical to the indicative forms. All suffixes that start with &quot;vi-&quot; have a subject in the 2nd person. In the forms unique to the interrogative transitive (which all have 2nd person subjects), the forms with a (2nd person) &quot;singular&quot; subject are turned into forms with a (2nd person) &quot;plural&quot; subject by adding &quot;-si-&quot; after the initial &quot;vi-&quot; (except when the object is 1st person plural, in which case the same form is used for both plural and singular subject, as is the case for all interrogative &quot;or indicative&quot; forms with the object in the 1st or 2nd person plural).

The initial &quot;v-&quot; changes to &quot;p-&quot; or is deleted according to the rules.

After the suffix &quot;-nngil-&quot; ‘not’, &quot;v-&quot; is deleted (while the &quot;pp-&quot; of the 3rd person plural intransitive forms is changed to &quot;l-&quot;) and a first vowel is changed to (e.g. &quot;suli+vugut&quot; ‘we work’ but &quot;suli-nngil+agut&quot; ‘we don&#x27;t work’). The intransitive 2nd person does not have separate interrogative forms after &quot;-nngil-&quot;, hence e.g.
* &quot;suli+vutit&quot; ‘you (sg.) work’
* &quot;suli-nngil+atit&quot; ‘you (sg.) don&#x27;t work’
* &quot;suli+vit?&quot; ‘do you (sg.) work?’
* &quot;suli-nngil+atit?&quot; ‘don&#x27;t you (sg.) work?’ (instead of the expected *&quot;suli-nngil+it?&quot;)

After the future suffix &quot;-ssa-&quot;, &quot;vu-&quot; and &quot;vo-&quot; (both ) change to &quot;a-&quot;. (&quot;Va-&quot;, &quot;vi-&quot;, &quot;ppu-&quot;, and &quot;ppa-&quot; do not change.)

After the suffix &quot;-qa-&quot;, &quot;vu-&quot;, &quot;vo-&quot;, &quot;va-&quot;, &quot;vi-&quot;, &quot;ppu-&quot;, and &quot;ppa-&quot; all change to &quot;a-&quot; (except when this would lead to &quot;aaa&quot;, in which case &quot;aaa&quot; is shortened to &quot;aa&quot;). &quot;-qa-&quot; + &quot;vai&quot; becomes &quot;qai&quot;, not *&quot;qaai&quot;. (In accordance with the rule, &quot;aau&quot; becomes &quot;aaju&quot;, hence &quot;-qa-&quot; + &quot;viuk&quot; becomes &quot;qaajuk&quot;, not *&quot;qaauk&quot;.) The suffix &quot;-qa-&quot; was historically &quot;-qi-&quot;.

===== Imperative and optative moods =====
The imperative mood is used to issue orders and is always combined with the second person. The optative is used to express wishes or exhortations and is never used with the second person. There is a negative imperative form used to issue prohibitions. Both optative and imperative have transitive and intransitive paradigms. There are two transitive positive imperative paradigms: a standard one and another that is considered rude and is used usually to address children.



===== Conditional mood =====
The conditional mood is used to construct subordinate clauses that mean &quot;if&quot; or &quot;when&quot;.

===== Causative mood =====
The causative mood (sometimes called the &quot;conjunctive&quot;) is used to construct subordinate clauses that mean &quot;because&quot;, &quot;since&quot; or &quot;when&quot; and is also sometimes used to mean &quot;that&quot;. The causative is used also in main clauses to imply some underlying cause.



===== Contemporative mood =====
The contemporative mood is used to construct subordinate clauses with the meaning of simultaneity and is used only if the subject of the subordinate clause and of the main clause are identical. If they differ, the participial mood or the causative mood is used. The contemporative can also be used to form complement clauses for verbs of speaking or thinking.



===== Participial mood =====
The participial mood is used to construct a subordinate clause describing its subject in the state of carrying out an activity. It is used when the matrix clause and the subordinate clause have different subjects. It is often used in appositional phrases such as relative clauses.

==== Derivation ====
Verbal derivation is extremely productive, and Greenlandic has many hundreds of derivational suffixes. Often, a single verb uses more than one derivational suffix, resulting in very long words. Here are some examples of how derivational suffixes can change the meaning of verbs:

==== Time reference and aspect ====
Greenlandic grammar has morphological devices to mark a distinction between the recent and distant past, but their use is optional and so they should be understood as parts of Greenlandic&#x27;s extensive derivational system, rather than as a system of tense-markers. Rather than by morphological marking, fixed temporal distance is expressed by temporal adverbials:



All other things being equal and in the absence of any explicit adverbials, the indicative mood is interpreted as complete or incomplete, depending on the verbal lexical aspect.

However, if a sentence with an atelic verbal phrase is embedded within the context of a past-time narrative, it would be interpreted as past.

Greenlandic has several purely-derivational devices of expressing meaning related to aspect and lexical aspect such as &quot;sar&quot;, expressing &quot;habituality&quot;, and , expressing, &quot;stop to&quot;. Also, there are at least two major perfect markers: &quot;sima&quot; and &quot;nikuu&quot;. &quot;sima&quot; can occur in several positions with obviously-different functions. The last position indicates evidential meaning, but that can be determined only if several suffixes are present.

With atelic verbs, there is a regular contrast between indirective evidentiality, marked by &quot;sima&quot;, and witnessed evidentiality, marked by &quot;nikuu&quot;. Its evidential meaning causes the combination of first person and &quot;sima&quot; to be sometimes marked.

In the written language and more recently also in the spoken language, especially by younger speakers, &quot;sima&quot; and &quot;nikuu&quot; can be used together with adverbials to refer to a particular time in the past. That is, they can arguably mark time reference but do not yet do so systematically.

Just as Greenlandic does not systematically mark past tense, the language also does not have a future tense. Rather, it employs three different strategies to express future meaning:


The status of the perfect markers as aspect is not very controversial, but some scholars have claimed that Greenlandic has a basic temporal distinction between future and nonfuture. Especially, the suffix &quot;-ssa&quot; and handful of other suffixes have been claimed to be obligatory future markers. However, at least for literary Greenlandic, the suffixes have been shown to have other semantics, which can be used to refer to the future by the strategies that have just been described.

====Voice====
Greenlandic has an antipassive voice, which transforms the ergative subject into an absolutive subject and the absolutive object into an instrumental argument; it is formed mostly by the addition of the marker &quot;-(s)i-&quot; to the verb (the presence of the consonant being mostly phonologically determined, albeit with a few cases of lexically determined distribution) and, in small lexically restricted sets of verbs, by the addition of &quot;-nnig-&quot; or &quot;-ller-&quot; (the former being, however, more frequent because it is the one selected by the common verbal element &quot;-gi/ri-&quot; &#x27;to have as&#x27;). It has also been analysed as having passive voice constructions, which are formed with the elements &quot;-saa-&quot; (composed of the passive participle suffix &quot;-sa-&quot; and &quot;-u-&quot; &#x27;to be&#x27;), &quot;-neqar-&quot; (composed of the verbal noun suffix &quot;-neq-&quot; and &quot;-qar-&quot; &#x27;to have&#x27;) and &quot;-tit-&quot; (only to demote higher animate participants, also used with a reflexive causative meaning &#x27;to cause, let [someone do something to one]&#x27;). In addition, an &quot;impersonal passive&quot; from intransitive verbs &quot;-toqar-&quot; (composed of intransitive agent suffix &quot;-toq-&quot; and &quot;-qar&quot; &#x27;to have&#x27;) has been identified.

==== Noun incorporation ====
There is also a debate in the linguistic literature on whether Greenlandic has noun incorporation. The language does not allow the kind of incorporation that is common in many other languages in which a noun root can be incorporated into almost any verb to form a verb with a new meaning. On the other hand, Greenlandic often forms verbs that include noun roots. The question then becomes whether to analyse such verb formations as incorporation or as denominal derivation of verbs. Greenlandic has a number of morphemes that require a noun root as their host and form complex predicates, which correspond closely in meaning to what is often seen in languages that have canonical noun incorporation. Linguists who propose that Greenlandic had incorporation argue that such morphemes are in fact verbal roots, which must incorporate nouns to form grammatical clauses. That argument is supported by the fact that many of the derivational morphemes that form denominal verbs work almost identically to canonical noun incorporation. They allow the formation of words with a semantic content that correspond to an entire English clause with verb, subject and object. Another argument is that the morphemes that derive denominal verbs come from historical noun incorporating constructions, which have become fossilized.

Other linguists maintain that the morphemes in question are simply derivational morphemes that allow the formation of denominal verbs. That argument is supported by the fact that the morphemes are always latched on to a nominal element. These examples illustrate how Greenlandic forms complex predicates including nominal roots:

=== Nouns ===
Nouns are always inflected for case and number and sometimes for number and person of possessor. Singular and plural are distinguished and eight cases are used: absolutive, ergative (relative), instrumental, allative, locative, ablative, prosecutive (also called vialis or prolative) and equative. Case and number are marked by a single suffix. Nouns can be derived from verbs or from other nouns by a number of suffixes: - &quot;to read&quot; + - &quot;place&quot; becomes &quot;school&quot; and + - &quot;something good&quot; becomes &quot;good school&quot;.

Since the possessive agreement suffixes on nouns and the transitive agreement suffixes on verbs in a number of instances have similar or identical shapes, there is even a theory that Greenlandic distinguishes between transitive and intransitive nouns as it does for verbs.

==== Pronouns ====
There are personal pronouns for first, second, and third person singular and plural. They are optional as subjects or objects but only when the verbal inflection refers to such arguments.

Personal pronouns are, however, required in the oblique case:

==== Case ====
Both grammatical core cases, ergative and absolutive, are used to express grammatical and syntactical roles of participant noun phrases. The oblique cases express information related to movement and manner.



The instrumental case is versatile. It is used for the instrument with which an action is carried out, for oblique objects of intransitive verbs (also called antipassive verbs) and for secondary objects of transitive verbs.

There is no case marking if the noun is incorporated. Many sentences can be constructed oblique object as well as incorporated object.

It is also used to express the meaning of &quot;give me&quot; and to form adverbs from nouns:

The allative case describes movement towards something.

It is also used with numerals and the question word &quot;qassit&quot; to express the time of the clock and in the meaning &quot;amount per unit&quot;:

The locative case describes spatial location:

The ablative case describes movement away from something or the source of something:

The prosecutive case describes movement through something and the medium of writing or a location on the body.

The prosecutive case ending &quot;-kkut&quot; is distinct from the affix &quot;-kkut&quot; which denotes a noun and its companions, e.g. a person and friends or family:

The equative case describes similarity of manner or quality. It is also used to derive language names from nouns denoting nationalities: &quot;like a person of x nationality [speaks]&quot;.

==== Possession ====
In Greenlandic, possession is marked on the noun that agrees with the person and the number of its possessor. The possessor is in the ergative case. There are different possessive paradigms for each different case. Table 4 gives the possessive paradigm for the absolutive case of &quot;house&quot;. Here are examples of the use of the possessive inflection, the use of the ergative case for possessors and the use of fourth person possessors.

== Numerals ==

The numerals and lower numbers are,

== Vocabulary ==
Most of Greenlandic&#x27;s vocabulary is inherited from Proto-Eskimo–Aleut, but there are also a large number of loans from other languages, especially from Danish. Early loans from Danish have often become acculturated to the Greenlandic phonological system: the Greenlandic word &quot;priest&quot; is a loan from the Danish . However, since Greenlandic has an enormous potential for the derivation of new words from existing roots, many modern concepts have Greenlandic names that have been invented rather than borrowed: &quot;computer&quot; which literally means &quot;artificial brain&quot;. The potential for complex derivations also means that Greenlandic vocabulary is built on very few roots, which, combined with affixes, form large word families. For example, the root for &quot;tongue&quot; is used to derive the following words:
* &#x27;says&#x27;
* &#x27;word&#x27;
* &#x27;speaks&#x27;
* &#x27;discussion paper&#x27;
* &#x27;linguist&#x27;
* &#x27;grammar&#x27;
* &#x27;author&#x27;
* &#x27;conversation&#x27;
* &#x27;harangues him&#x27;
* &#x27;speaks badly about him&#x27;

Lexical differences between dialects are often considerable because of the earlier cultural practice of imposing a taboo on words that had served as names for a deceased person. Since people were often named after everyday objects, many of them have changed their name several times because of taboo rules, another cause of the divergence of dialectal vocabulary.

== Orthography ==
Greenlandic is written with the Latin script. The alphabet consists of 18 letters:
* A E F G I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V
 are used to spell loanwords, especially from Danish and English. Greenlandic uses &quot;...&quot; and »...« as quotation marks.

From 1851 until 1973, Greenlandic was written in an alphabet invented by Samuel Kleinschmidt, which used the &quot;kra&quot; (, capitalised ) which was replaced by in the 1973 reform. In the Kleinschmidt alphabet, long vowels and geminate consonants were indicated by diacritics on vowels (in the case of consonant gemination, the diacritics were placed on the vowel preceding the affected consonant). For example, the name &quot;Kalaallit Nunaat&quot; was spelled &quot;Kalãlit Nunât&quot; or &quot;Kalàlit Nunât&quot;. This scheme uses the circumflex (◌̂) to indicate a long vowel (e.g. ; modern: ), an acute accent (◌́) to indicate gemination of the following consonant: (i.e. ; modern: ) and, finally, a tilde (◌̃) or a grave accent (◌̀), depending on the author, indicates vowel length and gemination of the following consonant (e.g. ; modern: ). , used only before , are now written in Greenlandic. The spelling system of Nunatsiavummiutut, spoken in Nunatsiavut in northeastern Labrador, is derived from the old Greenlandic system.

Technically, the Kleinschmidt orthography focused upon morphology: the same derivational affix would be written in the same way in different contexts, despite its being pronounced differently in different contexts. The 1973 reform replaced this with a phonological system: Here, there was a clear link from written form to pronunciation, and the same suffix is now written differently in different contexts: for example do not represent separate phonemes, but only more open pronunciations of before . The differences are due to phonological changes. It is therefore easy to go from the old orthography to the new (cf. the online converter) whereas going the other direction would require a full lexical analysis.
==Example text==
Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Greenlandic:

(Pre-reform)

(Post-reform)

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in English:
:&quot;All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.&quot;

== See also ==

* Inuit languages
** Inuit grammar
** Inuit phonology

== Notes ==
===Abbreviations===
For affixes about which the precise meaning is the cause of discussion among specialists, the suffix itself is used as a gloss, and its meaning must be understood from context: -SSA (meaning either future or expectation), -NIKUU and -SIMA.

&lt;section begin=&quot;list-of-glossing-abbreviations&quot;/&gt;
4:fourth (reflexive or obviative) person
PART:participial mood
EQU:equative case
CONT:contemporative mood
INT:intransitive
INSTR:instrumental case
POSS:possessor
CAU:causative mood&lt;section end=&quot;list-of-glossing-abbreviations&quot;/&gt;

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* Fortescue, M. D. (1990). &quot;From the writings of the Greenlanders = Kalaallit atuakkiaannit&quot;. [Fairbanks, Alaska]: University of Alaska Press. 

== External links ==


* General Usage of the Greenlandic Language Papers at Dartmouth College Library
* Oqaasileriffik (The Greenland Language Secretariat) (version in English): contains many language resources including dictionaries, a speech synthesis program, a morphological analyser and a corpus
* Law of Greenlandic Selfrule (see chapter 7) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25355" start="0" end="11" title="Greenlandic language" label="Greenlandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25946" start="24" end="45" title="Eskimo–Aleut languages" label="Eskimo–Aleut language"/>
<link wikidata="Q887850" start="74" end="91" title="Greenlandic Inuit" label="Greenlandic Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="95" end="104" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27796" start="135" end="150" title="Inuit languages" label="Inuit languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="154" end="160" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="169" end="178" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858355" start="279" end="294" title="Naalakkersuisut" label="Naalakkersuisut"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="322" end="339" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q634266" start="422" end="439" title="Linguistic imperialism" label="colonial language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="441" end="447" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="458" end="465" title="Variety (linguistics)" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q15665351" start="469" end="480" title="West Greenlandic" label="Kalaallisut"/>
<link wikidata="Q888078" start="568" end="576" title="Inughuit" label="Inughuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671647" start="605" end="612" title="Inuktun" label="Inuktun"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="667" end="676" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q48641" start="696" end="718" title="polysynthetic language" label="polysynthetic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="780" end="785" title="root (linguistics)" label="roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="790" end="796" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536018" start="820" end="845" title="morphosyntactic alignment" label="morphosyntactic alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q862156" start="849" end="857" title="ergative–absolutive language" label="ergative"/>
<link wikidata="Q25355" start="1060" end="1062" title="Greenlandic language" label="he"/>
<link wikidata="Q25355" start="1164" end="1170" title="Greenlandic language" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25355" start="1194" end="1200" title="Greenlandic language" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="1367" end="1372" title="Grammatical case" label="cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="1393" end="1397" title="Verb" label="Verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="1430" end="1435" title="grammatical mood" label="moods"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="1448" end="1454" title="grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="1459" end="1465" title="grammatical person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="1473" end="1480" title="Subject (grammar)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="1485" end="1491" title="object (grammar)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q257885" start="1562" end="1572" title="word order" label="word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q830012" start="1576" end="1586" title="transitivity (grammar)" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q117364" start="1587" end="1593" title="clause" label="clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="1598" end="1617" title="subject–object–verb" label="subject–object–verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373325" start="1723" end="1739" title="switch-reference" label="switch-reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="1849" end="1866" title="grammatical tense" label="grammatical tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="2096" end="2105" title="grammatical aspect" label="aspectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975539" start="2133" end="2147" title="lexical aspect" label="lexical aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="2237" end="2249" title="future tense" label="future tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q727018" start="2296" end="2314" title="noun incorporation" label="noun incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="2584" end="2589" title="Loanword" label="loans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2606" end="2613" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="2648" end="2660" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="2732" end="2743" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q77634" start="2761" end="2780" title="Samuel Kleinschmidt" label="Samuel Kleinschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322198" start="2855" end="2870" title="spoken language" label="spoken language"/>
<link wikidata="Q754984" start="2894" end="2907" title="sound changes" label="sound changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172021" start="2922" end="2941" title="orthographic reform" label="orthographic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="2978" end="2984" title="Writing system" label="script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="3047" end="3055" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q849870" start="3080" end="3100" title="Literacy rate by country" label="highest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q72813" start="3177" end="3189" title="Thule people" label="Thule people"/>
<link wikidata="Q666758" start="3250" end="3256" title="Saqqaq culture" label="Saqqaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q603749" start="3261" end="3275" title="Dorset culture" label="Dorset culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364794" start="3558" end="3568" title="Paul Egede" label="Paul Egede"/>
<link wikidata="Q77634" start="4121" end="4140" title="Samuel Kleinschmidt" label="Samuel Kleinschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636257" start="5036" end="5060" title="Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa" label="Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa"/>
<link wikidata="Q937418" start="5146" end="5156" title="Sermitsiaq (newspaper)" label="Sermitsiaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q758268" start="5243" end="5273" title="Atuagagdliutit/Grønlandsposten" label="Atuagagdliutit/Grønlandsposten"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="5589" end="5624" title="indigenous languages of the Americas" label="indigenous language of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q925553" start="5795" end="5828" title="Red Book of Endangered Languages" label="Red Book of Language Endangerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="5927" end="5933" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q27796" start="6517" end="6532" title="Inuit languages" label="Inuit languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q15665351" start="6550" end="6561" title="West Greenlandic" label="Kalaallisut"/>
<link wikidata="Q15665389" start="6584" end="6594" title="Tunumiit dialect" label="Tunumiisut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671647" start="6616" end="6623" title="Inuktun" label="Inuktun"/>
<link wikidata="Q15665351" start="6624" end="6635" title="West Greenlandic" label="Kalaallisut"/>
<link wikidata="Q25946" start="6685" end="6704" title="Eskimo–Aleut languages" label="Eskimo–Aleut family"/>
<link wikidata="Q27796" start="6736" end="6751" title="Inuit languages" label="Inuit languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6755" end="6761" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="6766" end="6772" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671647" start="6917" end="6924" title="Inuktun" label="Inuktun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545847" start="7164" end="7181" title="Ammassalik Island" label="Ammassalik Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q321279" start="7186" end="7202" title="Ittoqqortoormiit" label="Ittoqqortoormiit"/>
<link wikidata="Q148877" start="7268" end="7279" title="Assimilation (phonology)" label="assimilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q957073" start="7280" end="7297" title="consonant cluster" label="consonant cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q303160" start="7428" end="7437" title="Upernavik" label="Upernavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q747898" start="7593" end="7602" title="Uummannaq" label="Uummannaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135227" start="7611" end="7620" title="Disko Bay" label="Disko Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q208098" start="7698" end="7706" title="Sisimiut" label="Sisimiut"/>
<link wikidata="Q226" start="7728" end="7732" title="Nuuk" label="Nuuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q847691" start="7753" end="7762" title="Maniitsoq" label="Maniitsoq"/>
<link wikidata="Q432397" start="7802" end="7808" title="Narsaq" label="Narsaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q221203" start="7813" end="7821" title="Qaqortoq" label="Qaqortoq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="8208" end="8213" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q521164" start="8319" end="8324" title="Mora (linguistics)" label="morae"/>
<link wikidata="Q623772" start="8529" end="8545" title="uvular consonant" label="uvular consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="8566" end="8576" title="allophonic" label="allophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="8607" end="8617" title="allophonic" label="allophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="8709" end="8716" title="Quechuan languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627" start="8721" end="8727" title="Aymara language" label="Aymara"/>
<link wikidata="Q208098" start="9292" end="9300" title="Sisimiut" label="Sisimiut"/>
<link wikidata="Q847691" start="9301" end="9310" title="Maniitsoq" label="Maniitsoq"/>
<link wikidata="Q226" start="9311" end="9315" title="Nuuk" label="Nuuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q545767" start="9316" end="9323" title="Paamiut" label="Paamiut"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="9379" end="9387" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="9826" end="9836" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48641" start="9862" end="9871" title="polysynthetic" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683359" start="10455" end="10459" title="head-marking language" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005050" start="10464" end="10481" title="dependent-marking language" label="dependent marking"/>
<link wikidata="Q392648" start="10488" end="10493" title="agent (grammar)" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170212" start="10498" end="10505" title="patient (grammar)" label="patient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401131" start="10588" end="10600" title="noun phrases" label="noun phrases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536018" start="10634" end="10659" title="morphosyntactic alignment" label="morphosyntactic alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q862156" start="10699" end="10718" title="ergative language" label="ergative-absolutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q178435" start="10752" end="10773" title="nominative–accusative language" label="nominative-accusative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10908" end="10938" title="#Obviation and switch-reference" label="Obviation and switch-reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q110022" start="10981" end="10985" title="dual (grammatical number)" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="11666" end="11683" title="Open class (linguistics)" label="open word classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="11685" end="11690" title="nouns" label="nouns"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="11692" end="11697" title="verbs" label="verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="11702" end="11711" title="grammatical particle" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="12285" end="12289" title="case (grammar)" label="case"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="12522" end="12543" title="morphosyntax" label="grammatical relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="12574" end="12597" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="12617" end="12625" title="subject (grammar)" label="subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="12666" end="12673" title="object (grammar)" label="objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q392648" start="12785" end="12791" title="agent (grammar)" label="agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q178435" start="13115" end="13145" title="nominative–accusative language" label="nominative–accusative language"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="13296" end="13306" title="subject–object–verb" label="SOV / SOXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q933845" start="13400" end="13407" title="Topic (linguistics)" label="Topical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435289" start="13552" end="13557" title="focus (linguistics)" label="focal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207509" start="13882" end="13888" title="copula (linguistics)" label="copula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630879" start="14108" end="14120" title="coordination (linguistics)" label="coordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031017" start="14125" end="14138" title="subordination (linguistics)" label="subordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="14571" end="14580" title="pragmatics" label="pragmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348541" start="14697" end="14706" title="obviative" label="obviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373325" start="14710" end="14726" title="switch-reference" label="switch-reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182686" start="15093" end="15105" title="definiteness" label="definiteness"/>
<link wikidata="Q287232" start="15373" end="15384" title="antipassive voice" label="antipassive"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="15638" end="15648" title="inflection" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q728001" start="15653" end="15663" title="derivation (linguistics)" label="derivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="15758" end="15763" title="voice (grammar)" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="15775" end="15781" title="grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q380057" start="15906" end="15913" title="adverbs" label="adverbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9622433" start="16043" end="16051" title="postbase" label="postbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="16571" end="16580" title="agreement (linguistics)" label="agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11997264" start="16767" end="16777" title="indicative" label="indicative"/>
<link wikidata="Q12021746" start="16779" end="16792" title="interrogative mood" label="interrogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q22716" start="16794" end="16804" title="imperative mood" label="imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q527205" start="16809" end="16817" title="optative" label="optative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745428" start="16954" end="16962" title="negation (linguistics)" label="negative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17692" end="17701" title="Question#Grammar" label="questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q731363" start="18278" end="18297" title="Consonant gradation" label="Consonant gradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="18306" end="18313" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20975" end="20980" title="Greenlandic phonology#Rules" label="rules"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22243" end="22247" title="Greenlandic phonology#Rule" label="rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q625581" start="23001" end="23017" title="conditional mood" label="conditional mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q121851910" start="23137" end="23151" title="causative mood" label="causative mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402059" start="24127" end="24143" title="relative clauses" label="relative clauses"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="24736" end="24741" title="tense (grammar)" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975539" start="25015" end="25029" title="lexical aspect" label="lexical aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336024" start="25681" end="25693" title="telicity" label="atelic verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223979" start="25743" end="25756" title="evidentiality" label="evidentiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049318" start="26614" end="26623" title="nonfuture tense" label="nonfuture"/>
<link wikidata="Q287232" start="26968" end="26985" title="antipassive voice" label="antipassive voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194697" start="27616" end="27629" title="passive voice" label="passive voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q727018" start="28405" end="28423" title="noun incorporation" label="noun incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="28837" end="28845" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156935" start="28895" end="28912" title="complex predicate" label="complex predicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192997" start="31321" end="31338" title="instrumental case" label="instrumental case"/>
<link wikidata="Q287232" start="31475" end="31486" title="antipassive" label="antipassive"/>
<link wikidata="Q655020" start="31777" end="31790" title="allative case" label="allative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="31987" end="32000" title="locative case" label="locative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q156986" start="32034" end="32047" title="ablative case" label="ablative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q952933" start="32120" end="32136" title="prosecutive case" label="prosecutive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177653" start="32402" end="32415" title="equative case" label="equative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543662" start="32626" end="32636" title="possession (linguistics)" label="possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="33151" end="33161" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251843" start="33180" end="33198" title="Proto-Eskimo–Aleut" label="Proto-Eskimo–Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="34330" end="34335" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="34630" end="34642" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="34648" end="34656" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="34672" end="34679" title="Letter (alphabet)" label="letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043" start="34831" end="34846" title="non-English usage of quotation marks" label="quotation marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q77634" start="34922" end="34941" title="Samuel Kleinschmidt" label="Samuel Kleinschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755941" start="34964" end="34967" title="Kra (letter)" label="kra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172021" start="35025" end="35031" title="Spelling reform" label="reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="35063" end="35074" title="long vowels" label="long vowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="35079" end="35097" title="geminate consonant" label="geminate consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="35117" end="35126" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11175" start="35391" end="35401" title="circumflex" label="circumflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q216042" start="35454" end="35466" title="acute accent" label="acute accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167" start="35557" end="35562" title="tilde" label="tilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q627319" start="35573" end="35585" title="grave accent" label="grave accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642" start="35777" end="35794" title="Nunatsiavummiutut" label="Nunatsiavummiutut"/>
<link wikidata="Q636967" start="35806" end="35817" title="Nunatsiavut" label="Nunatsiavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q380307" start="35834" end="35842" title="Labrador" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="35944" end="35954" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="36637" end="36674" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q27796" start="36991" end="37006" title="Inuit languages" label="Inuit languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113367" start="37010" end="37023" title="Inuit grammar" label="Inuit grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059249" start="37027" end="37042" title="Inuit phonology" label="Inuit phonology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647132" wikidata="Q1239750" url="?curid=647132" title="Donald Byrne">
<text>Donald Byrne (June 12, 1930 – April 8, 1976) was an American university professor and chess player. He held the title International Master, and competed for his country in the Chess Olympiad on several occasions.

==Biography==
Born in New York City, Byrne was a professor of English. He taught at Pennsylvania State University from 1961 until his death, having been invited there to teach and to coach the varsity chess team. Before his time at Penn State, he was a professor at Valparaiso University in Indiana.

He was a competitor in the chess club run by Brooklyn chess coach and master John W. Collins. Collins wrote about his students in the book &quot;My Seven Chess Prodigies&quot;, which features both Byrne brothers, Donald and Robert (see more below), and the young Bobby Fischer.

Byrne died in Philadelphia of complications arising from lupus. He was inducted into the U.S. Chess Hall of Fame in 2003.

==Chess career==
Byrne won the U.S. Open Chess Championship in 1953 in Milwaukee and around that time he achieved the second-highest rating in the U.S., behind Samuel Reshevsky, against whom Byrne had a winning record. He was awarded the International Master title by FIDE (the World Chess Federation) in 1962, and played for or captained five U.S. Chess Olympiad teams between 1962 and 1972. In 1972, he led a team representing Pennsylvania State University (the remainder of the team was alumni) to the US Amateur Team Championship in Philadelphia. The winning Penn State team consisted of Byrne, Dan Heisman, Steve Wexler, Bill Bickham, and Jim Joachim (alt.). Byrne&#x27;s elder brother, Grandmaster Robert Byrne, was also a leading player of that time.

Byrne was a great ambassador for American chess, seemingly on good terms with players from both sides of the Iron Curtain. At the 1966 Chess Olympiad in Havana, Cuba, Bobby Fischer, a member of the Worldwide Church of God, would not compete on Saturdays, and the tournament officials knew this, yet they scheduled his first game against a Soviet player on Saturday, leading to accusations and hot tempers by the U.S. and Soviet teams and the tournament officials. Byrne&#x27;s diplomacy and communication skills and the respect that all the players had for his integrity were enough to get the game rescheduled with everyone saving face. The tournament proceeded without further incident. Host Fidel Castro gave Byrne a hand-carved chess set to thank him.

Byrne was repeatedly asked by his teammates to be team captain, because of his interpersonal acumen and his generous, helpful nature. He routinely helped all the players analyze their games during adjournments, and he repeatedly succeeded in getting the temperamental Fischer to &quot;relax and play the game&quot;, as he would tell Fischer when stress threatened his continued participation in tournaments.

In the late 1950s Byrne contracted lupus, an auto-immune disease. He was known around campus for his very wide-brimmed brown Stetson hat. He would frequently tell stories about his chess exploits, often turning red from laughter. One story occurred in the 1956 Rosenwald tournament during the Game of the Century between Byrne and Bobby Fischer. Fischer was winning the game decisively, and Byrne asked some of the other players if it would be a good &quot;tip of the hat&quot; to Fischer&#x27;s superb play to let young Fischer play the game to a checkmate instead of Byrne resigning, which would normally happen between masters. When the other players agreed, Byrne played the game out until Fischer checkmated him. Byrne added &quot;You have to remember, Bobby wasn&#x27;t yet &quot;Bobby Fischer&quot; at that time&quot;, meaning that the then 13-year-old Fischer was &quot;only&quot; a master, and not yet the 14-year-old wunderkind and top U.S. player he became the following year. Two other Byrne stories posted online: Fischer and the Border Patrol and The Hustler Gets Byrned.

As a player, Byrne popularized the ...&quot;a5&quot; line in the Yugoslav Attack in the Dragon Variation of the Sicilian Defence. Against 1. &quot;d4&quot;, he often preferred to play the Gruenfeld Defense. As White, he preferred using the English Opening.

==Notable games==

*In the following game, Byrne wins against perennial World Championship contender Efim Geller:
:Geller vs. D. Byrne, Moscow 1955 1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 g6 6.Be3 Bg7 7.f3 Nc6 8.Qd2 0-0 9.0-0-0 Be6 10.Kb1 Rc8 11.g4 Qa5 12.Nxe6 fxe6 13.Bc4 Nd8 14.Be2 Nd7 15.Bd4 Ne5 16.f4 Ndc6 17.Bxe5 dxe5 18.f5 Nd4 19.fxg6 hxg6 20.Rhf1 Rf4 21.g5 b5 22.Bd3 Rcf8 23.Qg2 b4 24.Ne2 Qc5 25.Qh3 Rf3 26.Rxf3 Rxf3 27.Qg4 Rxd3 28.Rc1 Rd1 29.c3 Rxc1+ 30.Kxc1 Nxe2+ 31.Qxe2 bxc3 32.Qg2 cxb2+ 33.Kxb2 Qb4+ 34.Kc2 a5 35.Qg4 Qc5+ 36.Kb3 Qb6+ 37.Kc3 a4 38.h4 Qd4+ 39.Kc2 Qf2+ 40.Kd3 Qxa2 41.h5 Qb3+ 42.Kd2 gxh5 0–1
*In this game Byrne gives Samuel Reshevsky, who had clinched the tournament win the round before, his only defeat in a tournament best known for Bobby Fischer&#x27;s &quot;Game of the Century&quot; win over Byrne:
:D. Byrne vs. Reshevsky, Third Rosenwald Trophy 1956 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 e6 4.Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6 6.e4 a6 7.a4 g6 8.Nf3 Bg4 9.Be2 Bf3 10.Bf3 Nbd7 11.0-0 Bg7 12.Bf4 Qc7 13.Rc1 0-0 14.b4 Rfe8 15.a5 Qb8 16.bxc5 Nxc5 17.Na4 Nxa4 18.Qxa4 Qd8 19.Qxb4 Bf8 20.h3 Rb8 21.Rfe1 b6 22.axb6 Qxb6 23.Qxb6 Rxb6 24.e5 dxe5 25.Bxe5 Ba3 26.Rcd1 Bb2 27.Bc7 Rxe1 28.Rxe1 Rb4 29.Rb1 Bc3 30.Rb4 Bxb4 31.d6 Bc3 32.Bc6 Be5 33.g3 g5 34.Bd8 Kg7 35.d7 h5 36.Ba5 Nd7 37.Bxd7 Kg6 38.Kg2 f5 39.Bc8 g4 40.h4 f4 1–0

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* &quot;Former chess coach named to Hall of Fame&quot; remembrance in a Penn State publication
* Inductee Biography at the Chess Hall of Fame</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1239750" start="0" end="12" title="Donald Byrne" label="Donald Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="86" end="91" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690563" start="118" end="138" title="International Master" label="International Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q428303" start="176" end="190" title="Chess Olympiad" label="Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="276" end="283" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="298" end="327" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q186047" start="480" end="501" title="Valparaiso University" label="Valparaiso University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="560" end="568" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q940930" start="592" end="607" title="John W. Collins" label="John W. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q961003" start="739" end="745" title="Robert Byrne (chess player)" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q41314" start="778" end="791" title="Bobby Fischer" label="Bobby Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="851" end="856" title="lupus" label="lupus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035502" start="883" end="906" title="U.S. Chess Hall of Fame" label="U.S. Chess Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995105" start="948" end="976" title="U.S. Open Chess Championship" label="U.S. Open Chess Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="988" end="997" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093345" start="1050" end="1056" title="chess rating system" label="rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q311737" start="1077" end="1093" title="Samuel Reshevsky" label="Samuel Reshevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690563" start="1155" end="1175" title="International Master" label="International Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q102178" start="1185" end="1189" title="FIDE" label="FIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q428303" start="1266" end="1280" title="Chess Olympiad" label="Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="1346" end="1375" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1454" end="1466" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105269" start="1609" end="1620" title="International Grandmaster" label="Grandmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q961003" start="1621" end="1633" title="Robert Byrne (chess player)" label="Robert Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="1785" end="1797" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="1829" end="1835" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="1837" end="1841" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q41314" start="1843" end="1856" title="Bobby Fischer" label="Bobby Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752048" start="1874" end="1897" title="Grace Communion International" label="Worldwide Church of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="2370" end="2382" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q188297" start="2877" end="2882" title="Lupus erythematosus" label="lupus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092839" start="2967" end="2974" title="Stetson" label="Stetson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054896" start="3135" end="3154" title="The Game of the Century (chess)" label="Game of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q20819848" start="3390" end="3399" title="checkmate" label="checkmate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3417" end="3426" title="Glossary of chess#Resign" label="resigning"/>
<link wikidata="Q205178" start="3769" end="3779" title="Child prodigy" label="wunderkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q188566" start="4041" end="4057" title="Sicilian Defence" label="Sicilian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q753005" start="4117" end="4134" title="Gruenfeld Defense" label="Gruenfeld Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q110693" start="4169" end="4184" title="English Opening" label="English Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q190042" start="4259" end="4277" title="World Chess Championship" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q352495" start="4288" end="4299" title="Efim Geller" label="Efim Geller"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647133" wikidata="Q900575" url="?curid=647133" title="King of arms">
<text>King of arms is the senior rank of an officer of arms. In many heraldic traditions, only a king of arms has the authority to grant armorial bearings and sometimes certify genealogies and noble titles. In other traditions, the power has been delegated to other officers of similar rank.

==Heraldic duties==
In England, the authority to grant a coat of arms is subject to the formal approval of the Earl Marshal in the form of a warrant. In jurisdictions such as the Republic of Ireland the authority to grant armorial bearings has been delegated to a chief herald that serves the same purpose as the traditional king of arms. Canada also has a chief herald, though this officer grants arms on the authority of the governor general as the king&#x27;s representative through the herald chancellor&#x27;s direct remit. Scotland&#x27;s only king of arms, the Lord Lyon, exercises the royal prerogative by direct delegation from the Crown and like the Chief Herald of Ireland and the old Ulster King of Arms needs no warrant from any other office bearer.

In the Kingdom of Spain, the power to certify coats of arms has been given to the (chroniclers of arms).

The English and Scottish kings of arms are the only officers of arms to have a distinctive crown 
of office, used for ceremonial purposes such as at coronations (as opposed to peers, who instead wear a coronet). At the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II, the kings of arms used a crown trimmed with sixteen acanthus leaves alternating in height, and inscribed with the words (&#x27;Have mercy upon me, O God, according to Thy great mercy&#x27;; Psalm 51). When this crown is shown in pictorial representations, nine leaves and the first three words are shown. Recently, a new crown has been made for the Lord Lyon, modelled on the Scottish Royal crown among the Honours of Scotland. This crown has removable arches which will be removed at coronations to avoid any hint of &quot;lèse majesté&quot;.

==Kings of arms and heraldic authorities of the United Kingdom==
===Kings of arms of England, Wales and Northern Ireland===
*Garter Principal King of Arms
*Clarenceux King of Arms (England and Wales south of the Trent)
*Norroy and Ulster King of Arms (England north of the Trent and Northern Ireland)

===Scottish king of arms===
*Lord Lyon King of Arms

===Orders of chivalry===
Garter King of Arms is the herald of the Order of the Garter as is in Scotland Lord Lyon King of Arms the herald of the Order of the Thistle. The Norroy and Ulster King of Arms is the herald of the (now dormant) Order of St Patrick. Other British orders of chivalry have their own kings of arms:
* Bath King of Arms, for the Order of the Bath
* King of Arms of the Order of St Michael and St George
* King of Arms of the Order of the British Empire

==Chief or state heralds of Ireland and the Commonwealth==
*Chief Herald of Canada
*Chief Herald of Ireland
*National Herald (formerly State Herald) of South Africa
*New Zealand Herald of Arms Extraordinary
*Chief Herald of Arms of Malta

==State Herald of Sweden==
*The State Herald () of Sweden is the head of a branch of the National Archives of Sweden

==Cronistas de Armas of Spain==

*Cronistas Reyes de Armas

==Former kings of arms of Portugal==
* &quot;Rei de Armas Portugal&quot; or &quot;Portugal Rei de Armas&quot; (&#x27;Portugal King of Arms&#x27;)
* &quot;Rei de Armas Algarve&quot; (&#x27;Algarve King of Arms&#x27;)
* &quot;Rei de Armas Índia&quot; (&#x27;India King of Arms&#x27;)

==King of Arms of the Royal House of Bourbon Two Sicilies==
* King of Arms Royal House of Bourbon Two Sicilies (Fernando Muñoz Altea, first appointed by the Prince Ranieri, Duke of Castro)

==See also==
* Bureau of Heraldry
* Canadian Heraldic Authority
* College of Arms
* Court of the Lord Lyon
* Grant of arms
* Heraldic authority

==References==
==External links==
*The Court of the Lord Lyon
*The College of Arms
*The Office of the Chief Herald of Ireland
*Genealogy &amp; Heraldry Bill, 2006 - new legislation on heraldry before the Irish Senate
*King of Arms Royal House of Bourbon Two Sicilies (Appointed by the Duke of Castro)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q900575" start="0" end="12" title="King of arms" label="King of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247049" start="38" end="53" title="officer of arms" label="officer of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="63" end="71" title="heraldry" label="heraldic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="131" end="148" title="coat of arms" label="armorial bearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="344" end="356" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265164" start="398" end="410" title="Earl Marshal" label="Earl Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477326" start="428" end="435" title="Warrant (law)" label="warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="466" end="485" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096751" start="644" end="656" title="Chief Herald of Canada" label="chief herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="714" end="730" title="governor general" label="governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="738" end="749" title="Charles III of the United Kingdom" label="king&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983896" start="777" end="794" title="Herald Chancellor of Canada" label="herald chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523599" start="855" end="864" title="Lord Lyon King of Arms" label="Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1058" end="1074" title="Kingdom of Spain" label="Kingdom of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170984" start="1248" end="1253" title="Crown (headgear)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="1306" end="1316" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294983" start="1359" end="1366" title="coronet" label="coronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797766" start="1376" end="1408" title="coronation of Queen Elizabeth II" label="coronation of Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q158091" start="1462" end="1477" title="Acanthus (genus)" label="acanthus leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349033" start="1600" end="1608" title="Psalm 51" label="Psalm 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848668" start="1817" end="1836" title="Honours of Scotland" label="Honours of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="1934" end="1946" title="lèse majesté" label="lèse majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q640138" start="2080" end="2109" title="Garter Principal King of Arms" label="Garter Principal King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095534" start="2111" end="2134" title="Clarenceux King of Arms" label="Clarenceux King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q19714" start="2167" end="2172" title="River Trent" label="Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q953355" start="2175" end="2205" title="Norroy and Ulster King of Arms" label="Norroy and Ulster King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523599" start="2286" end="2308" title="Lord Lyon King of Arms" label="Lord Lyon King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="2376" end="2395" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q721030" start="2455" end="2475" title="Order of the Thistle" label="Order of the Thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q953355" start="2481" end="2511" title="Norroy and Ulster King of Arms" label="Norroy and Ulster King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326038" start="2547" end="2566" title="Order of St Patrick" label="Order of St Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868928" start="2633" end="2650" title="Bath King of Arms" label="Bath King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="2660" end="2677" title="Order of the Bath" label="Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412201" start="2680" end="2733" title="King of Arms of the Order of St Michael and St George" label="King of Arms of the Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412202" start="2736" end="2783" title="King of Arms of the Order of the British Empire" label="King of Arms of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096751" start="2845" end="2867" title="Chief Herald of Canada" label="Chief Herald of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531582" start="2869" end="2892" title="Chief Herald of Ireland" label="Chief Herald of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998381" start="2894" end="2909" title="Bureau of Heraldry" label="National Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015421" start="2951" end="2991" title="New Zealand Herald of Arms Extraordinary" label="New Zealand Herald of Arms Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142380" start="2993" end="3022" title="Maltese heraldry" label="Chief Herald of Arms of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724971" start="3113" end="3140" title="National Archives of Sweden" label="National Archives of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187716" start="3176" end="3200" title="Cronista Rey de Armas" label="Cronistas Reyes de Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17264838" start="3247" end="3268" title="Rei de Armas Portugal" label="Rei de Armas Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17264838" start="3284" end="3305" title="Portugal Rei de Armas" label="Portugal Rei de Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17264838" start="3356" end="3376" title="Rei de Armas Algarve" label="Rei de Armas Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q17264838" start="3426" end="3444" title="Rei de Armas Índia" label="Rei de Armas Índia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277769" start="3547" end="3595" title="King of Arms Royal House of Bourbon Two Sicilies" label="King of Arms Royal House of Bourbon Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277769" start="3597" end="3617" title="Fernando Muñoz Altea" label="Fernando Muñoz Altea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943652" start="3642" end="3672" title="Prince Ranieri, Duke of Castro" label="Prince Ranieri, Duke of Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998381" start="3690" end="3708" title="Bureau of Heraldry" label="Bureau of Heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="3711" end="3738" title="Canadian Heraldic Authority" label="Canadian Heraldic Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="3741" end="3756" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="3759" end="3781" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q671174" start="3784" end="3797" title="Grant of arms" label="Grant of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613815" start="3800" end="3818" title="Heraldic authority" label="Heraldic authority"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647137" wikidata="Q263630" url="?curid=647137" title="Lobau">
<text>The Lobau () is a floodplain in Vienna, Austria. Located in the south-east of the city, on the northern bank of the Danube, it is a part of the Danube-Auen National Park. 

== History ==

=== Before 1870 ===
The river meandered through the flat Marchfeld, forming floodplains that constantly changed due to floods. 

==== Battle of Aspern ====

On May 21 and 22, 1809, during the War of the Fifth Coalition, the Lobau was the site of the Battle of Aspern. In order to confront the Austrian troops led by Archduke Charles stationed north of the Danube, Napoleon ordered his army to cross the river in the Lobau area near Kaiserebersdorf. The crossing of the Danube, was a challenging operation due to the need to cross several wide branches of the river, and the absence of any bridges.

The Battle of Aspern was Napoleon&#x27;s first defeat and led to the death of Jean Lannes, one of his most trusted marshals and a key figure in his military campaigns. The fighting took place north of the Lobau on open fields and in nearby villages, particularly Aspern and Essling. After the battle, Napoleon retreated with his troops into the Lobau, which at the time was an island between the Danube branches, and set up his headquarters there for several weeks. On the night of July 5, 1809, Henri-Gatien Bertrand had several bridges built, allowing Napoleon to move 150,000 men to the left bank of the Danube in just a few hours. He then launched an immediate attack on the Austrian army and decisively defeated them at the Battle of Wagram.

Today, locations like Napoleonstraße, monuments at Napoleon&#x27;s headquarters (near the Panozzalacke), Napoleon&#x27;s powder magazine, the French cemetery, the French crossing (south of Groß-Enzersdorf), and the Lion of Aspern commemorate the battle. In Paris, the Rue de Lobau by the Hôtel de Ville and the Avenue de Wagram, which leads to the Arc de Triomphe, are named in remembrance of the battle and the subsequent victory.

=== Danube regulation ===
Following the Danube regulation in 1870, many of the river&#x27;s side arms and floodplains in Vienna were filled in or developed, especially on the southern bank. In contrast, the northern bank, farther from the city, faced less urban pressure, allowing the Lobau to remain a preserved area for hunting, forestry, and agriculture, eventually becoming a popular recreational space.

Historically, the Lobau was a royal hunting reserve, frequently visited by Crown Prince Rudolf. In 1903, Emperor Franz Joseph I. and King Edward VII of Britain embarked on a hunting trip there. In 1905, the Lobau was designated as a protected area, and in 1918, Emperor Charles I. gifted the Upper Lobau to the city of Vienna.

=== Development ===
The concept of a Danube-Oder Canal through the Lobau dates back to 1719, with construction commencing in 1939 during the Nazi era. By the time work was halted, 4.2 kilometers of navigable canal had been completed. The Lobau Oil Harbor was established, including a refinery and large tank storage facilities. The canal split the Lobau into the Upper and Lower Lobau, with the Lower Lobau remaining largely untouched and natural, while the Upper Lobau was developed for agriculture. Forced laborers, primarily Soviet prisoners and Jews, were used in the construction of the refinery, which became a target of bombing raids.

In addition, small areas of the Lobau were used for military exercises. The Lobau Groundwater Works, which provides Vienna with drinking water during peak demand, was also constructed in the area.

=== Conservation ===
The Lobau is a crucial refuge for endangered species and was designated a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve from 1977 to 2016. Since 1978, it has been a nature reserve, with a landscape protection area extending to Aspern, protecting a quarter of Donaustadt.

In 1983, the Lower Lobau was designated a Ramsar Wetland area. Since 1996, the Lobau has been part of the Danube-Auen National Park, which extends downstream into Lower Austria, creating an ecological corridor with other protected areas. The Lobau is also connected to the Ramsar areas in Slovakia and the Czech Republic, forming a trilateral cross-border Ramsar area.
== Leisure ==
After World War I, the Lobau became a popular recreational area. Tram line 317 from Kagran transported people there, where they could enjoy long hikes and spend relaxing days by the water without encountering large crowds. In the 1920s, naturism, whether officially permitted or not, took off in the Lobau. Along its old river arms, naturist groups established meeting spots that continue to exist to this day.

The &quot;Dechantlacke&quot; and &quot;Panozzalacke&quot; are popular swimming spots in the Lobau. A nature trail called &quot;Obere Lobau&quot; was established in the national park area. It runs from the park entrance at Saltenstraße to the entrance at Dechantweg. The Lobau is connected by numerous hiking trails, including the long-distance &quot;Ostösterreichischer Grenzlandweg&quot; and the European long-distance trails E4 and E8.

== Ecology ==
The straightening of the river through the Danube regulation altered the Lobau&#x27;s hydrology. The formerly flood-prone landscape transitioned into a groundwater-fed wetland, while many of the Danube’s main and side arms became stagnant water bodies, gradually filling with sediment. The reduction in large-scale flooding and natural water flow disrupted ecological connections between the river and its floodplain, leading to a steady decline in groundwater and surface water levels.

The Lower Lobau has been experiencing rapid desiccation and sedimentation. A noticeable drop in water levels can be observed in the receding groundwater table and the frequent drying out of surface waters. These changes are largely attributed to river regulation efforts and the deepening of the Danube’s riverbed, a process intensified by hydropower development. Additionally, sediment deposits in floodplain waters, shifts in the Danube’s flow patterns, and inadequate water management have further altered the ecosystem. As water levels decline, the region&#x27;s biodiversity is also diminishing.

=== Water ===
The oxbow lakes and ponds occassionly dry out completely. These standing or slow-flowing bodies of water support diverse plant communities, some of whom are highly endangered. Many of these species have adapted to the changes in water levels. During particularly dry years, the receding water creates extensive mudflats, which are subsequently colonized by specialized plant and animal species.

Endangered aquatic plants in the region include water violet (&quot;Hottonia palustris&quot;), various pondweed species (&quot;Potamogeton spp.&quot;), water chestnut (&quot;Trapa natans&quot;), water crowfoot (&quot;Ranunculus aquatilis&quot;), and the carnivorous bladderwort (&quot;Utricularia&quot;). Plants adapted to temporarily dry shorelines include spikerush (&quot;Eleocharis&quot;), mudwort (&quot;Limosella&quot;), beggarticks (&quot;Bidens&quot;), and club-rush (&quot;Schoenoplectus&quot;).

The Josefsteg is a 135-meter-long pedestrian bridge in Vienna&#x27;s Lobau area, spanning the Schröderwasser. It is surrounded by a sea of common reed (&quot;Phragmites australis&quot;). The bridge was rebuilt in 2020.

=== Softwood riparian forests ===
On freshly deposited sand or gravel, influenced by the type of substrate and its proximity to the river, an initial plant cover establishes itsself. This marks the beginning of a typical wetland succession. The progression starts with herbaceous vegetation, followed by the growth of willow shrubs, and eventually the establishment of wetland forest trees, leading to the development of softwood riparian forests. 

These forests are primarily composed of light-demanding deciduous trees, such as willows (&quot;Salix spp.&quot;) and poplars (&quot;Populus spp.&quot;), which require open, unshaded areas to thrive. Common species include white willow (&quot;Salix alba&quot;), crack willow (&quot;Salix fragilis&quot;), European ash (&quot;Fraxinus excelsior&quot;), black poplar (&quot;Populus nigra&quot;), and white poplar (&quot;Populus alba&quot;).
=== Hardwood riparian forests ===
If the river no longer periodically floods an area, different tree species may eventually establish themselves on the mature wetland soils after several generations of trees. This area is less frequently flooded but still remains influenced by the river, with its location being strongly impacted by fluctuations in groundwater levels driven by the Danube&#x27;s high and low water events.

Typical tree species in these forests include the fluttering elm (&quot;Ulmus laevis&quot;), field elm (&quot;Ulmus minor&quot;), ash (&quot;Fraxinus excelsior&quot;), small-leaved lime (&quot;Tilia cordata&quot;), pedunculate oak (&quot;Quercus robur&quot;), and white poplar (&quot;Populus alba&quot;). These habitats support a variety of specialized species, including beetles and their larvae, which live in the decaying wood of trees and shrubs. The tree stumps and dead trees are particularly important for bird life.
=== Dry gravel terraces (Heißländen) ===
Heißländen are savanna-like habitats that develop on thick gravel deposits in the Lobau. Trees grow only where the soil layer is deep enough and retains sufficient moisture. These areas are relatively common in the Lobau but can be extremely dry in some locations.

The floodplains feature distinctive steppe-like dry gravel terraces known as &quot;Heißländen&quot;. These areas, formed on deep gravel deposits, have limited water availability, allowing only drought-tolerant plants to thrive. Typical species found here include hawthorn (&quot;Crataegus&quot;), sea buckthorn (&quot;Hippophae rhamnoides&quot;), various orchids, barberry (&quot;Berberis&quot;)&quot;,&quot; and feather grass. Lichens and mosses, which can withstand dry conditions, are also common. The praying mantis, an insect native to extremely dry environments, is another notable species found in these habitats.

== Wildlife ==
The Lobau supports a diverse range of flora and fauna due to its dynamic floodplain ecosystem. Seasonal flooding and varied habitats, including wetlands, forests, and river arms, create favorable conditions for numerous species.
=== Mammals ===
The Lobau provides habitat for over 30 species of mammals. One of the most notable is the Eurasian beaver (&quot;Castor fiber&quot;), which was reintroduced in the 1970s after having been extirpated from Austria. Other mammals found in the area include wild boar (&quot;Sus scrofa&quot;), European otter (&quot;Lutra lutra&quot;), roe deer (&quot;Capreolus capreolus&quot;), Eurasian water shrew (&quot;Neomys fodiens&quot;), red fox (&quot;Vulpes vulpes&quot;), and European hare (&quot;Lepus europaeus&quot;). Several bat species also inhabit the region, such as the common noctule (&quot;Nyctalus noctula&quot;), Natterer&#x27;s bat (&quot;Myotis nattereri&quot;), and Daubenton&#x27;s bat (&quot;Myotis daubentonii&quot;).

=== Reptiles and amphibians ===
The wetlands and forests of the Lobau provide a suitable habitat for a variety of reptiles and amphibians. Among the reptiles found in the area are the European pond turtle (&quot;Emys orbicularis&quot;), slow worm (&quot;Anguis fragilis&quot;), Aesculapian snake (&quot;Zamenis longissimus&quot;), dice snake (&quot;Natrix tessellata&quot;), grass snake (&quot;Natrix natrix&quot;), and smooth snake (&quot;Coronella austriaca&quot;). Amphibians in the region include the European tree frog (&quot;Hyla arborea&quot;), agile frog (&quot;Rana dalmatina&quot;), European fire-bellied toad (&quot;Bombina bombina&quot;), and Danube crested newt (&quot;Triturus dobrogicus&quot;).

=== Fish ===
The waterways of the Lobau also support diverse fish species, such as the European bitterling (&quot;Rhodeus amarus&quot;), common carp (&quot;Cyprinus carpio&quot;), pigo (&quot;Rutilus pigus&quot;), and European mudminnow (&quot;Umbra krameri&quot;).

=== Birds ===
The Lobau serves as a key stopover and wintering site for migratory birds. Fish-eating species include the great cormorant (&quot;Phalacrocorax carbo&quot;), grey heron (&quot;Ardea cinerea&quot;), and common kingfisher (&quot;Alcedo atthis&quot;). Birds of prey found in the area include the red kite (&quot;Milvus milvus&quot;), white-tailed eagle (&quot;Haliaeetus albicilla&quot;), and European honey buzzard (&quot;Pernis apivorus&quot;). Other notable species include the middle spotted woodpecker (&quot;Dendrocoptes medius&quot;) and the sand martin (&quot;Riparia riparia&quot;).
=== Invertebrates ===
The Lobau is home to a wide range of invertebrates, including mollusks, crustaceans, arachnids, and insects. Mollusks found in the area include the duck mussel (&quot;Anodonta anatina&quot;), great pond snail (&quot;Lymnaea stagnalis&quot;), and Lister’s river snail (&quot;Viviparus contectus&quot;). The noble crayfish (&quot;Astacus astacus&quot;) represents the region’s crustaceans, while arachnids include the zebra spider (&quot;Salticus scenicus&quot;) and the tarantula wolf spider (&quot;Lycosa singoriensis&quot;).

The insect population is particularly diverse, featuring species such as the dragonflies green snaketail &quot;(Ophiogomphus cecilia)&quot; and Eurasian baskettail (&quot;Epitheca bimaculata)&quot;, the southern festoon butterfly (&quot;Zerynthia polyxena)&quot;, the European mantis (&quot;Mantis religiosa&quot;), the water strider (&quot;Gerridae&quot;), and the stag beetle (&quot;Lucanidae&quot;).

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="18" end="28" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="32" end="38" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="40" end="47" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q474886" start="144" end="169" title="Danube-Auen National Park" label="Danube-Auen National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q383169" start="245" end="254" title="Marchfeld" label="Marchfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q684324" start="380" end="406" title="Fifth Coalition" label="War of the Fifth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q541626" start="438" end="454" title="Battle of Aspern" label="Battle of Aspern"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="481" end="496" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q84201" start="504" end="520" title="Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen" label="Archduke Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="552" end="560" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q273032" start="865" end="876" title="Jean Lannes" label="Jean Lannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q93854" start="1050" end="1056" title="Aspern" label="Aspern"/>
<link wikidata="Q80340" start="1061" end="1068" title="Essling" label="Essling"/>
<link wikidata="Q63475" start="1283" end="1304" title="Henri-Gatien Bertrand" label="Henri-Gatien Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q467777" start="1516" end="1532" title="Battle of Wagram" label="Battle of Wagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q17504814" start="1656" end="1671" title="Gunpowder magazine" label="powder magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q871555" start="1724" end="1739" title="Groß-Enzersdorf" label="Groß-Enzersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1792" end="1797" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q640968" start="1823" end="1837" title="Hôtel de Ville, Paris" label="Hôtel de Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873974" start="1846" end="1862" title="Avenue de Wagram" label="Avenue de Wagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="1883" end="1898" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568874" start="2008" end="2025" title="Vienna Danube regulation" label="Danube regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152923" start="2452" end="2471" title="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria" label="Crown Prince Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="2482" end="2505" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Emperor Franz Joseph I."/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="2510" end="2536" title="Edward VII" label="King Edward VII of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="2639" end="2657" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Emperor Charles I."/>
<link wikidata="Q336097" start="2742" end="2759" title="Danube–Oder Canal" label="Danube-Oder Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q298770" start="2846" end="2854" title="Austria within Nazi Germany" label="Nazi era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909622" start="3332" end="3345" title="Oil campaign of World War II" label="bombing raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q163248" start="3641" end="3665" title="World Network of Biosphere Reserves" label="UNESCO Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="3711" end="3725" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q258333" start="3805" end="3815" title="Donaustadt" label="Donaustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="3860" end="3874" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar Wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q474886" start="3924" end="3949" title="Danube-Auen National Park" label="Danube-Auen National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="3981" end="3994" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="4107" end="4115" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="4124" end="4138" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4207" end="4218" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q129612" start="4266" end="4275" title="Trams in Vienna" label="Tram line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721129" start="4285" end="4291" title="Kagran" label="Kagran"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="4438" end="4446" title="naturism" label="naturism"/>
<link wikidata="Q849854" start="5010" end="5039" title="European long-distance paths" label="European long-distance trails"/>
<link wikidata="Q151658" start="5040" end="5042" title="E4 European long distance path" label="E4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377713" start="5047" end="5049" title="E8 European long distance path" label="E8"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="5342" end="5350" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="5381" end="5389" title="Flood" label="flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q903071" start="5598" end="5609" title="desiccation" label="desiccation"/>
<link wikidata="Q635485" start="5614" end="5627" title="sedimentation" label="sedimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="5695" end="5706" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429491" start="5859" end="5867" title="Stream bed" label="riverbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="5894" end="5904" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="6121" end="6133" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q209333" start="6174" end="6185" title="Oxbow lake" label="oxbow lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12719646" start="6190" end="6195" title="Pond" label="ponds"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="6481" end="6489" title="Mudflat" label="mudflats"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="6577" end="6591" title="Aquatic plant" label="aquatic plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q157882" start="6614" end="6626" title="Hottonia palustris" label="water violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227751" start="6669" end="6677" title="pondweed" label="pondweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487780" start="6718" end="6732" title="Water caltrop" label="water chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q146130" start="6761" end="6775" title="Ranunculus" label="water crowfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q161195" start="6832" end="6843" title="Utricularia" label="bladderwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q161871" start="6924" end="6933" title="Eleocharis" label="spikerush"/>
<link wikidata="Q63782" start="6960" end="6967" title="Limosella" label="mudwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q157173" start="6993" end="7004" title="Bidens" label="beggarticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433585" start="7031" end="7040" title="Schoenoplectus" label="club-rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q28557" start="7211" end="7222" title="Phragmites australis" label="common reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="7347" end="7351" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="7355" end="7361" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="7513" end="7520" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188230" start="7521" end="7531" title="Ecological succession" label="succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="7561" end="7582" title="Herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="7610" end="7616" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="7661" end="7668" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="7713" end="7721" title="softwood" label="softwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11177275" start="7722" end="7738" title="Riparian forest" label="riparian forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="7798" end="7813" title="Deciduous" label="deciduous trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="7823" end="7830" title="Willow" label="willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="7860" end="7867" title="Populus" label="poplars"/>
<link wikidata="Q156918" start="7965" end="7977" title="Salix alba" label="white willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q97198288" start="8004" end="8016" title="crack willow" label="crack willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q156907" start="8047" end="8059" title="Fraxinus excelsior" label="European ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q147064" start="8094" end="8106" title="Populus nigra" label="black poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q146269" start="8140" end="8152" title="Populus alba" label="white poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q147492" start="8656" end="8670" title="Ulmus laevis" label="fluttering elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q147487" start="8699" end="8708" title="Ulmus minor" label="field elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q158746" start="8774" end="8791" title="Tilia cordata" label="small-leaved lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q165145" start="8821" end="8836" title="Quercus robur" label="pedunculate oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q811646" start="9061" end="9072" title="Tree stump" label="tree stumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="9186" end="9193" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q132557" start="9700" end="9708" title="Crataegus" label="hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q165378" start="9734" end="9747" title="Hippophae rhamnoides" label="sea buckthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="9792" end="9799" title="Orchid" label="orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q158503" start="9801" end="9809" title="Berberis" label="barberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036764" start="9850" end="9863" title="Feathergrass" label="feather grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="9865" end="9872" title="Lichen" label="Lichens"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="9877" end="9883" title="Moss" label="mosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q131250" start="9942" end="9956" title="praying mantis" label="praying mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="10369" end="10376" title="mammals" label="mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="10409" end="10424" title="Eurasian beaver" label="Eurasian beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="10572" end="10581" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="10608" end="10622" title="European otter" label="European otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q122069" start="10650" end="10658" title="roe deer" label="roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q465986" start="10694" end="10714" title="Eurasian water shrew" label="Eurasian water shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="10745" end="10752" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838" start="10786" end="10799" title="European hare" label="European hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q214846" start="10888" end="10902" title="common noctule" label="common noctule"/>
<link wikidata="Q504488" start="10991" end="11011" title="Daubenton&amp;#x27;s bat" label="Daubenton&amp;#x27;s bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="11161" end="11169" title="reptiles" label="reptiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="11174" end="11184" title="amphibians" label="amphibians"/>
<link wikidata="Q187036" start="11231" end="11251" title="European pond turtle" label="European pond turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q183660" start="11284" end="11293" title="Common slow worm" label="slow worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q256791" start="11325" end="11342" title="Aesculapian snake" label="Aesculapian snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q750237" start="11378" end="11388" title="dice snake" label="dice snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q170713" start="11422" end="11433" title="grass snake" label="grass snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q208648" start="11467" end="11479" title="smooth snake" label="smooth snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142057" start="11552" end="11570" title="European tree frog" label="European tree frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q545917" start="11599" end="11609" title="agile frog" label="agile frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515577" start="11649" end="11666" title="fire-bellied toad" label="fire-bellied toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q253442" start="11702" end="11721" title="Danube crested newt" label="Danube crested newt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="11819" end="11823" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402074" start="11845" end="11864" title="European bitterling" label="European bitterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q81110" start="11895" end="11906" title="common carp" label="common carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q925796" start="11938" end="11942" title="pigo" label="pigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q752178" start="11976" end="11994" title="European mudminnow" label="European mudminnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="12097" end="12112" title="Bird migration" label="migratory birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q25440" start="12146" end="12161" title="great cormorant" label="great cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25273" start="12197" end="12207" title="grey heron" label="grey heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q79915" start="12241" end="12258" title="common kingfisher" label="common kingfisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="12288" end="12301" title="Bird of prey" label="Birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q156250" start="12332" end="12340" title="red kite" label="red kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="12370" end="12388" title="white-tailed eagle" label="white-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170466" start="12429" end="12451" title="European honey buzzard" label="European honey buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q275591" start="12517" end="12542" title="middle spotted woodpecker" label="middle spotted woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25909" start="12585" end="12596" title="sand martin" label="sand martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="12687" end="12700" title="Invertebrate" label="invertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="12712" end="12720" title="Mollusca" label="mollusks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="12722" end="12733" title="Crustacean" label="crustaceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="12735" end="12744" title="Arachnid" label="arachnids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="12750" end="12757" title="Insect" label="insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500716" start="12798" end="12809" title="duck mussel" label="duck mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q911251" start="12842" end="12858" title="great pond snail" label="great pond snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q937520" start="12896" end="12916" title="Viviparus contectus" label="Lister’s river snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q210959" start="12956" end="12970" title="Astacus astacus" label="noble crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317090" start="13119" end="13140" title="tarantula wolf spider" label="tarantula wolf spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="13181" end="13187" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="13254" end="13265" title="Dragonfly" label="dragonflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q942217" start="13266" end="13281" title="Ophiogomphus cecilia" label="green snaketail"/>
<link wikidata="Q232693" start="13321" end="13340" title="Epitheca bimaculata" label="Eurasian baskettail"/>
<link wikidata="Q913469" start="13380" end="13406" title="Zerynthia polyxena" label="southern festoon butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q268319" start="13445" end="13460" title="European mantis" label="European mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q270322" start="13497" end="13510" title="water strider" label="water strider"/>
<link wikidata="Q208786" start="13543" end="13554" title="stag beetle" label="stag beetle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647169" wikidata="Q236958" url="?curid=647169" title="Katherine Anne Porter">
<text>Katherine Anne Porter (May 15, 1890 – September 18, 1980) was an American journalist, essayist, short story writer, novelist, poet, and political activist. Her 1962 novel &quot;Ship of Fools&quot; was the best-selling novel in America that year, but her short stories received much more critical acclaim. In 1966, she was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction and the U.S. National Book Award for &quot;The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter.&quot;

==Biography==
===Early life===
Katherine Anne Porter was born in Indian Creek, Texas, as Callie Russell Porter to Harrison Boone Porter and Mary Alice (Jones) Porter. Although her father claimed maternal descent from American frontiersman Daniel Boone, Porter herself altered this alleged descent to be from Boone&#x27;s brother Jonathan as &quot;the record of his descendants was obscure, so that no-one could contradict her&quot;. This relationship was unfounded. Porter was enthusiastic about her own genealogy and family history, and spent years constructing a &quot;quasi-official&quot; version of her ancestry alleging descent from a companion of William the Conqueror, although &quot;most of the genealogical connections she boasted did not exist.&quot; The writer O. Henry (William Sydney Porter) was claimed as her father&#x27;s second cousin, but later research established that &quot;except the accident of her name&quot;, there was no connection. Despite her focus on her family history, Porter failed to identify her relationship to Lyndon B. Johnson, 36th President of the United States, his grandmother being the sister of Porter&#x27;s uncle-by-marriage. The rest of Porter&#x27;s family did not take her genealogical embellishments seriously, considering them to be part of her character as an &quot;accomplished raconteur&quot;.

In 1892, when Porter was two years old, her mother died two months after giving birth. Porter&#x27;s father took his four surviving children (an older brother had died in infancy) to live with his mother, Catherine Ann Porter, in Kyle, Texas. The depth of her grandmother&#x27;s influence can be inferred from Porter&#x27;s later adoption of her name. Her grandmother died while taking eleven-year-old Callie to visit relatives in Marfa, Texas.

After her grandmother&#x27;s death, the family lived in several towns in Texas and Louisiana, staying with relatives or living in rented rooms. She was enrolled in free schools wherever the family was living, and for a year in 1904 she attended the Thomas School, a private Methodist school in San Antonio, Texas. This was her only formal education beyond grammar school.

===Young adulthood and illness===
In 1906, at the age of 16, Porter left home and married John Henry Koontz in Lufkin, Texas. She subsequently converted to his religion, Roman Catholicism. Koontz, the son of a wealthy Texas ranching family, was physically abusive; once while drunk, he threw her down the stairs, breaking her ankle. They divorced officially in 1915.

In 1914, she escaped to Chicago, where she worked briefly as an extra in movies. She then returned to Texas and worked the small-town entertainment circuit as an actress and singer. In 1915, she asked that her name be changed to Katherine Anne Porter as part of her divorce decree.

Also in 1915, she was diagnosed with tuberculosis and spent the following two years in sanatoria, where she decided to become a writer. It was discovered during that time, however, that she had bronchitis, not TB. In 1917, she began writing for the Fort Worth &quot;Critic&quot;, critiquing dramas and writing society gossip. Prior to 1918, Porter was married to, then subsequently divorced from, T. Otto Taskett then Carl Clinton von Pless. In 1918, she wrote for the &quot;Rocky Mountain News&quot; in Denver, Colorado. While there, she almost died during the 1918 flu pandemic. When she was discharged from the hospital months later, she was frail and completely bald. When her hair finally grew back, it was white and remained that color for the rest of her life. Her experience was reflected in her trilogy of short novels, &quot;Pale Horse, Pale Rider&quot; (1939), for which she received the first annual gold medal for literature in 1940 from the Society of Libraries of New York University.

===New York and Mexico: First literary works===
In 1919, Porter moved to Greenwich Village in New York City and made her living ghost writing, writing children&#x27;s stories and doing publicity work for a motion picture company. The year in New York City had a politically radicalizing effect on her; and in 1920, she went to work for a magazine publisher in Mexico, where she became acquainted with members of the Mexican leftist movement, including Diego Rivera. Eventually, however, Porter became disillusioned with the revolutionary movement and its leaders. In the 1920s she also became intensely critical of religion, and remained so until the last decade of her life, when she again embraced the Roman Catholic Church.

Between 1920 and 1930, Porter traveled back and forth between Mexico and New York City and began publishing short stories and essays. Her first published story was &quot;María Concepción&quot; in &quot;The Century Magazine&quot;. (In his 1960s novel &quot;Providence Island&quot;, Calder Willingham had the character Jim fantasize a perfect lover and he called her Maria Concepcion Diaz.) In 1930, she published her first short-story collection, &quot;Flowering Judas and Other Stories&quot;. An expanded edition of this collection was published in 1935 and received such critical acclaim that it alone virtually assured her place in American literature.

In 1924, Porter had an affair with Francisco Aguilera which resulted in pregnancy. In December of that year, Porter gave birth to a stillborn son. Some biographers suggest that Porter suffered several miscarriages and had an abortion. During the summer of 1926, Porter visited Connecticut with other writers and artists including Josephine Herbst, John Herrmann, and Ernest Stock, an English painter. After contracting gonorrhea from Stock, Porter had a hysterectomy in 1927, ending her hopes of ever having a child. Yet Porter&#x27;s letters to her lovers suggest that she still intimated her menstruation after this alleged hysterectomy. She once confided to a friend that &quot;I have lost children in all the ways one can.&quot;

===Acclaimed writing career and teaching===

During the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s, Porter enjoyed a prominent reputation as one of America&#x27;s most distinguished writers, but her limited output and equally-limited sales had her living on grants and advances for most of the era.

During the 1930s, she spent several years in Europe during which she continued to publish short stories. She married Eugene Pressly, a writer, in 1930. In 1938, upon returning from Europe, she divorced Pressly and married Albert Russel Erskine, Jr., a graduate student. He reportedly divorced her in 1942, after discovering her real age and that she was 20 years his senior.

In 1941, during a stay at the artists&#x27; retreat Yaddo, Porter went on a ride through the rural area south of Saratoga Lake, where she found her future home in Malta. She named the property &quot;South Hill&quot; for several years before selling it to author George F. Willison in 1946.

Porter became an elected member of the National Institute of Arts and Letters in 1943, and was a writer-in-residence at several colleges and universities, including the University of Chicago, the University of Michigan, and the University of Virginia.

Between 1948 and 1958, she taught at Stanford University, the University of Michigan, Washington and Lee University, and the University of Texas, where her unconventional manner of teaching made her popular with students. In 1959 the Ford Foundation granted Porter $26,000 over two years.

Three of Porter&#x27;s stories were adapted into radio dramas on the program &quot;NBC University Theatre&quot;. &quot;Noon Wine&quot; was made into an hour drama in early 1948, and two years later, both &quot;Flowering Judas&quot; and &quot;Pale Horse, Pale Rider&quot; were produced in half-hour dramas on an episode of the hour-long program. Porter herself made two appearances on the radio series giving critical commentary on works by Rebecca West and Virginia Woolf. In the 1950s and the 1960s, she occasionally appeared on television in programs discussing literature.

Porter published her only novel, &quot;Ship of Fools&quot;, in 1962; it was based on her reminiscences of a 1931 ocean cruise that she had taken from Vera Cruz, Mexico, to Germany. The novel&#x27;s success finally gave her financial security (she reportedly sold the film rights for &quot;Ship of Fools&quot; for $500,000). Producer David O. Selznick was after the film rights, but United Artists, who owned the property, demanded $400,000. The novel was adapted for film by Abby Mann; producer and director Stanley Kramer featured Vivien Leigh in her final film performance.

Despite Porter&#x27;s claim that after the publication of &quot;Ship of Fools&quot;, she would not win any more prizes in America, she was awarded in 1966 the Pulitzer Prize and the U.S. National Book Award for &quot;The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter&quot;. That year she was also appointed to the American Academy of Arts and Letters. She was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature five times from 1964 until 1968.

In 1966, Porter donated her literary papers to the University of Maryland. On Porter&#x27;s 78th birthday, the Katherine Anne Porter Room was opened in McKeldin Library (later moved to Hornbake Library) at the University of Maryland to house many books from Porter&#x27;s personal library and other items belonging to her.

In 1977, she published &quot;The Never-Ending Wrong&quot;, an account of the notorious trial and execution of Sacco and Vanzetti, which she had protested 50 years earlier.

===Death===
Katherine Anne Porter had a severe stroke in 1977. After being examined by psychiatrists, Porter was deemed incompetent, and the court appointed her nephew Paul Porter as her guardian. Porter died in Silver Spring, Maryland, on September 18, 1980, at the age of 90, and her ashes were buried next to her mother at Indian Creek Cemetery in Texas. In 1990, Recorded Texas Historic Landmark number 2905 was placed in Brown County, Texas, to honor Porter&#x27;s life and career.

==Awards and honors==
*1962 – Emerson-Thoreau Medal
*1966 – Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for &quot;The Collected Stories&quot; (1965)
*1966 – National Book Award for &quot;The Collected Stories&quot; (1965)
*1967 – Gold Medal Award for Fiction from the American Academy of Arts and Letters
*Five nominations for the Nobel Prize in Literature (1964, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968)
*2006 – Porter was featured on a States postage stamp issued May 15, 2006 with a value of 39¢. She was the 22nd person featured in the &quot;Literary Arts&quot; commemorative stamp series.

==Works==

===Short story collections===
*&quot;Flowering Judas&quot; (Harcourt, Brace: 1930). Includes eight of Porter&#x27;s earliest short stories.
*&quot;Flowering Judas and Other Stories&quot; (Harcourt, Brace: 1935). Includes the contents of the earlier edition as well as four additional stories.
*&quot;Pale Horse, Pale Rider: Three Short Novels&quot; (Harcourt, Brace: 1939). Includes the three stories Porter referred to as short novels: &quot;Old Mortality&quot;, &quot;Noon Wine&quot; (American radio, 1948; American TV, 1966; American TV, 1985), and &quot;Pale Horse, Pale Rider&quot; (American radio, 1950; Canadian TV, 1963 &amp; British TV, 1964).
*&quot;The Leaning Tower and Other Stories&quot; (Harcourt, Brace: 1944). Includes nine of Porter&#x27;s short stories. 
*&quot;The Old Order: Stories of the South&quot; (Harcourt, Brace: 1955). Includes ten of Porter&#x27;s previously published short stories, all of which take place in the American South.
*&quot;The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter&quot; (Harcourt, Brace: 1964). Includes all twenty-six of Porter&#x27;s previously published short stories, including the three she preferred to call short novels, as well as four additional stories.

===Novel===
*&quot;Ship of Fools&quot;, (Little, Brown, &amp; Co.: 1962; (American film, 1965).

===Nonfiction===
*&quot;The Days Before&quot; (Harcourt, Brace: 1952). Includes many of Porter&#x27;s book reviews, critical essays, memoirs, etc.
*&quot;The Collected Essays and Occasional Writings of Katherine Anne Porter&quot; (Delacorte: 1970).

===Posthumous publications===
*&quot;Letters of Katherine Anne Porter&quot; (Atlantic Monthly Press: 1990), edited by Isabel Bayley. Includes portions of over 250 letters Porter wrote to over sixty correspondents between 1930 and 1966.
*&quot;&quot;This Strange, Old World&quot; and Other Book Reviews Written by Katherine Anne Porter&quot; (University of Georgia Press, 1991), edited by Darlene Harbour Unrue. Includes almost 50 of the book reviews Porter published in various periodicals during her lifetime.
*&quot;Uncollected Early Prose of Katherine Anne Porter&quot; (University of Texas Press: 1993), edited by Ruth M. Alvarez and Thomas F. Walsh. Includes twenty-nine of Porter&#x27;s prose works of fiction and nonfiction, not included in earlier published editions.
*&quot;Katherine Anne Porter&#x27;s Poetry&quot; (University of South Carolina Press: 1996), edited by Darlene Harbour Unrue. Includes all thirty-two of the poems Porter published in periodicals during her lifetime.
*&quot;Porter: Collected Stories and Other Writings&quot; (Library of America: 2008). Includes the full text of &quot;The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter&quot; (Harcourt, Brace 1964) as well as many of the pieces that were included in her two previous collections of nonfiction.
*&quot;Selected Letters of Katherine Anne Porter: Chronicles of a Modern Woman&quot; (University Press of Mississippi: 2012), edited by Darlene Harbour Unrue. Includes over 130 complete letters Porter wrote to over seventy correspondents between 1916 and 1979.

===Other publications===
*&quot;My Chinese Marriage&quot; by Mae Franking, ghostwritten by Porter (Duffield &amp; Co: 1921).
*&quot;Outline of Mexican Popular Arts and Crafts&quot; (Young &amp; McCallister: 1922).
*&quot;Katherine Anne Porter&#x27;s French Song Book&quot; (Harrison of Paris: 1933). Includes seventeen French songs and Porter&#x27;s English translations.
*&quot;A Christmas Story&quot; (Delacorte: 1967). Porter&#x27;s story, previously published, about her niece Mary Alice Hillendahl.
*&quot;The Never-Ending Wrong&quot; (Little, Brown, &amp; Co.: 1977). Porter&#x27;s reflections upon the 1927 executions of Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti.

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===

* Flanders, Jane. &quot;Katherine Anne Porter’s Feminist Criticism: Book Reviews from the 1920&#x27;s&quot;, &quot;Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies&quot; 4, no. 2 (1979): 44–48. https://doi.org/10.2307/3346540.
* Givner, Joan. &quot;Katherine Anne Porter: A Life&quot;. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 1991, First edition 1982. .
* Hardwick, Elisabeth. &quot;What she was and what she felt like.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot;, November 7, 1982. Retrieved: November 18, 2011.
* Nance, William L. &quot;Katherine Anne Porter and the Art of Rejection&quot;. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1963. 
* Tanner, James Thomas Fontenot, PhD. &quot;The Texas Legacy of Katherine Anne Porter&quot; Texas Writers Series (Book 3). Denton, TX: University of North Texas Press, 1991. .
* Unrue, Darlene Harbour. &quot;Katherine Anne Porter Remembered&quot;. Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press, 2010. .
==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* Brief biography at &quot;Perspectives in American Literature&quot; 
* Katherine Anne Porter at &quot;American Masters&quot; (PBS)
* Photos of the first edition of Porter&#x27;s Pulitzer Prize winning book
* Official site of Porter&#x27;s childhood home in Kyle, TX
* Papers of Katherine Anne Porter and Paul Porter papers housed at Hornbake Library, University of Maryland Libraries
* Stuart Wright Collection: Katherine Anne Porter Papers (#1169-009), East Carolina Manuscript Collection, J. Y. Joyner Library, East Carolina University
* Mary Louis Doherty papers, at the University of Maryland Libraries. Contains correspondence with Katherine Anne Porter.
* Harry C. Perry, Jr. papers, at the University of Maryland Libraries. Contains correspondence with and financial papers of Katherine Anne Porter.
* Cyrilly Abels papers, at the University of Maryland Libraries. Abels was the literary agent, editor, and friend of Katherine Anne Porter.
* . Yale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q236958" start="0" end="21" title="Katherine Anne Porter" label="Katherine Anne Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134909" start="177" end="190" title="Ship of Fools (Porter novel)" label="Ship of Fools"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="254" end="267" title="short story" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q833633" start="334" end="360" title="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction" label="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="374" end="393" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726672" start="404" end="450" title="The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter" label="The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020118" start="524" end="543" title="Indian Creek, Texas" label="Indian Creek, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q316661" start="698" end="710" title="Daniel Boone" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="1112" end="1133" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q172788" start="1231" end="1239" title="O. Henry" label="O. Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="1505" end="1522" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1529" end="1559" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q277669" start="2037" end="2048" title="Kyle, Texas" label="Kyle, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q982507" start="2238" end="2250" title="Marfa, Texas" label="Marfa, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="2336" end="2345" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="2527" end="2536" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="2547" end="2558" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="2609" end="2623" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q975590" start="2737" end="2750" title="Lufkin, Texas" label="Lufkin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2796" end="2813" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q658371" start="3058" end="3063" title="Extra (actor)" label="extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="3260" end="3267" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3268" end="3274" title="Decree#Other uses of the term" label="decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3314" end="3326" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="3364" end="3373" title="sanatorium" label="sanatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="3471" end="3481" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="3526" end="3536" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883624" start="3752" end="3771" title="Rocky Mountain News" label="Rocky Mountain News"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="3781" end="3787" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="3839" end="3856" title="Spanish flu" label="1918 flu pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4112" end="4134" title="Pale Horse, Pale Rider: Three Short Novels" label="Pale Horse, Pale Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="4256" end="4275" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="4351" end="4368" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="4406" end="4419" title="ghost writing" label="ghost writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="4638" end="4644" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="4702" end="4718" title="leftism" label="leftist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="4730" end="4742" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="5114" end="5127" title="Short story" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q116756556" start="5176" end="5192" title="María Concepción (short story)" label="María Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471002" start="5208" end="5228" title="The Century Magazine" label="The Century Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q459230" start="5287" end="5304" title="Calder Willingham" label="Calder Willingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430319" start="5458" end="5491" title="Flowering Judas and Other Stories" label="Flowering Judas and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q233762" start="5640" end="5659" title="American literature" label="American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q745832" start="5794" end="5803" title="stillborn" label="stillborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="5863" end="5875" title="miscarriages" label="miscarriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="5887" end="5895" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288380" start="5992" end="6008" title="Josephine Herbst" label="Josephine Herbst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239089" start="6010" end="6023" title="John Herrmann" label="John Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="6081" end="6090" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q550675" start="6116" end="6128" title="hysterectomy" label="hysterectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12171" start="6256" end="6268" title="menstruation" label="menstruation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598870" start="7104" end="7109" title="Yaddo" label="Yaddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375317" start="7165" end="7178" title="Saratoga Lake" label="Saratoga Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708930" start="7215" end="7220" title="Malta, New York" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539157" start="7314" end="7332" title="George F. Willison" label="George F. Willison"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="7382" end="7420" title="National Institute of Arts and Letters" label="National Institute of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="7512" end="7533" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="7539" end="7561" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="7571" end="7593" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="7633" end="7652" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785291" start="7682" end="7711" title="Washington and Lee University" label="Washington and Lee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="7721" end="7740" title="University of Texas" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="7830" end="7845" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="7935" end="7947" title="radio dramas" label="radio dramas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952797" start="7969" end="7991" title="NBC University Theatre" label="NBC University Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q236669" start="8326" end="8338" title="Rebecca West" label="Rebecca West"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="8343" end="8357" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="8416" end="8426" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134909" start="8502" end="8515" title="Ship of Fools (Porter novel)" label="Ship of Fools"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="8613" end="8622" title="Veracruz" label="Vera Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169951" start="8752" end="8765" title="Ship of Fools (film)" label="Ship of Fools"/>
<link wikidata="Q72291" start="8796" end="8813" title="David O. Selznick" label="David O. Selznick"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="8845" end="8859" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q306891" start="8938" end="8947" title="Abby Mann" label="Abby Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q73136" start="8971" end="8985" title="Stanley Kramer" label="Stanley Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q129429" start="8995" end="9007" title="Vivien Leigh" label="Vivien Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q833633" start="9199" end="9213" title="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="9227" end="9246" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726672" start="9257" end="9303" title="The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter" label="The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="9351" end="9387" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="9415" end="9440" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q107335015" start="9457" end="9461" title="1964 Nobel Prize in Literature" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q113456762" start="9468" end="9472" title="1968 Nobel Prize in Literature" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="9526" end="9548" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895690" start="9627" end="9643" title="McKeldin Library" label="McKeldin Library"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9828" end="9850" title="The Never-Ending Wrong" label="The Never-Ending Wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q833926" start="9909" end="9927" title="Sacco and Vanzetti" label="Sacco and Vanzetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="10019" end="10025" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q584804" start="10092" end="10103" title="competence (law)" label="incompetent"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="10184" end="10207" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302881" start="10339" end="10371" title="Recorded Texas Historic Landmark" label="Recorded Texas Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370843" start="10490" end="10511" title="Emerson-Thoreau Medal" label="Emerson-Thoreau Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q833633" start="10520" end="10546" title="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction" label="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726672" start="10557" end="10578" title="The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter" label="The Collected Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="10600" end="10619" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726672" start="10630" end="10651" title="The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter" label="The Collected Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="10711" end="10747" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="10774" end="10799" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430319" start="11179" end="11212" title="Flowering Judas and Other Stories" label="Flowering Judas and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11332" end="11374" title="Pale Horse, Pale Rider: Three Short Novels" label="Pale Horse, Pale Rider: Three Short Novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108354" start="11502" end="11511" title="Noon Wine" label="Noon Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412429" start="11692" end="11727" title="The Leaning Tower and Other Stories" label="The Leaning Tower and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11813" end="11848" title="The Old Order: Stories of the South" label="The Old Order: Stories of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726672" start="12000" end="12046" title="The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter" label="The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134909" start="12267" end="12280" title="Ship of Fools (Porter novel)" label="Ship of Fools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169951" start="12322" end="12335" title="Ship of Fools (film)" label="American film"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468753" start="12499" end="12568" title="The Collected Essays and Occasional Writings of Katherine Anne Porter" label="The Collected Essays and Occasional Writings of Katherine Anne Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895456" start="12937" end="12964" title="University of Georgia Press" label="University of Georgia Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005866" start="13169" end="13194" title="University of Texas Press" label="University of Texas Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279253" start="13421" end="13455" title="University of South Carolina Press" label="University of South Carolina Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428855" start="13646" end="13664" title="Library of America" label="Library of America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14753" end="14803" title="Sacco and Vanzetti#Execution and funeral" label="executions of Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205067" start="15069" end="15081" title="Joan Givner" label="Givner, Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895456" start="15138" end="15165" title="University of Georgia Press" label="University of Georgia Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895937" start="15444" end="15478" title="University of North Carolina Press" label="University of North Carolina Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895979" start="15622" end="15653" title="University of North Texas Press" label="University of North Texas Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895031" start="15751" end="15778" title="University of Alabama Press" label="University of Alabama Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16150" end="16166" title="University of Maryland Libraries#Hornbake Library" label="Hornbake Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895690" start="16168" end="16200" title="University of Maryland Libraries" label="University of Maryland Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895690" start="16391" end="16423" title="University of Maryland Libraries" label="University of Maryland Libraries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647180" wikidata="Q1550543" url="?curid=647180" title="Santa Rosae">
<text>Santa Rosae (also spelled Santarosae) was, before the end of the last ice age, an ancient landmass off the coast of present-day southern California, near Santa Barbara County and Ventura County, of which the northern Channel Islands of California are remnants. At its largest, Santa Rosae was roughly 3-4 times bigger than the northern Channel Islands of today, nearly 125 km (77.67 miles) long from east to west. Between about 20,000 and 5,000 years ago, Santa Rosae lost about 70% of its land mass to post-glacial rising sea level, leaving behind a vast submerged landscape currently being explored by scientists. San Miguel, Santa Rosa, Santa Cruz, and Anacapa Island comprise the unsubmerged portions of Santa Rosae today. This island was about 5 miles offshore. It broke up between about 11,000 and 9,000 years ago, and the present northern Channel Islands took their shape after the continental ice sheets melted and sea levels rose by about 100 meters.

There is evidence to suggest that a now-submerged island, Calafia, lay between Santa Rosae and the mainland.

Santa Rosae had a population of pygmy mammoths (&quot;Mammuthus exilis&quot;), which became extinct roughly 13,000 years ago.

On Santa Rosa Island was found the ~13,000-year-old skeleton of Arlington Springs Man, among the oldest human remains yet found in North America. As Santa Rosae was not connected to the mainland at the time, this shows that Paleo-indians settled the island using boats. Archaeological evidence shows that these Paleocoastal peoples had sophisticated maritime technologies and fished, hunted marine mammals and birds, and harvested island plant foods. These Paleocoastal peoples, who survived on the island until about 8,000 years ago, may be the ancestors of the Island Chumash tribe, who lived on the northern Channel Islands for millennia until Spanish authorities removed them to mainland missions in the 1820s.

==See also==

* Maui Nui

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1550543" start="0" end="11" title="Santa Rosae" label="Santa Rosae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550543" start="26" end="36" title="Santa Rosae" label="Santarosae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="65" end="77" title="Wisconsin glaciation" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="128" end="147" title="southern California" label="southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q108106" start="154" end="174" title="Santa Barbara County, California" label="Santa Barbara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127" start="179" end="193" title="Ventura County, California" label="Ventura County"/>
<link wikidata="Q306147" start="217" end="246" title="Channel Islands (California)" label="Channel Islands of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348353" start="616" end="626" title="San Miguel Island" label="San Miguel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646097" start="628" end="638" title="Santa Rosa Island (California)" label="Santa Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398502" start="640" end="650" title="Santa Cruz Island" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q483391" start="656" end="670" title="Anacapa Island" label="Anacapa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="1060" end="1068" title="Continent" label="mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q244237" start="1103" end="1116" title="pygmy mammoth" label="pygmy mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q675738" start="1262" end="1283" title="Arlington Springs Man" label="Arlington Springs Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1329" end="1342" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="1422" end="1435" title="Paleo-Indians" label="Paleo-indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q24251468" start="1768" end="1775" title="Chumash people" label="Chumash"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="1845" end="1864" title="New Spain" label="Spanish authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="1881" end="1898" title="Spanish missions in California" label="mainland missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911055" start="1930" end="1938" title="Maui Nui" label="Maui Nui"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647196" wikidata="Q169338" url="?curid=647196" title="2–3 tree">
<text>In computer science, a 2–3 tree is a tree data structure, where every node with children (internal node) has either two children (2-node) and one data element or three children (3-node) and two data elements. A 2–3 tree is a B-tree of order 3. Nodes on the outside of the tree (leaf nodes) have no children and one or two data elements. 2–3 trees were invented by John Hopcroft in 1970.

2–3 trees are required to be balanced, meaning that each leaf is at the same level. It follows that each right, center, and left subtree of a node contains the same or close to the same amount of data.

==Definitions==
We say that an internal node is a 2-node if it has &quot;one&quot; data element and &quot;two&quot; children.

We say that an internal node is a 3-node if it has &quot;two&quot; data elements and &quot;three&quot; children.

A 4-node, with three data elements, may be temporarily created during manipulation of the tree but is never persistently stored in the tree.

We say that is a 2–3 tree if and only if one of the following statements hold:

* is empty. In other words, does not have any nodes.
* is a 2-node with data element . If has left child and right child , then 
** and are 2–3 trees of the same height;
** is greater than each element in ; and
** is less than each data element in .
* is a 3-node with data elements and , where . If has left child , middle child , and right child , then
** , , and are 2–3 trees of equal height;
** is greater than each data element in and less than each data element in ; and
** is greater than each data element in and less than each data element in .

==Properties==
* Every internal node is a 2-node or a 3-node.
* All leaves are at the same level.
* All data is kept in sorted order.

==Operations==

===Searching===
Searching for an item in a 2–3 tree is similar to searching for an item in a binary search tree. Since the data elements in each node are ordered, a search function will be directed to the correct subtree and eventually to the correct node which contains the item.

# Let be a 2–3 tree and be the data element we want to find. If is empty, then is not in and we&#x27;re done.
# Let be the root of .
# Suppose is a leaf.
#* If is not in , then is not in . Otherwise, is in . We need no further steps and we&#x27;re done.
# Suppose is a 2-node with left child and right child . Let be the data element in . There are three cases:
#* If is equal to , then we&#x27;ve found in and we&#x27;re done. 
#* If formula_1, then set to , which by definition is a 2–3 tree, and go back to step 2.
#* If formula_2, then set to and go back to step 2.
# Suppose is a 3-node with left child , middle child , and right child . Let and be the two data elements of , where formula_3. There are four cases:
#* If is equal to or , then is in and we&#x27;re done.
#* If formula_1, then set to and go back to step 2.
#* If formula_5, then set to and go back to step 2.
#* If formula_6, then set to and go back to step 2.

===Insertion===
Insertion maintains the balanced property of the tree.

To insert into a 2-node, the new key is added to the 2-node in the appropriate order.

To insert into a 3-node, more work may be required depending on the location of the 3-node. If the tree consists only of a 3-node, the node is split into three 2-nodes with the appropriate keys and children.

If the target node is a 3-node whose parent is a 2-node, the key is inserted into the 3-node to create a temporary 4-node. In the illustration, the key 10 is inserted into the 2-node with 6 and 9. The middle key is 9, and is promoted to the parent 2-node. This leaves a 3-node of 6 and 10, which is split to be two 2-nodes held as children of the parent 3-node.

If the target node is a 3-node and the parent is a 3-node, a temporary 4-node is created then split as above. This process continues up the tree to the root. If the root must be split, then the process of a single 3-node is followed: a temporary 4-node root is split into three 2-nodes, one of which is considered to be the root. This operation grows the height of the tree by one.

===Deletion===
Deleting a key from a non-leaf node can be done by replacing it by its immediate predecessor or successor, and then deleting the predecessor or successor from a leaf node. Deleting a key from a leaf node is easy if the leaf is a 3-node. Otherwise, it may require creating a temporary 1-node which may be absorbed by reorganizing the tree, or it may repeatedly travel upwards before it can be absorbed, as a temporary 4-node may in the case of insertion. Alternatively, it&#x27;s possible to use an algorithm which is both top-down and bottom-up, creating temporary 4-nodes on the way down that are then destroyed as you travel back up. Deletion methods are explained in more detail in the references. 
===Parallel operations===
Since 2–3 trees are similar in structure to red–black trees, parallel algorithms for red–black trees can be applied to 2–3 trees as well.

==See also==
* 2–3–4 tree
* 2–3 heap
* AA tree
* B-tree
* (a,b)-tree
* Finger tree
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q169338" start="23" end="31" title="2–3 tree" label="2–3 tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="37" end="56" title="tree data structure" label="tree data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777473" start="70" end="74" title="Node (computer science)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90" end="103" title="Tree (data structure)#Internal nodes" label="internal node"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172389" start="146" end="158" title="data element" label="data element"/>
<link wikidata="Q677051" start="225" end="231" title="B-tree" label="B-tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="278" end="287" title="leaf node" label="leaf node"/>
<link wikidata="Q62874" start="364" end="377" title="John Hopcroft" label="John Hopcroft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1216" end="1222" title="Tree (data structure)#Terminology" label="height"/>
<link wikidata="Q623818" start="1854" end="1872" title="binary search tree" label="binary search tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q506496" start="4876" end="4890" title="red–black tree" label="red–black tree"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4893" end="4932" title="Red–black_tree#Parallel_algorithms" label="parallel algorithms for red–black trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q169233" start="4986" end="4996" title="2–3–4 tree" label="2–3–4 tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634019" start="4999" end="5007" title="2–3 heap" label="2–3 heap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490262" start="5010" end="5017" title="AA tree" label="AA tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q677051" start="5020" end="5026" title="B-tree" label="B-tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q677051" start="5029" end="5039" title="(a,b)-tree" label="(a,b)-tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q11186393" start="5042" end="5053" title="Finger tree" label="Finger tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="647197" wikidata="Q3312666" url="?curid=647197" title="Midge Decter">
<text>Midge Decter (née Rosenthal; July 25, 1927 – May 9, 2022) was an American journalist and author. Originally a liberal, she was one of the pioneers of the neoconservative movement in the 1970s and 1980s. She was a critic of feminism and the women&#x27;s liberation movement.

==Early life==
Decter was born in Saint Paul, Minnesota, on July 25, 1927. She was the youngest of three daughters of Rose (née Calmenson) and Harry Rosenthal, a sporting goods merchant. Her family was middle-class and Jewish. She attended the University of Minnesota for one year, the Jewish Theological Seminary of America from 1946 to 1948, and New York University, but did not graduate from any of them. She initially identified as a liberal on the political spectrum.

==Career==
Decter was assistant editor at &quot;Midstream&quot;, before working as secretary to the then-editor of &quot;Commentary&quot;, Robert Warshow. Later she was the executive editor of &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot; under Willie Morris. She then began working in publishing as an editor at Basic Books and Legacy Books. Her writing has been published in &quot;Commentary&quot;, &quot;First Things&quot;, &quot;The Atlantic&quot;, &quot;National Review&quot;, &quot;The New Republic&quot;, &quot;The Weekly Standard&quot;, and &quot;The American Spectator&quot;.

Together with Donald Rumsfeld, Decter was the co-chair of the Committee for the Free World, an anti-communist organization. She was one of the original champions of the neoconservative movement with her spouse, Norman Podhoretz. She was also a founder of the Independent Women&#x27;s Forum, and was founding treasurer for the Northcote Parkinson Fund, founded and chaired by John Train. She was a member of the board of trustees for The Heritage Foundation. She was also a board member of the Center for Security Policy and the Clare Boothe Luce Fund. A member of the Philadelphia Society, she was, for a time, its president.

Decter was arguably the leading antifeminist in the United States prior to Phyllis Schlafly&#x27;s rise to prominence. She was a critic of the women&#x27;s liberation movement. She defended &quot;traditional&quot; gender roles and &quot;family values.&quot; She was a critic of the gay rights movement. 

Following a tongue-in-cheek remark by Russell Kirk, the Society&#x27;s founder, about the prevalence of Jewish intellectuals in the neoconservative movement, Decter labelled Kirk an anti-Semite. She was also a senior fellow at the Institute of Religion and Public Life. She was one of the signatories to Statement of Principles for the Project for the New American Century. Decter served on the national advisory board of Accuracy in Media. 

In 2008, Midge Decter received the Truman-Reagan Medal of Freedom from the Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation.

==Personal life==
Decter married her first husband, Moshe Decter, in 1948. Together, they had two children: Naomi and Rachel, who predeceased Decter in 2013. They divorced in 1954. Two years later, she married Norman Podhoretz, a neoconservative, who went on to become editor of &quot;Commentary&quot; magazine. They remained married until her death. Together, they had two children: Ruthie Blum and John Podhoretz.

Decter lived most of her adult life in Manhattan. She died on May 9, 2022, at her home in Manhattan. She was 94 years old.

==Publications==
* &quot;Losing the First Battle, Winning the War&quot;
* &quot;The Liberated Woman and Other Americans&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The New Chastity and Other Arguments Against Women&#x27;s Liberation&quot; (1972) 
* &quot;Liberal Parents, Radical Children&quot; (1975) 
* &quot;An Old Wife&#x27;s Tale: My Seven Decades in Love and War&quot; (2001) 
* &quot;Always Right: Selected Writings of Midge Decter&quot; (2002) 
* &quot;Rumsfeld : A Personal Portrait&quot; (2003) 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3312666" start="0" end="12" title="Midge Decter" label="Midge Decter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312666" start="18" end="27" title="Midge Decter" label="Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="154" end="169" title="neoconservative" label="neoconservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031205" start="240" end="272" title="women&amp;#x27;s liberation movement" label="women&amp;#x27;s liberation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="309" end="330" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="Saint Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="519" end="542" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688743" start="561" end="599" title="Jewish Theological Seminary of America" label="Jewish Theological Seminary of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="623" end="642" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="713" end="720" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210918" start="728" end="746" title="political spectrum" label="political spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843030" start="797" end="806" title="Midstream (magazine)" label="Midstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115290" start="870" end="880" title="Commentary (magazine)" label="Commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350878" start="888" end="902" title="Robert Warshow" label="Robert Warshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="948" end="970" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020209" start="983" end="996" title="Willie Morris" label="Willie Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034881" start="1051" end="1062" title="Basic Books" label="Basic Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1067" end="1079" title="Legacy Books" label="Legacy Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072976" start="1145" end="1157" title="First Things" label="First Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="1171" end="1183" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="1197" end="1212" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="1226" end="1242" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790889" start="1256" end="1275" title="The Weekly Standard" label="The Weekly Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713567" start="1293" end="1315" title="The American Spectator" label="The American Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="1338" end="1353" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152977" start="1386" end="1414" title="Committee for the Free World" label="Committee for the Free World"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="1493" end="1508" title="neoconservative" label="neoconservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q945011" start="1535" end="1551" title="Norman Podhoretz" label="Norman Podhoretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017369" start="1583" end="1613" title="Independent Women&amp;#x27;s Forum" label="Independent Women&amp;#x27;s Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261127" start="1699" end="1709" title="John Train (investment advisor)" label="John Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="1757" end="1780" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="The Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988436" start="1817" end="1843" title="Center for Security Policy" label="Center for Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q456413" start="1852" end="1869" title="Clare Boothe Luce" label="Clare Boothe Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013969" start="1892" end="1912" title="Philadelphia Society" label="Philadelphia Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q664194" start="2233" end="2243" title="LGBT rights in the United States" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q158997" start="2294" end="2306" title="Russell Kirk" label="Russell Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2438" end="2449" title="Antisemitism" label="anti-Semite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072976" start="2487" end="2524" title="Institute of Religion and Public Life" label="Institute of Religion and Public Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q428649" start="2592" end="2628" title="Project for the New American Century" label="Project for the New American Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167245" start="2678" end="2695" title="Accuracy in Media" label="Accuracy in Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925611" start="2734" end="2764" title="Truman-Reagan Medal of Freedom" label="Truman-Reagan Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925611" start="2774" end="2814" title="Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation" label="Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26818549" start="2869" end="2881" title="Moshe Decter" label="Moshe Decter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993411" start="2935" end="2941" title="Rachel Abrams" label="Rachel"/>
<link wikidata="Q945011" start="3027" end="3043" title="Norman Podhoretz" label="Norman Podhoretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115290" start="3102" end="3112" title="Commentary (magazine)" label="Commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383383" start="3201" end="3212" title="Ruthie Blum" label="Ruthie Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253084" start="3217" end="3231" title="John Podhoretz" label="John Podhoretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="3324" end="3333" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
</links>
</doc>
